In the twenty five years following the Second World War the government was fully committed to full employment, however in the 1970s unemployment began to rise drastically (Vickerstaff, 2003). The number of unemployed rose from 1.3 million in 1979 to 3 million in 1982 (Jones and Novak, 1999, p39, Glynn, 1999, p190), and as Burnett notes these figures remained high throughout the 1980s and 1990s (1994). However although unemployment has always existed in periods of history before, this increase was significant, as new patterns emerged, with rising youth and ethnic minority unemployment, and unemployment concentrated in certain areas of the country (Ashton and Maguire, 1991). In this essay I will briefly outline why mass unemployment emerged at this time, including factors of global changes, technological advances and government policies. I will then move on to examine which groups were most at risk from these changes, looking closely at the young, those in industrial towns, men, especially the unskilled, and finally ethnic minorities, and exploring the reasons why they were so vulnerable. I will not look at several other groups who were also vulnerable; those with disabilities, few qualifications and the elderly, as they had been at risk from unemployment before, and it was not the situation in the 1970s that caused this risk, as it was with the groups I will look at. There were many reasons as to why unemployment grew in the 1980s and 1990s. The neo-liberal and social democratic approaches have opposing views, with the neo-liberals arguing that unemployment was down to individual attitudes, and that deregulating markets would solve this problem, whilst social democratic approaches argued that it was a structural problem, that regulated markets and welfare would lessen (Vickerstaff, 2003). However there were many more complicated factors involved in the steep decline during this period. One of the main reasons was global changes. Firstly the 1973 oil crisis lead to a decline in the global economy, and the British economy, causing unemployment to rise (Burnett, 1994), especially as this resulted in a shift of trade against Britain, as she was not an oil producer (Glynn, 1999). Secondly, throughout the recession global markets began to spread, meaning that British exports began to decrease, and more low cost products were imported from abroad, so many companies went bust (Ashton and Maguire, 1991). Also those companies who did not began to change their labour market strategy, either moving production to other countries, where labour was cheaper, or making redundancies and moving towards a more flexible workforce (Glynn, 1999). All of these changes in the global market had a dramatic effect on the labour market within Britain, but also to industry as a whole, as it caused a massive decline in the manufacturing industry (Ashton and Maguire, 1991), which fell in production by 15.75% between 1979 and 1983 (Glynn, 1999, p270). As manufacturing was a major employer in Britain at the time, inevitably unemployment rose, as although the service sector grew as manufacturing declined, it was not to the same extent, and fewer jobs were created. These global changes were also further compounded by increases in technology, and government policies. Technology displaced or made more flexible many jobs in the parts of the manufacturing industry that survived (Burnett, 1994) and meant that fewer workers were needed in the growing service sector. It also meant that many unskilled and semi skilled jobs disappeared from the market, as technology could now be used (Mizen, 2003). Ashton and Maguire argue that government policy made this problem worse however, as it weakened trade union power and made these changes easier for employers to introduce (1991), and Professor Laynard agrees, claiming that rising inflation, fiscal monetary policies and a lack of commitment to full employment caused dramatic increases in unemployment (Laynard, cited in Burnett, 1994, p268). One of the groups most affected by these changes was the young, and Makeham claims that they are now especially vulnerable to general trends in employment (1980, cited in Coles, 1995, p 32). In 1960 the unemployment rate for the under 25s was only 2.4%, however by 1979 it had increased to 12.2% and by 1981 it had risen further to 21.4% (Coles, 1995, p32). This trend is one that still continues today, and in 1996, half a million 19-24 year olds were classified as unemployed (Jones and Novak, 1999, p64). These statistics can further be placed in context by looking at the fact that although general unemployment was rising at the time, which could simply be reflected in these figures, it only rose by 45%, whereas youth unemployment rose by 120% (Coles, 1995, p32). There are many reasons as to why the young are so vulnerable to these changes. It is argued that they are especially vulnerable to the business cycle anyway, as in times of recession businesses cut their recruitment and training and inflate the experience and qualifications needed for financial reasons, as do Trade Unions, who aim to protect their existing members, meaning that the young have very little opportunity to enter into the work force. Also due to statutory redundancy payments it is cheaper to sack those who have been in work for the shortest period, and this usually applied to the young (Mizen, 2003). However, although this does make the young more vulnerable, the reasons why they became one of the highest groups in unemployment in the 1980s and 1990s has to be placed in context. Firstly the global changes and resulting decline in the manufacturing industry impacted significantly upon them, as it was previously a large source of youth employment, with one third of school leavers entering the industry (Mizen, 2003). This loss should have been compensated by the growth in the service sector, however many employers preferred adult female workers, and began to reject the young, reflecting the fact that Maguire claims, employers often view the young as irresponsible and lacking training and experience (1992), therefore making them more at risk in times of high unemployment. Technological advances also impacted as many of the jobs they displaced were in the manufacturing sector, which was a major source of youth employment, but also because it meant that fewer apprenticeships were offered (Coles, 1995), so the young could not get the training or the experience needed to enter the labour market initially. Burnett supports the idea that it meant that the young lacked the higher criteria requested by employers due to economic decline, but also points out that at the time adult wages were changed to apply to 18 year olds as well, not just older workers (1994), so it was now no cheaper for employers to hire young people. As well as being especially vulnerable to these changes in the labour market structure, the risk posed to the young was further increased by government policies. They blamed youth unemployment on what is known as the 'deficiency model' (Mizen, 2003), which argued that the reason the young were out of work was because they were restless in work, had no incentive to be there, or did not have the qualities needed for employment. This meant they received little support from the government to protect them from the dangers of unemployment. Therefore overall the recent changes in the labour market, technological advances and government policies have made the young a group particularly at risk of unemployment. Another group at risk to high unemployment were those living in traditional industrial towns, especially in the North and West. Statistics show that whilst the rate of official unemployment was only 8.4% in the South East, in the North West it was 14.7%, and in the North 16.6%, indicating that industrial areas were at a higher risk of unemployment (Jones and Novak, 1999, p41). Within these areas places such as Yorkshire, Scotland and Humberside were the worst affected, and Ashton et al found that a young man's chance of being unemployed in Sunderland was one in three, compared to only one in thirty three in St Albans (1988, cited in Coles, 1995, p39). Pissarides and Wadsworth note that this is largely due to the occupational distribution of employment (1992). These areas were where manufacturing production was concentrated, and when this went into decline due to global changes, these areas lost their main source of jobs. They also did not experience the benefits bought about by the increase in the service sector, as the growth of business was concentrated mostly in the South East, growing by 20% per year in these areas, compared to only 7.2% in the North West (McLaughlin, 1992, p14). Burnett supports this argument, saying that the structural changes that have occurred in the labour market, most notably the change from manufacturing production to service sector domination, have led to high job losses in certain areas, especially in industrial towns (1994). Technological advances have further increased the risk of unemployment in these areas as they have meant that many of the remaining jobs have become flexible (Vickerstaff, 2003). The people living within these areas were made even more vulnerable to these risks, as they become largely cut off from other cities where the service sector is now dominating, meaning they were excluded from job information networks and fell into a downward spiral ending in a culture of unemployment (Ashton and Maguire, 1991). These reasons have all combined to ensure that over the past thirty years people living in these industrial areas have been more affected by unemployment. Men, especially the unskilled, are another group at risk from unemployment, and who suffered during the mass unemployment of the 1980s and 1990s. Unemployment for men over 25 has increased four fold since the 1970s (Faggio and Nickell, 2003, p 31), with 2.3 million fewer men in work now than twenty years ago (Jones and Novak, 1999, p40). There are several reasons for this decline in male employment. Firstly, they were the main workers in the manufacturing industry, so when this declined their levels of unemployment increased (Ashton and Maguire, 1991). Although the service sector grew to replace manufacturing as a source of employment, women were favoured by employers due to their characteristics, and the way they were perceived as more caring and understanding, and also reliable, especially if they were married (Maguire, 1992). This idea is demonstrated clearly by Ashton and Maguire when they say; 'the new service sector jobs have provided low skilled, part-time and often casual employment, primarily for females' (1991, p53). The position of men, especially the unskilled, in the labour market has been further undermined by the global changes and technological advances that were taking place in the 1970s (Faggio and Nickell, 2003). The movement of production to developing countries meant that many unskilled and manual jobs were displaced, and it was previously men filled these positions. These developments therefore make men more vulnerable to unemployment, as the jobs they formerly had no longer exist, and the new jobs emerging in the service sector were seen as better suited to the innate skills of women. The final group vulnerable to unemployment are ethnic minorities, however it should be noted that this category needs to be disaggregated, as unemployment is especially significant for Afro-Caribbean's and Bangladeshi workers, but does not affect Asian workers, especially those from India or China, to the same extent. Pissarides and Wadsworth have identified this group as vulnerable, however, saying; 'race has a large effect on unemployment' (1992, p66). Statistics show that by 1986 the rate of white unemployment was 9.1% compared to 15.1% for non-whites (Pissarides and Wadsworth, 1992, p66). More recently Coles found that those identifying themselves as black were twice as likely to be unemployed (1995, p40). There are several reasons for this. Firstly many of them have lower educational achievements, with 40% of Bangladeshis having no formal qualifications (Wadsworth, 2003, p119), and in times of recession, as was occurring in the 1980s employers raise the qualifications necessary to move into employment, so ethnic minorities would have been put at risk. This could also be linked to the fact that many have a lack of language skills and familiarity with British institutions (Wadsworth, 2003), which employers may no longer have found acceptable in a time when a large reserve army of labour existed. Secondly racial discrimination existed, and still exists in the labour market, with employers perceiving ethnic minorities as lacking an innate ability (McLaughlin, 1992). If employers base the criteria for workers upon this it puts some ethnic minorities at a very high risk of unemployment. Finally Jenkins argues that as with those in industrial towns, ethnic minorities have limited access to job information networks, so they do not get the same opportunities as those with access (1986, cited in Maguire, 1992). This shows that some ethnic minorities are at a very high risk as they have lower qualification and skill levels, but also face exclusion and discrimination within the labour market, especially one with more focus upon the service sector than manufacturing. In conclusion there were four main groups who were at risk from unemployment, and therefore most vulnerable to mass unemployment in the 1980s and 1990s. The young were at risk due to global changes in the labour market; which caused a decline in manufacturing in Britain, technological advances, and government policies, and those in industrial areas suffered largely for similar reasons, as the decline in manufacturing hit these areas hard. Again it was largely the global changes and decline in manufacturing that put men at risk from unemployment, as well as ethnic minorities, although they also have to contend with issues of discrimination which place them at an even higher risk. Overall this shows that the global changes, technological advances and government policies in the 1970s put certain groups of people at risk, and they were especially vulnerable to unemployment. 