Official statistics are those produced by either the state, or by one of its agencies. There has been a huge increase in the number of official statistics since the Central Statistics Office was set up in 1941, and now large quantities of statistics are produced on a variety of different topics, for example income, housing and population. Although they are widely used there are many limitations of the use official statistics in sociology. In this essay I plan to talk about how the internal, or posivitist schools view statistics, looking at how they are critical of the reliability and validity of official statistics, and also how they feel that the processes involved in producing the statistics limit their uses. I will also explore the uses that statistics do have in sociology, and come to a conclusion on whether they should be use or not. The internal school of thought emphasises the need for reliability and validity in order to produce realistic statistics, however there are many problems with official statistics in this aspect, and as Hindess points out "they cannot be taken as a...reliable account" (Hindess, 1973). The term reliability refers to whether the statistics are replicable or not, and validity is defined as whether they paint a true picture of what they are looking at, and there are many problems with regards to both. The first problem is that of the definition of concept, and can cause problems with the reliability of the statistics. Different people define concepts in different ways so this alters the reliability of the study, and also means that readers may interpret the statistics in a different way to that which they were intended (Hindess, 1973, Shipman, 1973, May, 1997). Hindess points out that if concepts are defined differently it can have a huge result on the statistics (Hindess, 1973, cited in Irvine et al, 1979), and in Demystifying Statistics Irvine uses the example of unemployment, claiming that over the past three decades the definition of unemployment has altered many times, and this has big impact on the number of people who are defined as unemployed, according o the statistics (Irvine and Miles, 1979). The next problem is linked to validity. Official statistics go through a long process of decision making before the final result is reached (Hindess, 1973, May, 1997), even down to what methodology is used, and this process can alter the results greatly. In Social Research May uses the example of crime statistics to show this. The first decision in the process here is that of what is a crime in terms of the law. This would have a huge impact on crime statistics, for example if marital rape was not illegal then the crime statistics of rape would be very different. The second decision is made by the victim of the crime; whether to report it or not, which means that the formation of official statistics is not just influenced by those composing them, but also by decisions made by those involved in the actual area (May, 1997). Human judgement is a key factor in this criticism, but as the decision process shows it is not just the judgement of those composing the statistics that is involved (Hindess, 1973). This means that as the process continues the statistics become further distorted as different people's views and decisions become involved. This idea can be illustrated using the example of suicide. The official statistics produced on this topic are not only influenced by those collating the statistics, but also by those determining the causes of death. This can be seen by the fact that in the past Catholic priests did not like to categorise the cause of a death as 'suicide', so the term 'natural cause' would have been used instead, resulting in a very different set of statistics in the end. Cicourel also supports this idea; however he takes it one step further by saying that these decisions are influenced by people's background experiences (Cicourel, cited in Hindess, 1973). This means that even if two people from the same organisation tried to collect the same results there would be complications as they have had different experiences. Overall this shows that reliability and validity are hard to establish in official statistics, due to the number of human decisions involved, and the different ways in which people apply concepts. However according to the radical approach there are more limitations with statistics. The radical approach tells us that us that official statistics tell us more about the state than they do the topics they are exploring, therefore statistics should be viewed as a construction, and as Irvine and Miles say; "statistics are not collected, but produced" (Irvine and Miles, 1979). Official statistics are not neutral perceptions of a topic, but instead reflect political agendas (Irvine and Miles, 1979) and the aims of those with political power (May, 1997). One example of this is the way in which the government produced official statistics relating to unemployment under Margaret Thatcher. During her time in power the definition of unemployment changed over twenty times, as the aim of the statistics was to show how unemployment was decreasing, and the most successful way in which to achieve this was to alter the definition of the concept of unemployment. This shows how the aims and motives of those collecting the data can influence the final statistics. Radical thinkers also believe that statistics only tell us about the groups in society who hold power, and are simply a reflection of the balances of power in society (Hesteretal, 1996, cited in May, 1997). Official statistics do not exist on all topics that sociologists may want to look at, and as a result can be very limiting for them, but also only present a one sided view of society. One example of this is servants in the Victorian era. Many statistics from this time were produced by those in positions of power, for example mistresses, so they tell us little about the lives of the servants, who were working class and held little power. However, despite these limitations official statistics do have some uses. According to posivitists as long as the statistics are reliable and valid then hey are very useful, and one example of this is birth and death rates. As the registration of births and deaths are legal requirements the statistics are reliable, and paint a valid picture of the contemporary and past population levels. Statistics that are not produced using legal requirements can also be useful, however. Bulmer claims that statisticians often go to many lengths to avoid problems with reliability and validity, and he claims that as a result official statistics pose no more of a problem than sociological research. He also argues that if sufficient thought is given to the production of official statistics, and more scientific, rather than theoretical concepts are used, then these problems can be corrected, however it is hard to apply this to sociological research (Bulmer, 1984, cited in May, 1997). Using the radical approach statistics can be useful to tell us about the state and those in power, and what they are interested in. However radicals argue that if the processes involved in the construction of official statistics are carefully considered when analysing the results then the statistics can be seen to present a useful and valid picture of society (Hindess, 1973). However radicals also argue that official statistics are used most successfully, and paint the most realistic picture when they are combined with another method (May, 1997), for example self report studies when the topic of crime is being studied, as this allows the decision making process involved in the official statistics to be balanced out, as people are more likely to be honest in a self report study. Overall, according to the posivitists the main limitations of official statistics arise from the issues of reliability and validity, however they feel that in many cases these limitations are overcome by careful planning, so argue that sociologists should use official statistics. Radicals on the other hand, believe that official statistics are a construction of the state, and this means that although they are useful for examining the state and its interests they do not provide a realistic picture of society. I feel sociologists should use official statistics especially when examining those with power, or exploring the state, however they should treat official statistics produced on other topics with care, and be aware of the process of decision making and methodology that occurs before the statistics are finally produced. 