Since the fourteenth century the practice of medicine has become a profession, and more importantly, a male-dominated profession. Previously medicine was seen as a female duty, however all areas of medicine have been professionalized over the centuries, and slowly become male-dominated, even the practice of obstetrics, which until the twentieth century, was still viewed as a female responsibility. This rise of medicine has had many implications for women; in this essay I will discuss them. The most important, both in terms of gender and class, was the exclusion of women from what had previously been a female occupation, and their confinement into inferior areas of medicine. However I will also examine the effects the rise of the profession of medicine had on women in relation to how women were viewed from the nineteenth century onward, and also the practical impacts that it had upon women receiving treatment, especially in the case of childbirth. In terms of class I will look at how working-class women received different treatments, as a result of the rise of medicine as a profession, and also how, consequently, the divisions between working-class and upper-class women increased. I will begin by looking at one of the most important implications; women's exclusion from medicine. In previous centuries health care tended to be carried out by female lay-healers within the community (Witz, 1992). Female lay-healers were valued members of the community and as a result gained high status. They cared for the sick and elderly, and were also relied upon to produce drugs and remedies for their patients (Moscucci, 1990). As females were seen as closer to the earth it was felt that they were most suited to carrying out the role of carer within the community, however medicine slowly began to develop as a form of science, rather than an occupation relating to nature, and male domination of the occupation began. From the 1700's the view developed that rationality and science were most important, however these were qualities associated with men, rather than women, who were seen as emotional and religious, not scientific, and as the body began to be viewed from a scientific perspective it was these qualities that were required in the practice of medicine (Donnison, 1993). Men also placed emphasis upon these qualities to justify their dominant role within medicine. Education was introduced to train people in the practice of medicine, and in 1858, the Medical Registration Act secured medicine as a profession (Witz, 1992). However, this also ensured the exclusion of women from medicine. As medicine came to be based on qualifications, rather than experience, patriarchal institutions were able to ensure women were excluded from medicine. They were unable to gain entry into the Universities offering qualifications in medicine, for example the University of Edinburgh, and prevented from taking exams that would gain them a place on the Medical Register (Witz, 1992). Although several women, including Sophie Jex Blake, managed to gain university places, they were subject to prejudice and abuse by fellow students, and following their entry onto the Medical Register, universities changed their policies, ensuring that although women could study medicine, they would not necessarily qualify to practice it (Witz, 1992). This exclusion of women can also be traced in the area of midwifery. Until the twentieth century midwifery was viewed as a female responsibility, being viewed as inferior to other areas. Although from the 1700s onwards there were several man-midwives, they did not deal with routine births, stepping in only if there was a problem; their role was similar to that of a surgeon (Donnison, 1993). However post-1730's their role changed, and they became increasingly involved in routine births, especially with the upper and middle classes. What was seen as 'a problem birth' was redefined, for example prior to this time breech births were regarded as normal, and female midwives considered able to deal with them competently, but as they came to be seen as a problem, male surgeons began to participate in an increasing number (Oakley, 1984). Despite these advances, it was not until the twentieth century that midwifery became recognised as central to general practice (Moscucci, 1990), and qualifications were deemed necessary to practice of midwifery, with the 1902 Midwives Act (Oakley, 1984). This resulted in women being further pushed out of an area which they had continued to dominate, despite the professionalisation of the rest of medicine. This also had class implications, as although women were accepted by lying-in hospitals to train in midwifery they had to pay for the privilege, ensuring that it was only those from the skilled classes who could qualify (Donnison, 1993). Previously, midwifery had been based largely on experience rather than qualification, so was practiced by many working-class women. Overall, one of the most important implications for women, was their excluded from an occupation previously regarded as female, as well as ensuring that only certain classes could enter the profession, which limited the options open to women who needed to work. It impact can still be seen today, as medicine is still a male-dominated practice, and the areas that women do enter, for example nursing, are regarded as inferior to the male-dominated areas, such as surgery. However it was not the only significant impact. Another major implication was the way in which women were depicted by the medical profession. As men wished to justify their exclusion of women from medicine, they redefined how women were viewed. As well continuing to portray them as too emotional to enter what they saw as the world of science, men also began to associate women's bodies with evil, claiming they were inherently dangerous, and therefore needed controlling (Smart, 1992). This would ensure that women were unable to enter medical profession, but also that men could retain control over women's bodies. However at the same time they also depicted women as frail, and therefore dependant upon the male medical practice (Moscucci, 1990, Smart, 1992). Both of these depictions ensured that women were unable to enter medicine, and guaranteed that it remained a male dominated profession. This had class implications for women, as those from the working classes were seen as the most dangerous, whereas frailty was largely associated with the upper and middle classes, which strengthened the divide between the upper and lower classes. It also impacted upon legislation, with further implications for women. As women were construed as dirty and dangerous by the medical profession, laws were created reflecting this point, for example the Contagious Diseases Acts in the 1860's (Smart, 1992), which created further controls for women, especially those from the working classes. The professionalisation of medicine also affected women in a more personal way. As it ensured the exclusion of women from medicine it meant that women seeking medical help had to see a male doctor (Donnison, 1993), a change that caused problems especially in childbirth. It resulted in loss of dignity for women, as many did not wish to see a male doctor in such situations, resulting in many deaths as female midwives were not trained to deal with the problems, or meant that male surgeons had 'to work blind', under the covers, creating many errors (Donnison, 1993). This implication was significant, as it was so personal, and did not just affect women who wished to enter the medical profession but all female patients. Having discussed the implications for women in relation to gender, and in some ways class, I will now focus more closely upon the class impacts. As the practice of medicine moved away from female lay-healing and towards a male profession many working-class women were denied access to medical care. As it became a profession the working classes could no longer afford to receive treatment, so many went without (Donnison, 1993), and the medical profession focused its attention on upper- class women, claiming they were more fragile and in need of extra help, which further excluded working-class women from medical treatment. The few hospitals set up to provide for the working classes were poor quality, and the women were subjected to harsh treatments, which the upper classes who could afford to pay for superior treatment were not. They were treated as if they were dirty in some way, in a similar way to which prostitutes were handled under the Contagious Diseases Acts (Moscucci, 1990). Upper-class women were able to use chloroform during birth, but no such aids were available to those from the working classes (Donnison, 1993). Such differences in treatment helped to increase the division between the working and upper classes that I mentioned previously. Overall the rise of medicine as a profession had many implications for women. It excluded them from the practice, an occupation which had previously been female, a result which had many further implications for women in both gender and class terms. It resulted in the redefining of women, into inherently dangerous, yet fragile human beings, who were therefore dependant upon men, and the male medical profession, as well as having a negative affect on women patients, as many did not wish to see male doctors. It also removed one of the final areas of society from which women could gain status, ensuring that men now acquired this standing, as well as excluding working-class women from treatment as they could no longer afford it, increasing the divisions between women of different classes. Therefore the rise of medicine as a profession turned it into an area of male-dominance, reduced women's power and ensured that male control over women increased, as did the control of the upper classes over the working classes. The rise had a largely negative effect upon women, especially those from the working classes, and its legacy can still be seen in medicine today. 