The nineteenth century was, until recently, predominantly seen as a century of rapid industrialisation which set the stage for profound social change. This way of thinking about the birth of a capitalist society, however, fails to recognise the two sides to the changes that took place. After all, not only was there rapid increase in supply, also was demand of consumer goods ever increasing (McCracken 1990:5). Earlier examples of cultural consumerism in various forms of frequent local gift exchange could already be found in the late eighteenth-century (Finn 2000:143). However, consumerism in the Victorian period took a different and much more broad-based shape through various agents, of which most importantly department stores and an 'unparalleled advertising craze' (Loeb 1994:5). And while men in the eighteenth-century were themselves participating consumers in an informal, pre-capitalist local economy, in the last decades of the nineteenth century mass advertisement of an impersonal character began to target almost only women as their potential customers (Loeb 1994:8) in a highly formalised mass commercial economy. The departure from a semi-formal, local economy to this increasingly enlarged scale of consumption of various kinds of consumer goods did not occur without protest or debate (Rappaport 1996). By the 1850s, the middle class had come to project a self-image of a virtuous class, with an identity based upon plainness and self-discipline. Especially into the nineteenth century, as the middle class began to emerge as a distinctive class, emphasised and luxurious clothing were replaced by more austere and sober dress (Finn 2000). Indeed sobriety and democratic value formed part of its claim to political power. But after the great wave of revolutions, from which middle class all over Europe once again arose reaffirmed in their political position, these democratic values came to be reinterpreted (Loeb 1994), slowly replacing sobriety for the desired acquisition of an 'ornamental delirium' for members of the middle class and the world that surrounded them (McCracken 1990:24). Perhaps the Great Exhibition of 1851 may be said to have served as a starting point of the spread of consumerism. Upon its opening in the Crystal Palace in London, it attracted a recorded total of six million visitors, equal to one-third of the country's population (Weintraub 2004). Moreover, for the first time, 'ordinary commodities [were turned] into cultural signifiers' (Rappaport 1996:65), affirming the results of a rational and sober life. Also William Whiteley, owner of London's first department store, had seen the Crystal Palace, and desired to open a store that made available those goods that remained unattainable at the Great Exhibition (Rappaport 1996). The decades after 1851 then set the stage for an ambiguous public debate among the middle classes, in which critics of new department stores such as Whiteley's expressed 'fears about the morality of consumption' (Rappaport 1996:66), while on the other side a nearly fantastic range of new goods and unprecedented luxury and comfort triggered a great appraisal of 'material democracy' (Loeb 1994:7). McCracken has argued that this middle class tendency toward mass consumerism represented a 'fundamental shift in the culture of the [...] modern world' (McCracken 1990:3) in which the middle class increasingly defined itself in material terms, while within its body others based their elitist or democratic values upon a paraphernalia of objects symbolically highly charged. Initially, the growing number of middle class women engaging themselves in the pastime of shopping was a sight that conflicted with the traditional Victorian 'angel in the household'. While some critics despised the idea of women drinking liquor during such shopping trips to the department store, others went even further to compare these consuming women with prostitutes (Finn 1998:36). In this criticism we may find a fear that was both classed and gendered; after all, prostitutes represented a disrupting female working class challenge to middle class Victorian idea of the gentile, meek and submissive wife. Shopping, however, remained viewed and actively gendered as a feminine task (Loeb 1994:12, Rappaport 1996:67) and the role of middle class women became increasingly an ornamental one. In the streets of London, 'Female shoppers, like the glittering objects on display, became a central part of the urban spectacle' (Rappaport 1996:80), allowing them to become walking statements, sometimes of middle class democratising success at large, other times drawing from an individualistic elitist identity (McCracken 1990). Advertisement did not play the least role in this newly constructed female middle class identity. From an early point, advertisers came to accept that 'the hand that rocks the cradle is the hand that buys the boots' (Loeb 1994:8). Throughout the second half of the nineteenth century, techniques of persuasion became increasingly refined (McCracken 1990:29), shifting the portrayal of the household mistress in a shape of the 'perfect lady' through images in an often historical, near-mythological style (Loeb 1994). Such portrayal of rather powerful, controlling women attempted to equal the act of shopping to having 'the opportunity to', as a critic wrote disdainfully, '"luxuriate" in a deep and intense "sense of power"' (Rappaport 1996:76). Growing consumerism, besides reforming the gender ideal, was also championed as a new definition of class difference. As goods on sale in the department store increasingly became 'material symbols', which set prescriptions of how the middle class was to dress, what material conveniences they could posses, which, in turn said something about 'how they should spend their leisure time' (McCracken 1990:27). Businesses and advertisers were eager to support this civilising, 'rational' view on middle class consumption. Their profits came mostly from the middle class, as a journal of the trade wrote: 'The buyers of the world are the great MIDDLE CLASS PEOPLE [sic]' (Loeb 1994:8). Thus, the Army and Navy Co-operative Society, a private department store, instructed the doorkeepers to keep servants and messengers out to avoid class mingling and provide safety for the female audience (Rappaport 1996). On the other hand, products that served to define middle class status were sold as necessities through the creation of great fear. Parents read in advertisements that without Mellin's Food, their child '[would] not last long' (Loeb 1994:14), while "Raw Milk" was advertised as so dangerous, that 'those who allow it to be served to their families take a great responsibility' (Loeb 1994:14). The arousal of fear can be said to have been used in advertisement and by the department stores in reaffirming middle class values through consumption, for which shopping could comfortably be conducted in the safe, exclusive environment of the department store. As mentioned earlier, this image of the safe middle class 'Universal Provider' taking care of you 'from the cradle to the grave' (Rappaport 1996:73) was continually criticised. Opponents of Whiteley's business tried to 'expose' the degenerate consumption behaviours of his customers (Rappaport: 1996:61), while hyperboloid advertisement was often dismissed as 'puffery' by its audience (Loeb 1994:5). Moreover, small shopkeepers tried to stand in the way of business men such as Whiteley whenever they could (Rappaport 1996). However, such opposition was overcome in various ways. First of all, great businesses such as Whiteley's received continual impulses through the middle class desire to attain novelties aroused by mass advertisement in periodicals of all kinds. Even as the country slid into an economical recession in the 1870s, the middle class 'seemed determined to perpetuate an invigorating sense of material possibility' (Loeb 1994:3). Objections to a valueless, banal middle class were diverted by the emergence of the eccentric, elitist model of the dandy, who, by claims of superior aesthetic standards created a new elite from within the middle class (McCracken 1990). Retailers with shops around department stores came to take these stores for a fact. It was soon found that, if the neighbourhood cooperated with the department store, markets expanded handsomely, also for smaller retailers (Rappaport 1996). Eventually, by the end of the nineteenth century all criticism had been channelled into the new consumerist middle class model. Except, perhaps, for some moral criticism, which was labelled as old-fashioned (Rappaport 1996). Consumption in the nineteenth century was nothing new (McCracken 1990). However, its extent and the way in which it changed the middle class was an enormous step further toward the modern capitalist model as we know it today. Where before the Victorian era consumption remained limited to a small number, it now took a flight to mass proportions. The way in which the public came to see the department store was transformed 'from "the halls of temptation" into a recognised and cherished "social sight"' (Rappaport 1996:61). Whereas social changes and higher living standards were previously seen as the result of industrialisation and the great increase of supply of a wide range of goods, the driving forces on the 'demand side' are now becoming increasingly appreciated and researched (McCracken 1990). One of the reasons for this enormous increase in consumption may be found in the fact that new markets were sought to create a demand for this surplus of goods (Rappaport 1996:81). However, this does not tell the entire story. The general enthusiasm with which new material achievements were hailed had a profound effect on society and the way in which the middle class defined itself as part of it. Also men, and more particularly women within the middle class were both changed and changed their identities consciously with increasing consumerism. As 'shopping' was essentially gendered as a female activity in the second half of the nineteenth century, changes of gender perception were most acutely visible with women. Women were now encouraged to beautify themselves and surround their middle class homes with a paraphernalia of gentility. 