The emergence of the sociological school of ethnomethodology in the early 1960s created a shock wave across the sociological establishment. Its revision of social norms and their relation to the social action springing from individual cases of social interaction was indeed deemed so radical that stories exist of 'ethnomethodologists being fired from their jobs simply because they were ethnomethodologists' (Craib 1992: 102). However, what may at first glance appear a drastically individualistic approach to social relations theory must be seen as embedded within a wider philosophical and social scientific critique of the value of conventional types of knowledge (Alexander 1987). Ethnomethodology asserts that functionalist theory lays an exaggerated amount of emphasis on collectivity within social relations, crystallised in organisations and norms of interaction that are derived therefrom. By first theorising a consistent system of norms, subsequent data gathered from social observation are then "made to fit" within this system. These data are, as traditional sociology has it, 'as it were, readily waiting' (Silverman 1972: 173) to be categorised. This, however, naturally creates a tension, as 'the meaning employed by those we study - their norms, values, attitudes and beliefs; the rules which govern their conduct - are treated as if their meaning were unproblematic' (Craib 1992: 103). This can even be observed to be the case in highly advanced social theories, as the overarching theoretical grid still requires the classification of a highly contestable and unstable social reality "out there": 'To employ such 'operational' or 'theory-laden' categories is not to escape the ascriptive or imputative work that ordinary action-concept usages carry with them' (Coulter 1979: 11). By failing to observe the complication characteristic of such norm-attribution, sociologists fall into the trap of taking sets of typification for granted, thereby tacitly avoiding the 'problem of concealed, commonsense commitments' (Coulter 1979: 15) to which all social actors involved conform. Instead, according to ethnomethodologists, the only way to avoid adding to such a body of affirmative "folk sociology" is to 'seek to understand the process of experiencing' (Silverman 1972: 166), by searching for the underlying motivation of action of each social actor. Such a methodology abstains from explaining social phenomena in immediate relation to abstract, theoretical norms, deriving actual interaction from alternative, everyday commonsensical approaches to social interaction, which have also been described as "second-order typifications", 'typifications of our common-sense typifications which order the social world in a rational way' (Craib 1992: 99-100). Instead of taking methods of social ordering for granted, the sociologist may then concern himself or herself with 'the manner in which members use rules to do the work of defining and interpreting actions' (Silverman 1972: 179). In this essay I shall discuss the D. Lawrence Wieder's case study of "the code", a semi-formal normative body maintained as the set of social rules by which residents in a 'rehabilitative facility for narcotic-addict felons on parole' (Wieder 1974: 144) claim to measure the validity of their social action. This ethnomethodological ethnographic study may provide interesting insights into how, for all actors involved in any organisational structure, 'talk and action are produced and understood as indexical displays of the everyday world' (Cicourel 1973: 99). The problematic relation Wieder discovers between the norms as he has them explained to him, and as he sees those norms put in practice reveals the usefulness for, 'not a commonsense sociology but a sociology of commonsense' (Silverman 1972: 170), an often arbitrary and precarious battlefield for social power negotiation. I shall thereafter also look at the limitations of such an approach to sociological studies. In his analysis of the role of "telling the code", Wieder begins by looking more closely at the way in which he personally internalised its meaning. As he received information on the content of "the code" piecemeal, it became necessary to create an internal schema for understanding it. In this way, it became possible to interpret further bits of information, while simultaneously elaborating the internal system into a generic and constantly expanding body of understanding. 'Each newly encountered 'piece' of talk was simultaneously rendered sensible by interpreting it in terms of the developing relevancies of the code and was, at the same time, more evidence of the existence of that code' (Wieder 1974: 161). Hereby, Wieder points out the indexical functioning of the "code system": the various norms at the core serve to interpret behaviour which is said to be based on it. However, this "indexing" of behaviour was not quite an unproblematic or effortless method. Behavioural significance was rendered only 'meaningful in the ways that it was said socially-in-a-context' (Wieder 1974: 163). While Wieder initially observed that he related residents' uncooperative attitudes quite naturally to the norms described in the convict code, he found that such categorisation could at times be rather arbitrary, resulting in situations in which <quote> '...either chosen alternative would be equally plausible interpretations in terms of the same rule, even though the alternatives propose opposite actions. [...] Instead of 'predicting' behavior, the rule is actually employed as an interpretative device' (Wieder 1974: 168).</quote>According to Wieder, all of residents' behaviour was, in the end, placed, and thereafter rendered rational, in the light of the convict code. It created, for the observer, a method in which social '...order and orderliness is accomplished - that is, it involves interpretive "work"' (Silverman 1972: 175). In the light of such formalistic social meta-theories as Durkheim's, the position of residents is understandable in terms of the social force of the convict code weighing upon them as an "institutionalised" norms of interaction. This position, however, fails to see the manipulative, indefinite character of the convict code, using instead 'the fact of norm compliance to assume that [the residents'] action has a compliant character, that it is passive and conformistic rather than active and constructing' (Alexander 1987: 274). In opposition to this, ethnomethodology, rather taking an individualistic stance, argues that in the enactment of norms (in this case described as "telling the code"), 'there is negotiation vis-à-vis [the meaning of these] rules'. In a similar vein, Cicourel has argued that 'this [...] environment of objects cannot be tied easily to notions like status, role and norms, employed by actors in less structured or controlled everyday situations' (Cicourel 1973: 15). In other words, norms only derive meaning from their enactment, which is continually negotiated and whose stability depends on the degree of acceptance which the various social actors concede to the meaning contained within the enactment. Under normal circumstances, the process of norm negotiation takes place without great complication, as 'we are frequently engaged in making connections in our descriptions' (Coulter 1979: 15). In this process of "making sense" of the social stimuli around us, we draw upon previous experience, thus arriving at 'a series of commonsense constructs [which we] have pre-selected and pre-interpreted [from] this world which [we] experience as the reality of their daily lives' (Schutz in Coulter 1979: 9). Beyond this, the analogy of "making sense" extends further in the sense of serving the purpose of creating structural coherence and predictability in our perception of the world that we experience. A convincing set of behavioural rules such as the convict code is necessary to order the residents' forms of social interaction, which is, in fact, 'knowledge [that] is itself inherently unstable, something which is created anew in each encounter' (Craib 1992: 102). The precariousness of resident-staff interaction is pointed out by its strong dependence on contextuality. With "the code" in mind as an interpretative tool, all actors involved (which in this case may involve the residents, members of staff and the observer), continually scan incoming social stimuli for recognisable modes of behaviour which may contextually seem logical. In doing this, variables as the particular social actors, the setting and the timing play an indispensable role for practices of indexing, i.e., "sense-making" (Cicourel 1973: 101, Wieder 1974). In this context, staff's reaction to residents' 'problematic acts' were not confronted as subversive behaviour; rather was their character now converted 'into instances of a familiar pattern' (Wieder 1974: 151). In this way, the facility's staff utilised the convicts' code in order 'to formulate a recognizable coherent story, standard, typical, cogent, uniform, planful, i.e., a professionally defensible, and thereby, for members, a recognizably rational account' (Garfinkel in Alexander 1987: 262-3). Unsurprisingly, Wieder sees "telling the code" in the first place as a means of justification of the chosen course of action. By "telling the code", residents explain and justify why they will not cooperate in certain situations or answer certain questions posed by staff. By accepting the code, staff, in turn, account for residents' uncooperativeness in activities and rehabilitative procedures. <quote>''Telling the code' provided staff with a useful way of talking about residents and themselves which portrayed both teams as more or less reasonable and more or less helpless to change the character of the relationship between the teams, because of the social-fact character (in Durkheim's sense) of the regularities made available by 'telling the code' which were none of anybody's specific doing or responsibility' (Wieder 1974: 151)</quote>Interesting is Wieder's reference to Durkheim: in "telling the code", all social actors in the facility render types of social interaction institutionalised, thereby attempting to (though not actually) reifying them (Durkheim's "social facts"). With this, however, the door is only just opened to further and more penetrating interpretations of action-motivation. Ethnomethodology points out that, in order to gain real understanding that means something, 'intentions and the actor's views are always potentially relevant and must be taken into account' (Pitkin in Coulter 1979: 12-3). Indeed, by assuming interpretation ends at normative causality, sociologists inevitably miss out on the politics underlying social action (Coulter 1979: 11, Silverman 1972: 175). The darker, more precarious side of social interaction lies in the tensions of power underneath its surface. Ethnomethodology does not deny the existence of a "common culture", and this would be an absurd claim to make (Alexander 1987: 262); however, the precariousness of social interaction is exactly that what this "common culture" is not: individuals may challenge the existing order by either directly confronting it, or, more subtly, by manipulating its general traits to their advantage. Whether this challenge is pursued consciously or not is, strictly spoken, not relevant; as Pitkin asserts, 'One may have to intend to lie in order to lie, but one need not intend to deceive in order to deceive' (Pitkin in Coulter 1979: 12). An analogy may here be found in the functioning of penal codes, in that 'the fit is 'managed' through negotiating socially organized activities' (Cicourel 1973: 13) in which both hidden and open methods of manipulation are used. The position Wieder takes in his account of the role of the convict code draws on the traditions of both radically challenging all knowledge in a systematic way, and emphasising the inescapable burdens of responsibility that social action brings with it. It is therefore no surprise that 'phenomenological sociology, existential sociology, [and] the sociology of everyday life' (Craib 1992: 97) are often mentioned in conjunction with one another. The indefiniteness of society described by such a sociology stresses a few characteristics. In the first place, we can observe that social "roles" have a dynamic character that extends beyond the immediately observable social surface. It can be observed that 'the dynamic aspect of status or office and such is always influenced by factors other than the stipulations of the position itself' (David in Cicourel 1973: 14). From this follows, secondly, that the situational placement of social interaction takes an important place in determining its meaning, i.e. it is not just about what actors speak, but more importantly about how communication takes place (Garfinkel in Alexander 1987: 270). Thirdly, the constant change in interpretation of social norms results in an extreme degree of relativism invoked by ethnomethodology (Craib 1992: 102). In assuming the '"adequate" or "appropriate" operational definitions' (Silverman 1972: 177), staff of the "halfway house" avoided facing up to the existential question of where this appropriateness was derived from. Thus, Wieder can ultimately only conclude one thing: ''Telling the code' masked what was 'really going on' at the halfway house - what was 'really going on' was residents' pursuing their immediate interests by fabricating instances of 'telling the code' which deceived me and the staff' (Wieder 1974: 169). Naturally, Wieder's approach is not free from criticism. It can, in the first place, be said that it gives a rather cynical, or at least extremely sceptical account the natural course that social interaction takes within the example of his case study. While underlying forces may be at work in social interaction, it is entirely possible that even the social actors involved are not aware of them. Residents in the facility may, in fact, feel that behaviour represents a genuine reflection of the loyalty and distrust that the convict code at varying times demands of him. Likewise, it is not unrealistic to think that staff generally recognises the "realness" of the code and in instances acts in accordance with it to protect certain individual residents. In other words, the convict code is not entirely without justified grounded. This problem brings under discussion the extent to which the freedom to negotiate socials norms actually exists. Regarded as a whole, society can be said to be rather more stable than the Wieder claims from within the ethnomethodological perspective. Thus, while Wieder's approach may be laudably seen to attempt to incorporate 'a genuine humanism in an ideological sense', it can be asked '[w]hether this moral humanism is theoretically justified' (Alexander 1987: 280). In his account of how the convict code is to be interpreted, Wieder emphasises how it obtains a indexical status. Rather like the coding system of books in a library, its norms serve to interpret rather than to describe it. Thus, norms serve as a tacit justification of real events, for both social actors and the sociologist. A truer account of events, is, however, more complicated. By accepting norms as motivation and authentic drives of social actors, the convict code came to serve as a tool of rendering behaviour logical and coherent. For staff, this tool justified an acceptance of nonconformist behaviour from the residents' side, while the residents often successfully manipulated it to their direct advantage. This underlying differentiation reveals the political and arbitrary nature of social norms, however developed and "theory-laden". In his approach to sociology, Wieder, and the wider school of ethnomethodologists, build upon the work of phenomenology and existentialism to show the inescapability of situational variables in the everyday context of social interaction. Thus, the "what" of social norms must separated from the "how" of interpretation, and subsequently analysed at a different level. This approach, however, has not remained uncriticised. Many sociologists deem the extent of manipulative power that ethnomethodologists award the individual with unrealistic. According to them, behaviour is more context-bound and can be seen to be derived from this context. In that case, Wieder's account of the convict code serves, foremostly, as an existential reminder of the forces underlying our everyday commonsense social interaction. . 