The publication of The Bell Curve in 1994, the issues it discussed and conclusions it drew have triggered an enormous controversy over the years after its publication (Keenan 1999). This comes mostly from its assumed political incorrectness, claimed implications for public policy, and doubts from the scientific community as to its scientific claims (Keenan 1999). In this essay I shall attempt to take a closer look at some sociologically significant conclusions reached in the book. It seems, however, impossible to review the book without references to the sharp criticism it sparked upon publication. I shall therefore occasionally refer to critics or related academic work. The book sets out in an ambitious tone. In its introductory note, the authors forebode sensational conclusions, expecting 'that many people will have a "This can't possibly be true" reaction' (p. xix). It soon becomes clear that the book is intended for a wide audience, and throughout the book the authors continually insinuate this presumption. It is a point that is well worth noting, as we shall later see. The intention of the book, however, is not very clear at the outset. Vague notions such as 'for the last thirty years, the concept of intelligence has been the pariah in the world of ideas' (p. 1), and further, 'received wisdom in the media is roughly 180 degrees opposite from each of the six points [that we assume as a basis]' (p. 23) leave the reader with the idea that the authors are to set straight a grave misunderstanding. The six points which the authors write about are of great importance throughout the book. They are six assumptions from the classicist school about intelligence (or cognitive ability, two terms that are used interchangeably in the book) and the place IQ testing takes in expressing a person's intelligence. Especially claim five and six, respectively, that properly administered IQ tests are not biased, and that intelligence is 'substantially heritable [...] no less that 40 percent and no more than 80 percent' (p. 23) are facts that the authors lean on particularly heavily. According to critics, the problem is that these claims involve more complication and nuance than an average reader may understand, and that the consensus among psychometricians that the authors mention is not as broad as their own claims. A critic of the book, professor in psychology Robert Sternberg reacts as follows: 'I think that there is definitely some heritability of intelligence in the White population. Almost every psychologist believes there is some heritability of IQ and I agree. But the public may not understand just what that means. If you accept the use of the heritability statistic, about .5 [50%] is probably right' (Miele 1995). Throughout the book, moderate claims moulded into more radical views and outcomes are commonplace. This becomes especially controversial and fragile as topics around intelligence difference between races are being discussed (Frisby 1995). The virulent attack on the most controversial matters discussed in the book, according to Murray, 'often read like an unintentional confirmation of our view of the "cognitive elite" as a new caste', while 'when the Sturm und Drang has subsided, nothing important in The Bell Curve will have been overturned. I say this not because Herrnstein and I were especially far-sighted, but because our conclusions are so cautiously phrased and our findings anchored so securely in the middle of the scientific road' (Upstream). To put these claims in context, it is necessary to look at some of the criticism of the book. The Bell Curve has been accused of presenting conclusions on a pseudo-scientific basis. As the book is quite substantial, and the authors continually moderate the argument besides cross-referencing chapters, it is difficult to either speak completely for or against the type of science that The Bell Curve presents the reader with. However, the idea that Sternberg brings up is worth noting. He says: 'The way that book is written is to, I think, say X on page 605 in sentence 8, with an appropriate caution, and then invite the reader to a somewhat more extreme conclusion elsewhere' (Miele 1995). In line with this claim, we find the authors introducing the idea of a possible constant deviation in intelligence between ethnic groups in a casual way: 'Americans have watched the spectacular economic success of the Pacific rim nations' (p. 272), as if this were a logical consequence of a population's higher IQ average. In the unfolding chapter 13, which deals with variations of cognitive ability between ethnic groups, the book continues to provide the evidence for trends in intelligence difference between 'Asians' and 'Whites'. For this evidence, the book leans heavily upon the work of Lynn. A key claim, that IQ differences in the results are not generally found in culturally biased assignments, is here backed by only one source, Jensen. The work of this scholar, however, is certainly not uncontroversial and may even be racially motivated (Keenan 1999). Thus, where Murray and Herrnstein claim that 'there is no longer an important technical debate' (p. 282), Sternberg counters: 'To the extent that there is a consensus it is certainly not Herrnstein's and Murray's' (Miele 1995). Nonetheless, it is no more than fair to put forward Murray's response in the afterword of the book: 'Never mind that The Bell Curve draws its evidence from more than a thousand scholars. Never mind that among [the accused scholars] are some of the most respected psychologists of our time' (p. 564). Possibly the complication with the data used lies not so much in its collectors as in the theory behind it. In order to further their argument, the authors take a great and careless leap beyond their use of the concepts of 'race' and 'ethnicity', concepts which, according to Frisby, are 'best left to specialists' (Frisby 1995), while a UNESCO report argues that 'The term [race] at best is at present time not really allowable on any score in man' (Miles 1982). How then do the authors of The Bell Curve justify their use of ethnicity (which, again, may be taken as interchangeable in the book)? Only a paragraph seems enough: 'The studies of "blacks" or "Latinos" or "Asians" who live in America generally denote people who say they are black, Latino or Asian - no more, no less' (p. 271), and further they write 'race differences are varied and complex - and they make the human species more adaptable and more interesting' (p. 272). In this way, the authors appear to draw a direct connection between personally perceived ethnic differences and the distribution of cognitive abilities for different human groupings. It can, however, conversely be argued that, like all over the world humans are expected to be born with two arms and two legs, the distribution of intelligence may be expected to fit into a similar predictable model worldwide. Opinions are still so divided about the issue that different conclusions are reached from the same data. As an example, the conclusions of Flynn are refuted by the authors as follows: 'He also says that Asian-Americans actually have the same non-verbal intelligence as whites', but 'Lynn disagrees and concludes from the same data [my italics] that there is an ethnic difference in overall IQ as well' (p. 273). Perhaps the contrast cannot be presented starker than through the following example. Whilst the authors argue that 'tests results are matched by analyses of occupational and scientific attainment by Jews, which consistently show their disproportionate level of success' (p.275), Keenan (1999) insists: 'The Jews provide another example of the blending of racial distinctions. They are all presumably derived from one population [...] Gene frequency studies, however, show that now Jewish populations in different parts of the world tend to resemble their surrounding populations at least as much, if not more, than they do each other'. The book consists of four parts comprising some 500 pages of textual body and several appendices providing more background. Part III, nonetheless, presents the most important and controversial findings. The authors recognise this, claiming, 'that many readers have turned first to this chapter indicates how sensitive the issue has become' (p. 270). It is difficult to accuse the authors of racist motives. Placing possibly controversial outcomes into a thought exercise, the authors state 'some people would interpret the news as a license for treating all whites as intellectually superior to all blacks [but it becomes] obvious how illogical [...] such reactions would be' (p. 312). It can, however, easily be said that the authors jump to conclusions about racial differences too soon, to go on suggesting changes in public policy in part IV. The problem with this book thus lies with its scientific inconsistency. It sets out with no clearly stated objective, while the use of scholarly caution and polite integrity is broken soon after the authors bring it up. While the authors promise in the introduction to 'employ the more neutral term cognitive ability as often as possible' (p. 22), synonyms such as 'smart' (p. 127), 'very smart... Very dumb...' (p. 133) that occasionally crop up nearly indicate the carelessness with which the authors draw their conclusions. Frisby claims that 'to parade facts about racial differences before the general public is akin to putting a lit match to gasoline' (Frisby 1995). The authors of The Bell Curve are eager to draw conclusions and that it is what lends this work its importance, but also its legions of hostile critics. In the words of Sternberg: 'If you were to ask, "What inference do Herrnstein and Murray invite their readers to draw?" they go beyond what they know' (Miele 1995). 