The writing of Simmel on the discipline of sociology is characterised by a desire to reduce the study of society to its essence. Instead of viewing society as Durkheim did, that is, as a generic force working externally of the individual and reifying itself through organisational structures and artefacts, Simmel was rather concerned with giving a 'serious [...]analysis of the social bond' (Nisbit 1959: 479), which can be described as the reciprocally working relation between two or more social actors. He denounced the view that a society "as such" could exist outside individuals (Simmel 1971a: 27), preferring to build a sociological system from the individual's standpoint. In the first place, Simmel represented social interaction as the dynamic attempt to reconcile the opposite drives within each human being - 'for example, the individual and the group, the need for conformity and for individuation, the need for stability and for flexibility' (Abel 1959: 478). Despite the theoretical character of these opposites, Simmel believed all "forms-of-sociation" are to some extent conditioned by the tension between them. Secondly, Simmel sought to separate the forms these conflicting ways of behaving could take, and their socio-historically dependent content. The form thereby attains a certain "objective" quality, acting as a generally discernable trait in a variety of social circumstances. As an illustration of this position, Simmel considered the phenomenon of secrecy to be a social form which could, therefore, not be judged as such, as it 'stands in neutrality above the value functions of its content' (Simmel 1950: 331). Furthermore, the greater the number of links through sociation, the more the social sphere becomes "society". Critics have recognised Simmel's breach with the nineteenth century approach of "doing" sociology: constructing a model of society and then coming up with solutions to its problems. It has been argued that this way of theorising society created laws and principles 'too vague and too sweeping to be applicable in practical circumstances' (Abel 1959: 475). Hence, it was exactly 'the microsociological character' of Simmel's approach to sociology which won his writing its original quality over other sociologists (Nisbit 1959: 480). The extent of strict reductionism in Simmel's writing, however, must not be exaggerated. Simmel did recognise that, while only forms, forms-of-sociation could take different shapes (contents), with, at times, such strong social repercussions that the social sphere acquired a nearly metaphysical quality. Consequently, he wrote of keeping a secret that it 'produces an immense enlargement of life: [...] the possibility of a second world alongside the manifest world; and the latter is decisively influenced by the former' (Simmel 1950: 330). Much of Simmel's writing on approaches to sociological studies is related to the role of abstraction, and its balance in relation to concrete situations. He stressed the value of a division between a broader, psychological approach to social drives, and the shapes these drives take in interacting with others, whom allow or resist these drives in varying degrees, and simultaneously in their turn attempt to give shape to their personal drives. Hence, 'the further development of every relation is determined by the ratio of persevering and yielding energies which are contained in the relation' (Simmel 1950: 334). Because of his view of society as the result of the constant reciprocal interaction and mutual pressure of concretely realised social forms Simmel is widely recognised as primarily 'a sociologist of forms' (Nisbit 1959: 479). The role of forms-of-sociation, however, was of even greater importance to him. In Simmel's writings on how sociology ought to approach the social question, he proposed that the detachment of the intention of a social action (form) from the actual deed was the fundamental solution to gain a greater insight in the working of the social sphere. Indeed, Simmel went even further and proposed that '[t]o separate, by scientific abstraction, these two factors of form and content which are in reality inseparably united; [...] seems to me the basis for the only, as well as the entire, possibility of a special science of society as such' (Simmel 1971a: 25). To illustrate the position of the sociologist within such a framework of thinking, Simmel drew an analogy between society and language. While both convey a message, they express this in particular way, embedded in the context of their users. This particularity, in both cases, is conditioned by economical standing, and historical and cultural forces. Still, we can trace a binding element between all users across time and social position. The shape the social takes is conditioned by the intention that the individual may have. Thus, social forms are like grammar, which 'isolates the forms of languages from their contents' beyond the 'heterogeneity of content and purposes which life reveals' (Nisbit 1959: 480), while the sociologist attempts to atomise and describe this "social grammar". The separation of form and content automatically assumes the individual as the basis for a social interaction. It thereby recognises the role of psychology in determining the origins of social behaviour (Simmel 1971a). Simmel was, however, much concerned with defining the proper territory of sociology, arguing that 'we are not interested in the psychological processes that occur in each of the two individuals but in their subsumption under the categories of union and discord' (Simmel 1971a: 34). All we can properly and legitimately call society is 'a mode of existence which concretely expresses itself in the reciprocal relations of human beings' (Abel 1959: 475). The social grid of forms-of-sociation owes to Kant's virtue ethics in that it separates intention from action (Craib 1997: 56); Simmel, however, was not concerned with adding a value judgment but argued that the sociologist should solely attempt to determine the "grammar" of society by example. A point of criticism in the use of forms as social elements separate from the real may be that it creates an extent of theoretical abstraction. For Simmel, however, this practice only has a function as a theoretical exercise. 'In any given social phenomenon, content and societal form constitute on reality' (Simmel 1971a: 24), he argued; the separation of form is to serve as a tool for interpretation of case study. In fact, in this, Simmel went even further than Weber, whom, with his use of the "ideal types" provided the two theoretical ends of a scale on which a particular society can then be placed. Simmel, on the contrary, insisted that the use of forms must always relate to 'a piece of history, either past or present' (Abel 1959: 479). As a result, all Simmelian sociological concepts such as 'status, Gemeinschaft, relative deprivation, and solidarity' maintain a degree concreteness despite their traits of universality (Abel 1959: 478). Due to the position, moreover, that '[f]orm and content cannot, in practice, be separated' (Nisbit 1959: 480), much of Simmel's writing did in fact not maintain such a theoretical strictness. He recognised this fact, but saw this rather as a natural process of knowledge-gathering, which, in sociology, can only be done in concrete terms: '[t]hrough [...] a study, of course, these forms would lose in applicability what they would gain in definiteness' (Simmel 1971a: 28). The use of the term "form" must, therefore, not be seen as an equivalent of "social law", since a conception of law may exist independently from the individual, while "form" must always be filled in by "content", like a geometrical shape needs a material to exist at all (Simmel 1971a). Another point of criticism that has been brought to the fore, is the way in which sociology, in Simmel's conception, occupies a place merely as the study of the microsocial, which comes out of the distinction between and form and content as the only purely human element in social relations (Abel 1959: 476). It is, furthermore, a point of inconsistency between Simmel's writing on what sociological studies should consist of, and his actual sociological treatises. For example, when Simmel describes the social form "secrecy" as 'a formal means of boasting and of subordinating the others' (Simmel 1950: 332), this definition is much narrower than his further expansion on its role in associations, and the physical-spatial element that secrecy often involves. Hence, it can be said that the Simmel's descriptions of the content often go beyond what he himself characterised as the elements that make up a society. By focussing on the microsocial element of society, Simmel failed to appropriate the external force of society over the individual, arguing, contrarily to Durkheim, that 'with every growth of new synthesising phenomena [...], the same group becomes "more society" than it was before' (Simmel 1971a: 27); that is - society is the sum-total of all microsocial interaction. Since, as mentioned above, 'the investigation of forms-of-sociation, requested by Simmel, involves the determination of their functions with regard to social life' (Abel 1959: 478), it may be of value to assess Simmel's application of the use of forms in one of his own investigations. In his essay 'The Metropolis and Mental Life', Simmel draws a parallel with the emergence of conglomerations of people in the metropolis on the one hand, and the coming into existence of new ways of social interaction or the absence of interaction due to a growth of individualism (Simmel 1971b: 325). In this model, the metropolis may be seen as the expression, or content, of the various forms-of-sociation that we associate with modernity and the emergence of individuality. Thence, life in the metropolis sees a dual, antagonistic development: on the one hand, the vast increase of daily moments of interaction between people, while on the other hand, individuals 'retreat from excessive external stimuli [which are social content]' (Frisby 1992: 66). According to Simmel, the foremost conflict in metropolitan society can be observed in the tension between the individual, rationalistic, and the weight of the continuing flux of impressions upon the emotive, subjective side of each person. This creates two types of extreme social reactions. On the one hand, '[t]he purely intellectualistic person [who] is indifferent to all things personal' (Simmel 1971b: 326) becomes wholly disinterested and impatient in interaction with others. For him, or her, '[t]he meaning and value of the distinction between things, and therewith of the things themselves, are experienced as meaningless' (Simmel 1971b: 330), solely out of a vast overflow of impressions in everyday life. On the other hand, maintaining a superficial, rational approach toward others may result in nervous breakdowns and agoraphobia, which Simmel regarded as 'pathological characteristics of modern cities' (Vidler 1991: 36). This view, despite providing an interesting model for the social effects of modern life, however shows some ambiguities in definition and theoretical inconsistency, while it steps over a few essential elements without touching upon them. For, when Simmel remarks that 'the metropolis [...] has outgrown every personal element' (Vidler 1991: 38), he does not satisfactorily substantiate this view in the terms that he set out as sociological tools. It remains unclear, for example whether the metropolis sees an "increase" or "decrease" of the "thing" society. For, while numbers of contact moments, which are essentially opportunities to add content to form vastly increase, they simultaneously become infinitely more fragmented, single-minded and disinterested. To add to this problem of definition, it can be argued that each individual 'derives [these] values and improvements from this collective' (Wolff 1950: 54). Here we arrive at the fundamental complexity of form as a strictly separate theoretical concept. From Simmel, we may read that the form of 'the secret is a first-rate element of individualization' (Simmel 1950: 334), while principally it is a social form which, despite the fact that it must, per definition, involve more than one social actor, on the other hand consist of not sharing something with others. This makes the distinction between the individual and the social a very troubled one, from which one can conclude that 'a person is never merely a collective being just as he is never merely an individual being' (Levine 1971: 261). As '[t]he social is determined, but it is also determining' (Abel 1959: 476), it is necessary to provide a strong definition of the forms-of-sociation before anything can be said of its relation to forms. While people engage in relationships with each other 'to satisfy their mutual and individual needs' (Craib 1997: 56), this does, however, not provide us with a very firm tool to determine the every-day content of such forms: we might think of the relationship between two individuals and something as abstract and indirect as the state. Moreover, by leaving out physical aspects of a model of society, Simmel narrows the understanding that sociology may generate of society. Thus, while Simmel acknowledges that '[s]ome social forms, such as the state, manifest themselves in a unique and localized space that excludes the possibility of forms inhabiting the same space' (Vidler 1991: 39), he fails to appropriate this fact in a societal sense. Yet, when a person gets a prison sentence, this is not the direct result of his interaction with merely the judge, but rather does this spring from a relation within a more collective set of concepts such as "the law" and "the state". Interpreting this example in purely microsocial, individual relations means missing the impersonal and continuous aspects of social organisation. In conclusion, the separation between form and content is important in that it stresses 'the "humanistic coefficient"' (Abel 1959: 479) in social relations. Whereas it allows a certain degree of generalisation of human drives within a heterogeneity of social circumstances, Simmel's theory stresses that we should not lose the 'element of irriducible humanism' (Nisbit 1959: 481) in society. It also stresses the direct reciprocal influence of individuals over each other in every-day social relations: '[t]he significance of [...] interactions among men lies in the fact that it is because of them that the individuals, in whom these driving impulses and purposes are lodged, form a unity, that is, a society.' (Simmel 1971a: 23). Thus, Simmel's reductionist sociology reveals a certain immediacy and existentialism to it. This approach to sociology, however, brings up a number of problems which Simmel sought to address by simply placing all socio-historical biases and influences inside the person-to-person relationships which gave content to universal, timeless forms. This brings about an antagonism in Simmel's system of thought, in that it reveals a disparity between the apparent behaviour (or action) of an individual's reaction to another, while this particular social form can only be analysed in a wider, macrosocial context. Especially more continuous, bigger forms of organisation have a greater sense of impersonality to them, making the underlying form (essentially a drive springing from individual actors) hard to define and ambiguous. The separation of form and content is thus a very useful too in the study of microsocial relations, but cannot be seen to contend any notion of a "society in its entirety". 