It was in 1903 that Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughter Christabel founded the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), following around forty years of organised campaign for female suffrage organisations in Britain (Banks 1981). After another fifteen years of campaign, interrupted by the First World War, women were finally granted the vote in 1918 through the Representation of People Act. It remains, however, a controversial matter as to whether the militant campaigns of the WSPU actually helped to quicken the vote for women, or not. In order to get a clearer picture of the tactics of the suffragettes, it is worthwhile to take a closer look at their use of the female body in violent, unconventional and often illegal ways, to draw attention to their cause. The connection of British femininity with a high morality, and the idea of gender equalities through historical argumentation were common ground arguments for the vote in the late nineteenth century. Although arguments of the 'constitutionalists' always sought to stay within the boundaries of middle class respectability, they certainly incorporated argumentation based upon the female body (Holton 1998). The most evident examples of this can be found in racist theories. Female authors attempted to present an image of a superior British race, of which women, had, by necessity, always been part. Charlotte Carmichael Stopes', in her book British Freewomen of 1894, argued that women's right to political participation originated from the ancient Britons. 'The moral codes, sexual equality in physical height [my italics]' were, in her book presented as arguments for women's suffrage (Holton 1998: 158). Constitutionalist feminists increasingly began to make use of racial reasoning to support their campaign for the vote (Holton 1998). This provided the movement with a legal means of enhancing female respectability and high morale in a way that was compatible and in harmony with society. However, after forty years of such campaigns, the women's vote was still nearly as far away as it had been at the outset. This realisation caused the WSPU to seek to pressurise the government, for they were responsible for the problem (Pugh 2000). From a harmony model, the dominant suffrage campaigns thence shifted to a model of conflict, bringing the movement into a new phase (Banks 1981, Holton 1998). The suffragettes, as the WSPU activists came to be known, sought to cut right through to the core of the problem by addressing the government directly. They sought to point out the inherent contradictions of the political system as it was: the partial inclusion of women into an essentially male-dominated environment (Lawrence 2000). From insisting on politicians' support in public meetings, the suffragettes soon radicalised (Vicinus 1985). They felt that the suffrage question was not dealt with seriously, and from there the WSPU leader Christabel Pankhurst set out to phrase the problem more directly: '[i]f Mr Asquith [PM] would not let her vote, she was not prepared to let him talk' (Lawrence 2001). This meant a great leap away from the Victorian feminist movement; suffragettes sought to replace the passive, homely housewife with a campaigning activist, a political being. In the words of the prominent suffragette Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence: 'Not the Vote only, but what the Vote means - the moral, the mental, economic, the spiritual enfranchisement of Womanhood, the release of women...' was of vital importance to women (Vicinus 1985: 249). A new stage of interrupting meetings started. Suffragettes continually disrupted parliamentary debates, by shouting out against the speaker. Increasingly coordinated, the suffragettes were sometimes able to spoil a complete speech, by disrupting the speaker in turns. In 1908, a speech by Lloyd George was continually interrupted for two hours, with fifty women carried out (Pugh 2000). Although this obstruction of the political process was arguably playing into the hands anti-suffragists, such forceful, physical practices of politics can be said to have been part of masculine politics as it was conducted by male politicians (Lawrence 2001). Indeed, when members of the audience could be forcefully removed from a public political meeting, this might be interpreted as a threat to the civil liberties (Pugh 2000). This meant a moral victory for the suffragettes, especially since gentlemanliness towards women was expected of politicians. Mass assault and arrests of women were not an uncommon sight any longer, which the particularly violent events of 'Black Friday' in November 1910 highlighted (Vicinus 1985). Hence, the suffragettes increasingly highlighted this state brutality by a number of means. Hunger striking was one of them, first begun on the initiative of Marion Wallace Dunlop in July 1909 (Pugh 2000). Protesting against the government's refusal to grant the suffragettes the status of political prisoners, the WSPU soon managed to place the campaign for female suffrage on a moral high ground, as the government had to face the issue of the prisoners' treatment. The WSPU brilliantly publicised this moral strength, speaking of 'moral right triumphing over physical force' (Vicinus 1985). Forcible feeding of hunger striking suffragettes soon received criticism from doctors (Pugh 2000) and graphic representation presented a shocking picture of the treatment of women in prisons. The problem continued, and leaving even the parliament divided (John 2001). In 1913, the Cat and Mouse Act was thus passed, which dismissed the policy of forcible feeding and was aimed at avoiding the negative publicity deriving from it. To some extent, the act succeeded in doing so, as many people argued that their suffering was 'self-imposed and their martyrdom as in some sense staged' (Harrison 1978: 180). This loss of sympathy and moral and intellectual high ground was however enhanced by the suffragettes increasing radicalisation and alienation from sympathisers (Pugh 2000). The suffragettes showed a radical impatience and determination that eventually led them to virtually abandon any techniques of persuasion (Pugh 2000). The years in the run towards World War I resulted in the most passionate outbursts of the suffragettes attack upon male domination of the political system (Vicinus 1985). A first systematic window breaking campaign had been undertaken in 1909, of which Sylvia Pankhurst said, 'let it be the windows of the Government, not the bodies of women which shall be broken' (Lawrence 2001: 222). A near concession of the parliament in 1910, which would have resulted in a limited vote for women, could not be passed by a much divided parliament. Winston Churchill, usually a sympathiser of the women's suffrage cause, voted against the bill in resentment of the WSPU's violent tactics (Harrison 1978). However, this failure so outraged the rank-and-file WSPU members, that another window breaking campaign was started by the end of 1911 (Vicinus 1985). Popular support for the WSPU was on the decline. The violence of the suffragettes' campaign made it possible to argue that women did not demonstrate the capability to participate in politics due to their rash and unreasonable behaviour. Criticism of the Union's leaders, Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst, even enhanced this view. 'They are not calm women,' Teresa Billington-Greig claimed, 'but irritable, yielding to sudden tempest' (Harrison 1978: 176). And whilst, 'the police, in early stages [...] avoided heavy-handed treatment of the women' (Pugh 2000: 193), they still insisted on continued provocation and imprisonment (Pugh 2000). In 1912 Christabel Pankhurst fled to Paris after the police raided the WSPU headquarters in London. As the movement was losing grip of its popular support, so did Christabel break with some of the high-ranking campaigners, among them the Pethick-Lawrences whom had up until then financed the several branches of the organisation (Pugh 2000). The publication of the 'The Freewoman', a periodical by a number of suffragettes, between 1911 and 1913, 'reawakened the free love fears that had haunted the feminist movements since its beginning' (Banks 1981: 132). The Pankhursts, however, had always insisted on dressing in feminine and respectable manner to disarm opponents from criticism (Pugh 2000). And despite arson, window breaking and other violent behaviour of WSPU movements, the organised anti-suffragist movement was cautiously following the skill with which the suffragettes sought publicity. As correspondence of October 1913 shows, the anti-suffragist movement was well aware of the press attention that the suffragettes managed to obtain. '[P]ublicity in the Press', an executive committee member wrote, 'is our greatest need and our opponents' chief advantage over us' (Harrison 1978: 175). It was this sparked public debate, and the attitude of directness and briskness in contrast to the vagueness and eventual moral weakness of the anti-suffragists over the real debate of women's suffrage, that eventually led the parliament to extend the vote to women over thirty. The suffragettes' efforts can be said to be characterised by a curious mixture of Victorian respectability and morality blended with a continual and controversial insistence on their rights. An immense confidence in the female gender to the extent of superior feelings (Vicinus 1985) combined with a strong sisterhood and sense of sacrifice for the cause led Sylvia Pankhurst to burst out even in 1954 against anti-suffragist Violet Markham: 'that foul traitor - who, while the suffragettes were hunger striking, appeared on the Albert Hall platform, [...] protesting against women having the vote' (Harrison 1978: 13). Resultantly, at all times, the suffragettes used their bodies as a symbol of sovereignty and moral superiority over the established political power, and this to point out the flaws in the anti-suffrage argumentation. 