The British project of Imperialism was driven by the 'scientifically' proven belief that white males were the natural, biological, superiors to ethnic minorities and women. Consequently, Englishmen considered it to be their right and duty to subjugate the populations of non-Western countries, disseminating their norms of propriety and their notions of what it meant to be 'civilised'. This essay is concerned with showing that this quest was glorified in the popular fiction of late nineteenth century England, and that the gender identities of English men and women were shaped and reinforced by the portrayal of 'uncivilised' people and uncharted, fantastical, territories. This essay will argue that the construction of gender identity is related to Imperialism and racism as the indigenous people of conquered nations provided white Englishmen with an image of 'uncivilised' people with which they could compare themselves to. Initially, it will be shown that the adventure story of late nineteenth century England provided young Englishmen with the belief that it was their right to propagate Imperialism because of their natural superiority to other ethnicities. It will then be shown that the subconscious dissatisfaction many Englishmen had with the restrictive nature of Victorian society was expressed in their enthusiasm for adventure stories set in societies ungoverned by such constraining norms. The contrast between English women and the women depicted in the adventure stories will be shown as reinforcing women's submissive role in Victorian society. Finally, the latent appeal to Victorian men in the adventure stories of a regression to a 'primitive' state reveals racist presuppositions. The essay begins with a discussion of the adventure story's role in reproducing Imperialist ideals. The adventure stories strongly conveyed the notion that it was legitimate for white males to be the rulers of other nations and cultures. Racism was connected to the construction of the Victorian white male's identity as it was believed that ethnic minorities were superstitious and depraved, whereas the Englishmen perceived themselves as austere, courageous and self-controlled; this led to the conclusion that only white males possessed the qualities necessary for governing other nations (Showalter, 1991; 93). Consequently, the adventure story relayed this notion to its young, male readership, and can therefore be described as a device through which the ideals of Imperialism were transmitted from generation to generation, thus ensuring the political goal of Empire building was continually achieved (80). Kipling presented this notion in The Man Who Would Be King when he discusses how the men of Kafiristan are suitable for building an Empire because they are "English" in their customs and practices, whereby they "sit on chairs", and are not simply "niggers" like the rest of the indigenous population (Kipling, 1888; 269). He reinforces this notion with his repeated reference to Indian men as a "Brown mass" which dehumanises them and reduces them to a rabble in which individuals are indistinguishable from one another and are characterised merely by their colour (262). Therefore, adventure stories shaped the identity of Victorian men as it encouraged them to believe that they were the highest distinction of people. Whilst they did illuminate the Victorian perception of other cultures, the adventure stories also revealed a latent male perspective of English society. The concept of Imperialism appealed to Victorian men because it represented the possibility of escaping from the confining structure of English society to unexplored regions of the world. Victorian society was rigidly structured in terms of gender roles and class and race distinctions, the parameters of which were determined by the restrictive Victorian morality and ideology of propriety (Showalter, 1991; 81). The adventure stories provided the Englishmen with an arena in which to explore facets of their character that would have otherwise been suppressed by society (81). The manifestation of this is the repeated blurring in the adventure stories of the boundaries that differentiated between acceptable behaviour and practices, and anti-social and uncivilised acts. These predominantly included a departure from the accepted norms governing sexuality in Victorian society, whereby the adventure story was characterised by close, or even homoerotic, relationships between the male protagonists that would have been suppressed in society because of the stigmatisation of homosexuality (81). Therefore, Imperialism contributed to the construction of gender identities as it fostered the exploration (by the male readership of adventure stories) of aspects of their character which would have been seen as taboo in Victorian society. Although adventure stories encouraged Englishmen to explore their identity, it can be argued that they served to reinforce the identities of women. The stark contrast between the portrayal of English women and 'native' women in the adventure stories reaffirmed women's subordinate position in Victorian society. The predominant depiction of English women was as naïve, and in need of the protection by men from the savage nature of the Imperial world and the indigenous people that inhabited it (98). The image of English women as docile and domesticated is opposed by the perception of 'native' women as wild and savage (98). In Joseph Conrad's story Heart Of Darkness, one of the most vivid depictions is of the powerful and magnificent mistress of Kurtz (a man who has abandoned the project of bringing civilisation to Africa and established himself as a dictator) whom he describes as "savage and superb; wild-eyed and magnificent" (Conrad, 1890; 220). Despite this, the inclusion of any women in the adventure stories was rare. When women of any nationality were included, it was generally in the capacity of an adversary or as a vice for the otherwise virtuous lead male protagonist (Showalter, 1991; 78). In Kipling's The Man Who Would Be King it is the insistence of Dravot (one of the two leading male, English, protagonists) on claiming a wife from the tribes that he has attained power over that leads to his downfall (Kipling, 1888; 273). Therefore, although the readership of adventure stories was predominantly male, they reinforced the role of women in Victorian society by associating them with the downfall of imperialist projects and ideals, leading the Englishmen to continue to suppress them. The idea that it was white Englishmen who were the arbiters of Imperialism can be understood further by examining the racist attitudes that were generative of their fascination with the 'primitive'. Adventure stories illuminate the fascination of the white Englishmen with the 'primitive' cultures they subjugated. Although the purpose of the Imperialist project was to impose English notions of propriety upon the indigenous people of the nations they conquered, it has been argued that these cultures had a seductive appeal to the Englishmen (Showalter, 1991; 95). The basis for this was the curiosity of the Englishmen about the lives of the 'primitive' people, in which greed, savagery and falsehood were endemic (95). This shows the fundamentally racist assumptions of the Englishmen about the people they oppressed. In spite of this elitist and judgemental perspective, it was these very 'qualities' that evoked such an intense response from Englishmen, which found expression in the adventure stories. In Heart Of Darkness (the most successful of all the adventure stories) one Englishman (Kurtz) has been seduced by the lure of power attainable by adopting the characteristics of the indigenous people he was supposed to be civilising, whilst another (Marlow) is engaged in a struggle not to emulate Kurtz and abandon his notions of civilisation as well. Therefore, the male identity was shaped by Imperialism and racism as an inherently racist perception of other cultures generated an immense interest in the Imperialist project, which consequently produced the notion of the seductiveness of a regression to a 'primitive' state of existence in which greed and a thirst for power would predominate if left unchecked. In this essay it has been shown that the male identity in the late Victorian era was influenced by adventure stories through their dissemination of the racist idea that Imperialism was justified by the Englishman's right to rule over people who were too uncivilised to govern themselves. Imperialism also contributed to the construction of gender identity by providing the imaginations of Englishmen with an abstracted territory within which they could be unaffected by the finite nature of a Victorian society founded upon repressive norms and values. The role of women as a destructive force of the project of Imperialism in most adventure stories reaffirmed their subordinate position within society as it was implied that they needed to be sheltered from the harsh realities and the savagery of the oppressed cultures. This 'savagery', however, influenced the Englishman's identity by exposing him to desires which stood in opposition to the conventional ideals of Imperialism. It therefore follows from the evidence presented here that the construction of gender identities was related to Imperialism and racism through the emphasis that the Imperialist project (with its racist presuppositions) placed upon white British masculinity. The primacy of white men is conveyed strongly in the adventure stories of the late nineteenth century; 'white manhood' is portrayed as an example of civility and the epitome of the Victorian notions of propriety, whereas women and the oppressed cultures involved are depicted as inferior or dangerous. Imperialism, and the racism it is imbued with, therefore affected men and women's sense of identity by confirming that there was a natural order in British society and the Imperial world, in which white men formed the rightly dominant group. 