<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>An experiment was carried out to investigate the effect of background noise that is either semantically related or unrelated to printed word lists, which must be learned in one minute then immediately recalled, in relation to Baddeley's phonological similarity effect study, (1966). Correctly recalled words from visual lists were counted after participants experienced either related spoken words over headphones, random, unrelated words or no noise at all during the study phase. It was found that participants showed significantly poorer short term memory after experiencing background noise that was related to the study lists than unrelated, and that both noise conditions resulted in significantly fewer words recalled than the control condition, showing that background speech impairs the learning process and that semantically related speech impairs learning and memory more than random speech. The results are discussed in terms of their implications in learning environments and in everyday conversation. </abstract><heading>Introduction. </heading>The study of human memory is of great importance in learning and education, as well as for disorders such as amnesia, and to generally understand the functions and processes of memory. For psychologists, the classification of memory into three categories: episodic (memory for events), semantic (factual memory) and procedural (memory for skills), is useful in distinguishing between different functions of memory. A huge amount of literature exists on short-term memory, possibly because it is easy to test, and often focuses on the performance of memory when subjected to background noise or distraction. Often noise such as traffic, types of music or volume is used, although there are a few studies which look at the effect of speech - both meaningful and irrelevant - as a distractor. This is valuable research when considering the relevance of noisy situations in real life, for example in the classroom or when trying to focus on one conversation. Hygge, Boman and Enmarker, (2001), compared the effects of road traffic noise and irrelevant speech, played through loudspeakers at 66dB, then tested recall of word lists and a comprehension task. Based on previous research on irrelevant speech in short term memory (LeCompte, 1994; Martin et al., 1998; Tremblay et al., 2000), the prediction was that speech would disrupt recall from episodic memory more than traffic noise, as irrelevant speech should tax limited resources for parallel semantic processing. They found a significant effect of noise overall on the recall task but no significant difference between traffic noise and random speech. Many studies have tested the effect of different types of speech on recall, but most focus on the effect of phonologically similar or dissimilar words on the number of items recalled, (Boyle, 1996). Results suggest that interference from background speech which is similar sounding disrupts working memory more than dissimilar sounding words. However very little research has been published testing the effects of semantically similar (related meaning) words as a distractor to memory. Baddeley (1966), found that only phonological difference in word pronunciation increased recall, whether or not word meanings were similar. However, Geraci and Franklin (2004), published a study entitled 'The influence of linguistic labels on source monitoring decisions', which showed that semantically related words, e.g. rabbit and bunny, lead to more confusion and errors in recall than phonetically related words or homographs. This experiment aims to test the effects of semantically similar words against random, unrelated words, when given as background noise, on the recall of printed word lists. It is predicted that some spoken words that are semantically similar to the printed words will be encoded along with the printed words and may displace the learned words from short-term memory store, therefore few printed words will be correctly remembered. When the spoken words are semantically unrelated it is expected that the noise will be a distractor, causing some memory impairment, but that words will not be displaced, therefore most words will be correctly recalled. In the control condition where no background noise is present memory should not be impaired and it is expected that participants will remember up to nine items, according to the seven plus or minus two rule, (Miller, 1956). <heading>Method. </heading><heading>Design</heading>The experiment used a one-way within-subjects design. The independent variable was the type of background noise during the study phase and there were three levels: semantically related speech, semantically unrelated speech and no noise. The dependent variable was the number of correctly recalled words during the test phase. <heading>Participants</heading>The participants were 30 students from the University of , both male and female and between the ages of 18 and 40. Participants were asked to volunteer their time. <heading>Materials</heading>The background noise used was a set of three MP3 files, each lasting one minute. The first and second contained lists of ten words (adjectives) repeated once, read by a male voice at a rate of one word per five seconds. The third was a recording made in a silent room. The tracks were played on a Sony digital MP3 player, through a set of headband lightweight headphones with the following specifications: 27mm diameter ferrite speakers, 20-20,000 Hz frequency and 32 ohms +/- 10% impedance. Volume was set at 60 dB. The printed word lists consisted of ten semantically similar adjectives of three to seven letters in each word list (A, B and C). An example sheet is given in appendix (i). Subjects were given plain A4 paper to write responses on in the test phase. A stopwatch was also used for timing the one minute study phase and the five minute test phase. <heading>Procedure</heading>Subjects were asked, one at a time, to sit alone at a desk in a silent room and put on the headphones. Subjects were given the printed sheet containing all three word lists and asked to start learning the first list only, trying to ignore the sound from the headphones, while the appropriate sound file was played at the same time. After one minute, timed on a stopwatch, participants were asked to stop learning and turn the sheet over. The headphones were also removed. Subjects were then given a sheet of plain A4 paper and a pen and asked to immediately recall as many words from the printed list only as possible, in any order. After exactly five minutes, timed again, the paper was removed and the headphones put on again. The second file was then played at the same time as the subject turned over the sheet and started to learn the second word list. After one minute of the study phase the subject was tested as before. The third file was then played as the subject learned the third word list and was tested again. The subject was debriefed and thanked for their time before leaving. The design was counterbalanced so that each of the thirty participants looked at the word lists and corresponding files in a different order, for example some learned B then C then A, some C then A then B and so on. <heading>Results. </heading>The participants' scores were then used to calculate mean scores for the three conditions as displayed in table 1 and figure 1. <table/>These data were subjected to a repeated measures analysis of variance test which revealed that the means differed significantly, F(2,58) = 73.95, p<0.05. A Bonferroni post-hoc test was performed which showed that the mean scores for background noise in general were significantly lower than the mean score for no noise, and that the mean score for related words was significantly lower than the mean score for unrelated noise. <heading>Discussion. </heading>An experiment was carried out to find out whether speech as background noise disrupts verbal processing more when it is semantically related to the task than when it is completely unrelated, as predicted by Geraci and Franklin (2004). This was done by measuring ability to learn words using short term memory whilst hearing either related words, unrelated words or no noise through headphones. Results show that noise served as a general distractor during the test phase and impaired memory significantly, however semantically related words over headphones also impaired the learning process significantly more than unrelated words. Table 1 shows that the mean score for the related condition was 1.4 words fewer than for unrelated words, whilst standard error for unrelated words was far lower than for related words. These results tell us that hearing background noise that is related to the task can interfere with the verbal processing which occurs when trying to learn a list of words. It is clear that the differences were not produced by interference during recall or storage, as no noise was experienced in the test phase, but that the speech impaired the encoding process of short term memory. When trying to explain these results it is necessary to look at the raw data (appendix iii) and the responses given. In terms of errors made the original responses showed that participants during the no noise condition were able to remember a mean number of 8.7 words, as predicted by the seven items plus or minus two rule, (Miller, 1956), and this can be seen from the raw data, as most participants recalled between seven and nine words. It was also noted during the study that most subjects during this condition finished recalling words before the five minutes allowed, that is they were able to access their short term memory quickly and easily. Interestingly, in the unrelated condition the same was noticed; most subjects recalled as many as they could before the five minute boundary and appeared to be able to access the words quickly. In the related condition, however, participants often used the entire five minutes to recall words slowly. Many of these subjects recalled up to fifteen words, but many of these were words from the audio list (over headphones). In the other conditions hardly any words were remembered from the auditory source. These findings suggest that the semantically related words confused the subject and made it harder to concentrate on the written list only. The recollection of non-printed words suggests that many audio words were encoded at the same time, displacing the written words from short term storage. The results can be explained using Baddeley's model of working memory, (1974), in particular the phonological articulatory loop. It is likely that participants used silent verbal rehearsal as a technique for learning the printed words, and that words heard over headphones that were related were confused with those being rehearsed silently and wrongly encoded. However at the same time the results contradict Baddeley's findings from a study of memory for word sequences as a function of acoustic, semantic and formal similarity, (1966), which found that semantic similarity did not impair memory. It can be said that this experiment is more specifically focused on semantic relationships than Baddeley's, ignoring phonological similarity, and therefore the results are more pronounced. It could also be seen, though, that the results are the product of an engineered situation and do not mirror other environments. It is possible that subjects were more confused by auditory information than usual because it was presented over headphones which block out other noise. In other situations continuing background noise is blocked out, but this may be more difficult when using headphones. Reassurance can be taken from the fact that the unrelated condition gave higher mean scores, therefore subjects were able to block out the noise to a greater extent. Other potential problems might be seen in the experimental design, for example in that only ten words were given to be learned in the study phase. It is possible that this is too few, meaning subjects learn words then are distracted by audio sounds. It would be beneficial to change one or more of the fixed variables to see whether the same results are gained. Overall the results proved significant and can be explained by current memory research, including theories of verbal rehearsal and short term memory displacement. The findings mean that the actual conditions during the encoding stage of memory are just as important if not more so than conditions during retrieval. This information has many implications in the fields of learning and memory. Obviously in the classroom adjustments can be made to optimise learning, for instance if a teacher talks about a topic whilst her pupils are trying to read or write about the same topic there may be confusion: the best conditions for learning are without background noise, so it is advisable for the teacher to talk first and allow the class to listen, then to let the class learn in silence or with unrelated background noise such as music or quiet conversation. In informative presentations and training the same can be said; if slides or handouts are being read whilst the speaker gives related information verbally, memory can be impaired. When trying to learn information it is better to focus on one source at a time than to try to absorb facts from a number of sources simultaneously. This can of course be tested using varied conditions and other senses. Replications of this study would be useful in order to clarify and extend these findings. Different sources of information such as visual images or numbers may give rise to different results; it cannot be said whether or not these findings are limited to words only. Additionally it would be more relevant to everyday situations to test memory whilst actual conversations or television recordings are played as background noise, or to test long term memory by delayed recall. Conditions could also be extended to include another language, white noise, music or timed beeps. This would clarify exactly what kind of noise is distracting to memory; all noise or just speech, all speech or just speech of a viable language. In conclusion, it has been found that semantically related speech presented as an auditory source can impair short term memory of word lists presented visually. These results support the predicted outcome and can be used as evidence for the working memory model and the phonological loop, (Baddeley, 1992), suggesting that working memory has limited resources for semantic processing. The findings may also have relevance within areas of learning and memory. 