Steven Katz claims in his essay on the historical perspective of the Holocaust that 'the intentional murder of European Jewry during World War II, is historically and phenomenologically unique', and it is possible to forget that despite the notoriety of the Jewish Question there have been other massacres during the twentieth century. Annihilations have occurred in many countries throughout the century including Turkey, Rwanda, China, Bosnia and Cambodia, and whilst there are significant differences between each one- such as method of slaughter, death toll and time span of persecution- there are some factors common to them all. In fact, the Holocaust was not even the first great massacre of the twentieth century as the Armenian genocide occurred during the First World War, and Melson argues that it is 'a more accurate archetype than is the Holocaust for current mass murder in the postcolonial third world and in the contemporary post-communist world'. However this does not exclude the Holocaust from sharing common characteristics with other massacres (as Katz disputes) for, on a fundamental level, patterns can be drawn between them. For instance they all arise from revolutionary or wartime climates, and also the motivation for their persecution was due to threat felt by the perpetrating parties. Therefore the Holocaust is not entirely unique, and neither are the other massacres of the twentieth century despite their geographical and statistical differences. <fnote>Rosenbaum, Alan (ed), Is the Holocaust Unique? Perspectives on comparative Genocide, (Oxford, 1996), p 19 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p 97 </fnote>First of all, persecution of minority groups is a trait of more than one massacre. For instance in Turkey during World War One genocide occurred against the non-Muslim (Armenian) communities living within the Ottoman Empire, the Holocaust was the persecution of Jews within Christian Europe, and the Bosnian massacre of the 1990s was carried out against all those upon Bosnian territory who could be labelled as 'Turks'. The Cambodian massacre of the 1970s also involved the persecution of minority religious groups such as Buddhists, and national communities such as the Thai and Chinese, however this differs slightly as it was less focused upon one group, and more centred upon merely eradicating those not suited to the oppressive restrictions of the Pol Pot regime. Even within this minority group persecution there are further similarities. As Melson notes, the Armenian genocide and the Holocaust are alike in that the 'Armenians and Jews were ethno-religious minorities of inferior status that had experienced rapid social progress and mobilisation in the nineteenth century' and such progress had intimidated the ruling governments sufficiently to lead to them ordering their destruction. He continues to note that 'the Armenians challenged the traditional hierarchy of Ottoman society as they became better educated, wealthier and more urban' and the Nazis also feared the flourishing success of Jewish communities during the 1930s, however the Holocaust added another dimension to minority persecution as a 'broader, biologically-driven aim of extermination' existed due to Nazi views that Jews were genetically inferior. The concept of social mobility of minority groups raises the question of threat, a common motivator of the perpetrating governments towards massacre. Just as the Nazis were threatened by the Jewish success, and the Ottomans by the Armenians, the Bosnians were threatened by the rise of Serbian nationalism that resulted in the fall of Yugoslavia, and the subsequent threat posed by the Serbs and Croats demanding land. As Melson notes, this threat of attack led the Bosnian Serbs- under their leader Radovan Karadzic- to practice 'massacre, ethnic cleansing, and cultural destruction against those they called the "Turks"'. In all three cases, even if there were other motivating factors, the perpetrators acted partly from fear. <fnote>Rosenbaum, Is the Holocaust Unique?, p 90 </fnote><fnote>Burleigh, Michael (ed), Confronting the Nazi Past: New Debates on Modern German History, (London, 1996), p 77 </fnote><fnote>Rosenbaum, Is the Holocaust Unique? , p 95 </fnote>The case of Cambodian genocide raises the example of massacre on a much broader, more national scale, and this form of massacre can be found elsewhere in the twentieth century- most notably in Nanking, China, during World War Two. As Callum Macdonald notes, in December 1937 'Japanese troops embarked on an orgy of murder, rape, arson and looting which lasted over six weeks' and rather than being directed at one particular ethnic or religious group it was an attack upon the Chinese nation. Similarly, in Cambodia whereas Pol Pot appeared to be attacking minorities, the massacre as a whole was a general ambush upon those that did not conform to the ideals of the communist party. This involved the slaughter of nearly 3000 Buddhists, 215,000 Chinese, 12000 Thai, and 'the Vietnamese community...was entirely eradicated'. The Muslim Chams were also targeted for, like the cases of Armenia and the Holocaust, 'their distinct religion, language and culture, large villages and autonomous networks threatened the atomized, closely supervised society that the Pol Pot leadership planned'. However this threat extended to all the aforementioned groups within Cambodia and became more of a national assault like the Japanese rape of Nanking. The only significant point that establishes Nanking as different in motive, though, is that it was an inter-national hostility that led to massacre (like in Bosnia). In Cambodia, Armenia and the Holocaust, massacre was derived from the respective government initiatives to impress their regime and ideals upon their country. <fnote>Levene, Mark and Roberts, Penny (eds), The Massacre in History, (Oxford, 1999), p 223 </fnote><fnote>Andreopoulos, Genocide: Conceptual and Historical Dimensions, (Pennsylvania, 1994), p 198 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p 199 </fnote>Another common factor between many massacres of the twentieth century concerns the conditions under which it was possible for massacre to occur. In Armenia, the Holocaust, Cambodia and Bosnia, annihilations took place as a result of the instability caused by revolution. The revolutions of the Ottoman Empire led to the rise of Pan-Turkism, where the Turkish ethnic group was identified 'as the authentic political community on which the Turkish state could and should rely' and this led to the exclusion of Armenians from Turkey. In Germany, the collapse of the Weimar Republic 'allowed the Nazis to recast German identity and ideology' and their subsequent control of government apparatus meant they could alter social and racial policy to infiltrate anti-Semitic ideas. In Cambodia, the rise of communism resulting from political civil war between the first independence leader Sihanouk and his successor Lon Nol, and also from American intervention from the Vietnam war, allowed Pol Pot to seize control and cut Cambodia off from the rest of the world as well as killing 1.5 million of its eight million population. Similarly, in Bosnia massacre occurred due to the chaos of Serbian nationalism causing the collapse of Yugoslavia and birth of Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia as independent countries and their subsequent territorial disagreements. In all four cases revolution created an instability that allowed for the rise of new ideas and thus new prejudices. <fnote>Rosenbaum, Is the Holocaust Unique? , p 90 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote>As well as revolution, War also plays a big responsibility in the viability of many twentieth century massacres. As Dadrian notes 'it is no coincidence that the two major genocides of this century (Armenian and Holocaust) were consummated in the vortex of two global wars' as there is a somewhat opportunistic element to the conditions under which massacre occurred. The onslaught of war allowed 'emergency powers' to be put in place- by Nazis and Turk Ittihadists- to increase security forces, and also the greater role of the militia in both cases allowed the mobilisation and mass murder of the persecuted. Both the Jews and the Armenians were 'considered as legitimate targets for destruction' by being levelled as internal enemies, thus creating some form of rationale within the country and also perpetrating massacre as an effective extension of the war already occurring. The presence of war helped to cover both massacres from other nations and therefore remove any opposition to the annihilations. As Wyman notes, in the case of the Holocaust 'seventeen months of systematic, cold-blooded murder ran their course between the time the Einsatzgruppen were turned loose on the Russian front, in June 1941, and the day in late November 1942 when the extermination plan was confirmed to the world' and it was only because of world warfare that this was possible. Perhaps the most prevalent example of this is the Japanese massacre in Nanking, for it was only because war erupted that it occurred- an opportunistic attack upon another nation rather than a chance to fulfil ethno-religious prejudice under the guise of warfare. The Japanese invaded China in the summer of 1937, and it was only after the fall of Shanghai in August that 'the mood of imperial troops...turned ugly, and many, it was said, lusted for revenge as they marched toward Nanking'. Chang accuses warfare as motivating civilians to rationalise massacre as acceptable, saying 'the rape of Nanking should be perceived as a cautionary tale- an illustration of how easily human beings can be encourages to allow their teenagers to be moulded into efficient killing machines able to suppress their better natures'. War was also used as a direct excuse for the massacre of Cambodia, for the Pol Pot regime gained favour as a result of American bombing of rural areas between 1970-73. The US army had intervened in the Vietnam war and 'soon encroached upon Cambodia's territory and integrity' and in response the Khmer Rouge, Pol Pot's forces, 'used the bombings devastation and massacre of civilians as recruitment propaganda' for their party. Similarly, in Bosnia ethnic massacre occurred under the post-independence territory wars, where Serbia desired greater Croatian territory and Bosnian Serbs wished to prevent Serb and Croat nationalists from encroaching on Bosnian territory. In all these instances, war provided both an opportunity to rationalise massacre and a veil to conceal it being perpetrated. <fnote>Rosenbaum, Is the Holocaust Unique? , p 118 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p 120 </fnote><fnote>Wyman, David, Abandonment of the Jews: America and the Holocaust, (New York, 1984), p 58 </fnote><fnote>Chang, Iris, The Rape of Nanking: The forgotten Holocaust of World War II, (London, 1997), p 34 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p 220 </fnote><fnote>Andreopoulos, Genocide, p 194 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote>Within each massacre there are smaller parallels between other annihilations of the twentieth century. For instance both the Armenian and Bosnian genocides involved making claims upon land, and the minority groups becoming deposed in order for the ruling parties to ''cleanse' the area of their presence, and destroy their culture'. The Armenian genocide also shares a similar approach of justification with the Nanking massacre in that both parties felt the 'need to subhumanize the intended victim'. However the Turks achieved this through stressing their actions as increasing their own mobility rather than oppressing the Armenians, whereas in Nanking it was left to the soldiers' imaginations. Chang notes how their 'automatic impulse was to dehumanise the prisoners by comparing them to insects and animals'. The need to surrealise such atrocious actions is common to all massacres as it takes subhuman mental strength to kill another person, but in the cases of Turkey and Nanking this need seems more overtly prevalent than in some other cases. <fnote>Rosenbaum, Is the Holocaust Unique? , p 96 </fnote><fnote>Andreopoulos, Genocide, p 10 </fnote><fnote>Chang, The Rape of Nanking, p 44 </fnote>Therefore, overall, whereas each twentieth century massacre occurred in very different manifestations, at different times, and for varying periods of time with differing scales of death, they do share some fundamental characteristics. In the cases of the Armenians, the Holocaust, Bosnia and Cambodia, all massacres involve the persecution of minority groups threatening the government, and the annihilations themselves were carried out in an unstable post-revolutionary climate. In all five examples warfare made massacre possible, and this is a crucial common factor between the countries as the ability to perpetrate such large-scale murders was only possible under the veil of warfare. Also, many countries felt the need to dehumanize victims in order to commit massacres and therefore not only were there similarities in the characteristics of their causation, but their methods of coping with atrocity. Melson's argument of the Armenian genocide as 'a more accurate archetype' than the Holocaust appears true as such persecution provides a base example for comparison with subsequent massacre, however the Holocaust- and the other examples mentioned- whilst seeming unique also form a pattern of traits applicable to massacre throughout the twentieth century. <fnote>Rosenbaum, Is the Holocaust Unique? , p 88 </fnote>