Social unrests were not unique to the 19 th Century, and the Qing state was by no means inexperienced in putting down such attempts to destabilize the State. Despite the consolidation of power during the reign of the Emperor Kangsi to Qianlong, there remained however, certain underlying grievances that were never fully eradicated, which led to the persistence of the themes such as 'Over-throw the Qing, Restore the Ming', ethnic and religious tensions. The end of the Qianlong era marked the conclusion of the golden age of Qing rule and saw the gradual decline of central power vis-à-vis the provincial power and the emerging western participation in Chinese politics. Though westerners have had a presence in China dating back to the Yuan dynasty, the Opium Wars and the corresponding treaty system marked a watershed for China-West relations, resulting in the change of status quo, of perceptions; and manifested itself in the increasingly intrusive presence of the West, which exposed the many weaknesses of the Qing state, making it more vulnerable to attacks from within. It is in this context that the above question should be addressed, and the writer will examine firstly the internal conditions and entrenched corruption which made it conducive for the outbreak of social unrests, followed by the implications of change brought about by the West, such as the desire to trade, introduction of new technology, ideas, religion, and the pursuit of Imperialism which clashed with Chinese assumptions of the monopoly of civilization, and in turn produced a virulent anti-foreign nationalism which threatened the social order during the period in question. Hence the writer will argue that the social unrests at the beginning of the 19 th Century was due more to the internal rather than external factors; but increasingly, the presence of the West is crucial to the emergence of violent xenophobic nationalism, which account for the social unrests in the later part of the 19 th Century. One of the persistent problems that the Qing failed to eradicate were the deep-rooted ethnic tensions which lent itself to many rebellions at the first half of the 19 th Century. The entrenched sentiments that the Qing were a foreign power residing in China led to the creation of many secret societies, such as the White Lotus Society and the Heaven and Earth Society (Tian-li-jiao), whose rallying cry of 'Overthrow the Qing and Restore the Ming' saw the outbreak of the White Lotus Revolt in 1796, Szechuan and Hubei, which lasted until 1904, as well as the attempt made by Li Wen Cheng to attack the imperial palace in 1813. The prejudices that the Han Chinese held against the Muslims and the latter's desire for autonomy from the Qing, led in the 1820s to the Muslim rebellion led by Jehangir in Turkestan, and subsequently, in the two Muslim rebellions, in Yunnan (1855-1873) and in Gansu and Shaanxi (1862-1873). The Taiping rebellion has its roots in ethnic tensions as well, with Hong Xiuquan and a considerable number of his followers coming from the Hakka (ke jia ren) sub-group, and these 'guest-settlers' were frowned upon by the largely Han population in Guangxi. The anti-Manchu sentiments of the Nian rebellion is perhaps most clearly indicated by their leader Zhang's honorific title of 'Great Han Prince with the Heavenly Mandate'. <fnote>Jonathan D. Spence, The Search for Modern China (2nd Edition), (New York, 1999), p. 184. </fnote>Ethnic tensions alone do not cause rebellions, but mixed with deplorable economic and social conditions can be a recipe for disaster. Between 1741-1841, the population increased by three-fold, but the increase in arable land could not keep pace with it, which led to food and land shortages, with the latter commodity increasingly becoming concentrated in the hands of the wealthy. The yearly occurrence of floods and droughts in the provinces along the valleys of Yellow and Yangtze rivers during the end of Daoguang's reign (1821-1850) and the lack of state initiatives in alleviating the situation may have led the population to believe that the mandate of Heaven was passing out of the hands of the Qing dynasty. Also, the Opium trade, conducted by the British led to the great outflow of silver, resulting in the devaluation of copper coins, the inflation in the prices of other commodities, and the corresponding increase in the peasants tax burden which was paid in silver. All these combined events accentuated the miseries of the common people and made for fertile ground for the outbreak of social unrests. Potential rebellion leaders could find amongst the population large numbers of poor peasants and artisans who were willing to throw their weight behind anything that promised better conditions than the existing one. The attractiveness of the Taiping laid in its Christian-Communism ideology and the proclamation that 'nowhere will inequality exist, and no one not be well fed and clothed." The triggers for the Muslim rebellion in Yunnan 'were the heavy land taxes and extra levies imposed by Peking on the Yunnanese Muslims' who in addition to that, were being ousted out of their sliver and gold mines by the Chinese. <fnote>Li Chien-nung, The Political History of China, 1840-1928, translated and edited by Teng Ssu-yu and Jeremy Ingalls, (California, 1967) p. 49. </fnote><fnote>Jonathan D. Spence, The Search for Modern China (2nd Edition), (New York, 1999). p. 176. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.187. </fnote>The inability of the State to alleviate the situation plaguing the population, and the ineffectiveness of the Army in putting down the rebellions are perhaps telling of the decay within the Qing central administration, which permeated to the lower level officials. The appalling inertia of the State led Zeng Guofan to condemn the ruinous tendency of officials 'to gloss over, to make up and to steal days of ease." The two chief ministers under Daoguang's reign, Tsao Chen Yung and Mu-chang-a discouraged officials from talking about national policy, and those who dared petition to the throne were threatened with punishments. It is perhaps not surprising then, to find the character of Chen Tsu-ch'en, the governor of Guangxi who did not bother with administrative affairs, bit prayed instead to Buddha to dispel catastrophes. 'Such was the immediate political background-general lethargy and irresponsibility-which paved the way for Taiping's rapid development." The corruption and lack of discipline within the Army was so rampant, that by the time of the White Lotus Rebellion, local militias had to be organized to compensate for the ineffectual standing army. Similarly, it was Zeng's Hunan army, Li Hongzhang's Huai army and Zuo Zhongtang's army, that suppressed the Taiping, the Nian and the Muslim rebellions. Also, inner court intrigues dominated the post Xian-feng era, which saw the rise of the Empress Dowager Cixi and her cronies, and in turn compromised the power of the Emperor to act as the unifying force of China. The diversion of resources meant for military and emergency purposes to fund the decadence of the court left China in a weakened state, creating ample opportunities for the outbreak of rebellions. <fnote>Li Chien-nung, The Political History of China, 1840-1928, (California, 1967), p. 49. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.50. </fnote>The Chinese Pandora box was sitting there, waiting to be unlocked, and when the West came to pry China open, they unleashed torrents of tensions, discontentment and grievances, which when mixed with Western military technology, religion and ideas, became more malignant, and threatened to topple the Qing state. The rise of Capitalism and the nation-state in the West led to the corresponding desire to gain economic advantage and prestige via the acquiring of colonies, and largely accounts for the increased presence of the West, and the advent of the Age of Imperialism, in China and else where (seen also in the 'Scramble for Africa') leading to the creation of anti-foreign nationalism, which is a major source of disturbances during the later half of the 19 th Century. The role of the West became increasingly important because the weak central Qing government were defenseless against the military superiority of the West, as seen in the Opium War. Correspondingly, the treaties that were concluded reflected this imbalance, and. 'under the treaties, China's sovereignty was increasingly impaired." 'The formative decades of the treaty system in the 1840s and 1850s must therefore be seen as the opening phase in an intricate and portentous growth of foreign influence on Chinese life..." and the creation of new institutions for Sino-foreign contact. China had to cede Hong Kong permanently to the British, open up Amoy, Fuzhou, Ningpo, Canton and Shanghai for trade, allow the British to fix customs duties, permit extraterritoriality and the establishment of equal basis for official correspondence, all of which were seen as attacks on the sovereignty of China, and the inability of the Qing to protect Chinese territory led to the creation of anti-Manchu as well as anti-foreign sentiments. In particular, the tradition of anti-foreign resistance can be traced to the San-yuan-li incident in Canton 1841, in which '...specific incitements (raping and defiling of temples in San-yuan-li), together with pervasive popular anxieties about the war, helped to transform relatively benign stereotypes about foreigners into xenophobic racism." Also, the period from 1841-1850 saw the upsurge of social disorders in Canton, and may have precipitated the Taiping Rebellion. 'In general after the Opium War, the prestige of the Manchu government was destroyed and the invitation to rebellion was ever-present...from 1841-1850 there was not a single year free from local uprisings." In retaliation to the Qing obstinate refusal to honour the treaties, the allied British and French forces stormed Peking, burned the Yuan-Ming-Yuan, and dealt Qing China a big blow to its prestige when Emperor Xian-feng had to flee to Jehol. This demonstrated clearly that the Manchus were no longer able to be guardians of China, and created a power vacuum within China, and made her vulnerable to attacks from within and without. <fnote>John K. Fairbank, The Creation of the Treaty System, in Dennis Twitchett and John K, Fairbank (ed.), The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 10 Late Ching 1800-1911, Part I, (New York, 1995), p. 214 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.215. </fnote><fnote>Frederic Wakeman Jr, The Canton Trade and the Opium War, in Dennis Twitchett and John K, Fairbank (ed.), The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 10 Late Ching 1800-1911, Part I, (New York, 1995), p. 202. </fnote><fnote>Frederic Wakeman Jr, Strangers at the Gate: Social Disorder in South China 1839-1861, (Los Angeles, 1966), p. 117-31. </fnote><fnote>Li Chien-nung, The Political History of China, 1840-1928, translated and edited by Teng Ssu-yu and Jeremy Ingalls, (California, 1967) p. 52. </fnote>Chinese defeat to the Allied British and French forces in 1960 led to the conclusion of a treaty, which granted full official toleration to the missionary, and also opened up the hinterland to the spread of Christianity. 'One result of this new set of circumstances was a considerable broadening and intensification of the tradition of Chinese hostility toward Christianity." Though the Christian attack on ancestor worship and idolatry offended all Chinese, it is interesting to note that anti-Christian demonstrations were often provoked by the exhortations of the gentry and official class; who saw themselves as defenders of Confucian order and civilisation in a period of disorder, and whom regarded Christianity as the anti-thesis of Confucianism, and as the imperialistic tool of the foreigners. The presence of missionaries who abused their positions by interfering in lawsuits, and in shielding their converts from Chinese law, as well as the flaunting of treaty rights in demanding large amount of indemnity as payment for damages did not endear them to the local populace. The problem was particularly acute with regards to the French Catholic missionaries, and 'the Tientsin Massacre (1870) represented the culmination of a decade of Sino-foreign friction revolving around Christian missionary activities.'  <fnote>Paul A. Cohen, China and Christianity: The Missionary movement and the Growth of Chinese Anti-foreignism 1860-1870, (Massachusetts, 1963), p. 64. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 233. </fnote>Deep-rooted Chinese ethnocentrism, the resentment against unwanted Western intrusion and the tendency of any society that has been seriously disturbed by internal disorders to seek an external scapegoat accounts largely for the Boxer Rebellion, which occurred when the 19 th Century drew to a close. It is perhaps telling that there was a song that went: 'Learn to be a Boxer, study the Red Lantern. Kill all the foreign devils and make the churches burn." The churches were the most visible facades of western imperialism and hence were the targets of anti-foreign movements, and for large segment of the population, 'the missionary was the only concrete manifestation of the foreign intrusion and, as such, the only flesh and blood object against which opposition to this intrusion could be directed.' <fnote>Ibid, p. 269. </fnote><fnote>Cheng Pei-Kai, Michael Lestz and Jonathan D. Spence, The Search for Modern China: A Documentary Collection, (New York, 1999), p. 186. </fnote><fnote>Paul A. Cohen, China and Christianity: The Missionary movement and the Growth of Chinese Anti-foreignism 1860-1870, (Massachusetts, 1963), p. 269. </fnote>The role of Western influence in inspiring rebellions, and in particular the Taiping, must be considered. Though the Taiping claimed initially to be led by the Christian ideology, in reality, source of it ideas were from the rites of Chou and the Works of Mencius, interwoven with the tenets of Christianity. Also, though Hung Jen Kan had a reform proposal in which western influence can be detected, the Taiping eventually reverted back to the old Chinese corruption, habits of conservatism and of fixed ideas. Hence, though the Taipings were initially trying to identify themselves with their foreign brethren, and sought to employ Western military technology, their adoption of Western ways was very superficial, and hence the West cannot be said to have contributed to the Taiping cause in any significant way. <fnote>Li Chien-nung, The Political History of China, 1840-1928, translated and edited by Teng Ssu-yu and Jeremy Ingalls, (California, 1967) p. 64 </fnote><fnote>Teng Ssu-yu and John K. Fairbank, China's response to the West: A Documentary Study 1839-1923, (Massachusetts, 1994), p. 57-59. </fnote>However, the West were particularly influential in helping the Qing to put down the social unrests, such as the employment of the Ever-Victorious Army and Gordon's artillery in supplementing the regular forces and local militias in putting down the Taiping. It must be said that generally, the West were adverse to social unrests, especially in the treaty ports where trade was concentrated, because social instability often interfered with trade and economic prosperity. The open intervention pursued by the West in suppressing the Taiping was to their interests: for the defense of Shanghai, and as a useful bargaining chip with the Qing government when seeking concessions. Also, in the Muslim rebellion in the Kansu, England secretly supported Yakub Beg, the leader of the rebellion, while Russia opposed the expansion of Yakub Beg's power, and under the pretense of maintaining peace along the border, occupied Ili in 1871, subdued the Mohammedan chief and moved troops into Urumchi. Hence when the West moved in to suppress social unrests, they did so only if it was within their interests to do so, should not be regarded as a philanthropic gesture. <fnote>Li Chien-nung, The Political History of China, 1840-1928, translated and edited by Teng Ssu-yu and Jeremy Ingalls, (California, 1967) p. 110. </fnote>Perhaps the most glaring exclusion in this essay is the role of Japan in the social unrests of the 19 th Century, but it would be convenient to evaluate Japan on the basis of a foreign power with imperialistic designs on China. The Sino-Japanese War of 1894-5 shook the Chinese self-confidence, and marked an end to the era of 'Self-Strengthening'. Though there was no particular anti-Japanese event, anti-Japanese sentiments took root during this era, and set the stage for more explicit and violent anti-Japanese movements that continue to present time. In conclusion, the social unrests of the early 19 th Century were caused more by internal than external problems, such as underlying ethnic tensions, the prevailing socio-economic conditions, the entrenched corruption and degeneration of the court and the army. However, The Opium War and the Treaty System that was imposed marked a watershed in the Qing-West relations, allowing the West to expose the weaknesses of the Qing State, making it more vulnerable to rebellions, and the rise of Western Imperialism in the quest for territorial gains and in the spread of Christianity, which led to the creation of anti-foreign nationalism, which dominated the face of social unrests in the late 19 th Century. Also, where their interests were concerned, the West would intervene to suppress social unrests in order to safeguard their commercial interests. Hence the parallel streams of development: the decline of the central power of the Qing State, and the growing western presence and penetration gave the West increasing importance in the creation and suppression of social unrests of the 19 th Century. 