The hypothesis put forth by J.C. Davis's Fear, Myth and History has provoked a heated debate that still in want of a closure, and one thinks that it may never be found, for it would be professional suicide for any of the historians involved, especially Davis, to 'recant' and come round to the others' viewpoint. While there is a sense that the debate has been bogged down by personal animosities and the lack of fresh interpretations, it is still of interest today, because of the pertinent "issues about historical methods raised by Fear, Myth and History" that "are important far beyond the particular case of England in the mid-seventeenth century." It is to this debate that we now turn our attention to, and I have structured the essay as such: the first section deals with historiography, methodology and the implications of Davis's interpretation on the discipline of History, followed by the main body of the essay which will focus on the two questions relating to our topic at hand-why Davis denies the existence of the 'Ranters', and subsequently, why he believes that the 'Ranters' were created by seventeenth century conservatives and twentieth-century Marxists. While Davis's interpretation is thought provoking, it is my opinion that his failure to differentiate between 'Ranter' myth and 'Ranters' has been a stumbling block in this debate. <fnote>G.E. Aylmer, "Did the Ranters Exist?", Past and Present, No. 117 (Nov., 1987), p. 208. Jstor article. </fnote>Before focusing on the main debate, it is imperative to begin with an examination of some of the held assumptions and employed techniques in Davis's hypothesis. In the area of historiography, Davis seems to have taken E.H. Carr's dictum "study the historian before you begin to study the facts" a bit too far when he claims that the 'Ranters' were conjured up by members of the Communist Party Historians Group in order to fit English history to Marxist theory. While it is important to question the agenda of historians, there is a fine line between the above, which is informative, and the latter-pure speculation-which I think that Davis is guilty of. Every historian writes with an agenda, for that is implicit in his/her argument, which in turn moulds his/her interpretation which is-according to Carr-"the lifeblood of history". One ponders about Davis's own agenda behind his enterprise, but let us not tarry on this for there are other more pertinent issues to discuss. In particular, Hill has raised a very relevant point that Davis's paradigm is flawed and his enterprise doomed from the start, because his desire to find "a coherent, cohesive group of like-minded Ranters" is anachronistic, and that he is guilty of looking at the past through eyes of the present. There is much inconsistency in Davis's methodology, seen in the way he views seventeenth century pamphlets with extreme scepticism and yet at the same time, as pointed out by Christopher Hill, seems to have taken Abiezer Coppe's ironic recantations seriously. The implications of this debate are far-reaching, and it has not only questioned how historians ought to view primary sources, but has also affected how we are to understand the function of labels. Labels exist first and foremost to describe an external reality, though, that does not preclude the possibility of that label acquiring associations along the way that exaggerate the former, hence turning it into a myth. In the same way that Protestants used the 'Catholic myth' to consolidate their positions, so the seventeenth century conservatives manipulated what was already in existence to galvanise the population into combating the attack on religious and social order that the English Revolution had brought about. <fnote>E.H. Carr, What is History?, (London, 1990) p.23. </fnote><fnote>J.C. Davis, "Fear, Myth and Furore: Reappraising the 'Ranters'", Past and Present, No. 129 (Nov., 1990), p. 82. Jstor article. </fnote><fnote>Carr, What is History? , p. 28 </fnote><fnote>Davis, Fear, Myth and History: The Ranters and the historians, (Cambridge, 1986), p. 74 </fnote><fnote>Christopher Hill, A Nation of Change and Novelty: Radical politics, religion and literature in seventeenth-century England, (London 1990), p.153 </fnote><fnote>Hill, A Nation of Change and Novelty, p. 180. </fnote><fnote>Davis, Fear, Myth and History, p. 53-7 </fnote>It is Davis's opinion that the 'Ranters' were a "projection of deviance", and that "there was no Ranter movement, no Ranter sect, no Ranter theology", but consisted of "a few relatively isolated individuals of heterogeneous persuasions" who were "swept up in the projection of a movement" and were subsequently "assigned roles by the historians" While "historians are agreed that it is wrong to speak of a Ranter sect or movement", few have gone so far as to deny the existence of the 'Ranters'. Davis is unique in asserting that because there were no concrete evidences of the 'Ranter's' practical antinomianism, therefore they do not exist. Even if such evidences were in existence, Davis would most likely reject them as sensationalism of the yellow press, or as unreliable stories conjured up by seventeenth century anti-'Ranter' pamphleteers. However, Hill points to evidence that Gerrard Winstanley experienced problems in his Digger colony, due to the presence of drinking, whoring and indolent 'Ranters', and makes a point, which is taken up by Aylmer that the 'Ranters' held an 'anti-work' ethic and lived a "hippy-like existence" Therein lies the 'practical antinomianism' that Davis seeks. The 'Ranters' hedonistic 'make love not war' sort of attitude constituted a critique of society, which manifested itself in the breaking of taboos, as opposed to the more taxing alternative of a violent overhaul of society. There is a more cogent explanation proposed by Hill that accounts for the lack of 'practical antinomianism'-it is simply that the Ranters were "talkers rather than doers."  <fnote>Ibid, p.124 </fnote><fnote>Bernard Capp, "Fear, Myth and Furore: Reappraising the 'Ranters'", Past and Present, No. 140, (Aug., 1993), p.165 Jstor article. </fnote><fnote>Aylmer, "Did the Ranters Exist?", p. 209 </fnote><fnote>Christopher Hill, The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas during the English Revolution, (London, 1991), p. 229-30. </fnote><fnote>Hill, A Nation of Change and Novelty, p. 185 </fnote>Davis's second charge is that the absence of any common defining ideology and close direct links between members of the supposed 'Ranter' core disproves that the 'Ranters' existed either as "a small group of like-minded individuals, as a sect, or as a large-scale, middle-scale or small movement." While it is true that the antinomian and spiritualist ideas were not unique to the 'Ranters', according to Capp "it is clear that something had crystallised from the flux, and that we are no longer dealing with isolated individuals". Capp substantiates his point with compelling evidence drawn from correspondences between Salmon, Webb and Coppe, which indicated a sense of familiarity to the point of intimacy. Though he concedes that Coppe and Clarkson were never close, nevertheless, he asserts that there were links between both groups, hence refuting Davis's claim that "the Ranter core shatters and disintegrates." As mentioned earlier, the search for a seventeenth-century group labelled the 'Ranters' eludes Davis precisely because he employs modern standards and preconceptions to study a seventeenth-century phenomenon. Davis's insistence in finding a certain measure of uniformity or convergence of ideas will not hold up even in the globalised world today, where common church denominational labels mask a whole range of disparate practices and beliefs. Seventeenth-century radical groups were even less likely to converge on not more than a few tenets which roughly separated them from the other movements, not forgetting as well, that there was a great deal of fluidity between the groups, as people shopped around for a belief system that appealed to them. The 'Ranters' were such a loose grouping precisely because of their nature as a subversive group, their wariness of any forms of organised religion and distaste for hierarchy, which makes them not unlike modern anarchist 'groups' in form. <fnote>Davis, Fear, Myth and History, p. 75 </fnote><fnote>Capp, "Reappraising the Ranters", p. 166-7 </fnote><fnote>Davis, Fear, Myth and History, p.75 </fnote>Davis's scepticism is conceivably fuelled by the tendency of supposed 'Ranter' leaders to recant in the face of persecution. His serious treatment of the ironic recantations of Coppe, Clarkson and others is puzzling in light of his scepticism with regards to seventeenth century anti-'Ranter' writings. In contrast, Hill accounts for this readiness to recant as a feature characteristic of 'Ranters', who, like their sixteenth-century predecessors, the Familists, practiced "Nicodemism-recanting in the face of overwhelming power" and warns us against taking their equivocal recantations seriously. This practice can also be seen as the direct consequence of the 'Ranter' belief in 'mortalism', which precludes the immortality of the soul and hence of the appeal of martyrdom. As Hill astutely points out "...resistance to the death would call for a deeper and more consistently worked out ideology than most Ranters had." The two historians also disagree as to whether the 'Ranters' were the main targets of the Blasphemy Act of 1650. If Parliament had regarded the ideas and behaviour of the 'Ranters' as a real threat to societal order, then Davis's hypothesis that the Ranters did not exist is weakened. Though Davis is correct in saying that the Blasphemy Act did not mention the Ranters, evidence points towards Clarkson's A Single Eye All Light as a trigger to the body of legislation, which according to McGregor "was largely a description of Ranter doctrine, owing much to the writings of Coppe and Clarkson." While there is a possibility that the Parliament was responding to the 'Ranter myth' and not to the 'Ranters' it still reinforces Aylmer's simple concept that there can be "no smoke without fire". To take the analogy further, the strength of the fire might be disproportionately small compared to the amount of smoke that is billowing, and the response of the fire fighters might be more than is required to deal with a small fire, but the fact remains that a small fire did exist. Though that does not preclude the possibility that some people may have stoked the fire and fanned the flames, hence creating the 'smoke screen' to mask their presumably sinister agendas. <fnote>Hill, A Nation of Change and Novelty, p. 179. </fnote><fnote>Hill, The World Turned Upside Down, p. 209. </fnote><fnote>J.F. McGregor, Fear, Myth and Furore: Reappraising the 'Ranters', Past and Present, No. 140 (Aug., 1993), p. 157. </fnote>In order to justify and perpetuate his hypothesis that the 'Ranters' did not exist, Davis puts forth a series of explanations that sought to provide a plausible list of agendas that necessitated the creation of the 'Ranter' myth. For the seventeenth century conservatives, the 'Ranters' were necessary as the "projection of deviance" "for it is only through deviance that we understand normality." While this is a compelling argument, and extreme radicalism may alienate other groups and force some into the protective arms of the conservatives, there is also the other possibility that the increased profile and definition of the 'Ranters' may have seduced and ensnared others. No matter how vile the portrayal of the 'Ranters' there is an element of freedom in antinomianism that can be particularly enticing, especially for young men. Hence, this myth is in my opinion a double-edged sword to be wielded at one's own peril. The myth may achieve normality, but it could just as easily go the other way and perpetuate deviant behaviour. The 'Ranter' myth was not the exclusive tool of the conservatives, but was also used to achieve sectarian consolidation: to enhance the acceptability of sects that were not as radical as the 'Ranters', and to induce conformity within sectarian ranks. Because this spectre of Ranterism was conjured up to fulfil a social function, Davis warns us against taking any of the anti-Ranter literature seriously. On the topic of sources, Hill suggests that we can look to seventeenth-century personalities, such as John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, who were previously from the Ranter milieu for an accurate account of 'Ranterism'. Notably, Hill focuses on the figure of Bunyan, who was himself initially tempted by Ranter ideas, but whose work's from 1665-1685 took on an anti-'Ranter' slant. Also, despite the many hostile anti-Ranter records, Hill uncovered Ranter nostalgia in Erbery, Byne and Sedgweick, who "found things to praise in the Ranters..." though he added that "they would hardly invent the Ranters for this purpose". At the very least, there is a consensus that 'Ranter' was a 'buzz-word' in seventeenth-century England, not unlike that of 'globalisation' in our own time, though an admittance that the misuse of the label 'Ranter' existed does not preclude the external reality of a group of 'Ranters'. <fnote>Davis, Fear, Myth and History, p.124 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.111 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 110. </fnote><fnote>Hill, A Nation of Change and Novelty, p. 164 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.177. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.169. </fnote>While Davis might possibly defend his claim that the 'Ranters' were created by seventeenth-century conservatives (amongst others), his other claim-that the 'Ranter' spectre was resurrected by A.L. Morton and Christopher Hill, both members of the Communist Party Historians' Group between 1946-1956 in a bid to "create the history of a popular democratic tradition in English history and culture" is absurd and deliberately provocative. The allegation that Davis brings against them-that of using theory to dictate history- is an equally valid charge that can be levelled at him. Hill's defence of himself and A.L. Morton in A Nation of Change and Novelty is fairly convincing, and he has managed to place the onus on Davis to explain his own motivation behind the whole enterprise. Furthermore, other historians have joined in the fray, and with a few differences they have reaffirmed the existence of the 'Ranters' and the 'Ranter' myth. While the debate should not end on a 'majority wins' basis, there is a sense that this is quite a lope-sided debate, with Davis fighting the battle on his own. <fnote>Davis, Fear, Myth and History, p.130 </fnote><fnote>Hill , A Nation of Change and Novelty, p. 190 </fnote>In conclusion, Davis's hypothesis, while novel, is not entirely convincing. The arguments of the other historians are a lot more persuasive, both in establishing a link between the various individual 'Ranter' leaders (despite the running debate about 'core' vs. 'milieu' which was not dealt with in this essay) and in their efforts to draw out some semblance of similarities between the various groups, while conceding that it impossible to define a coherent set of 'Ranter' ideology. This is not far off from Davis's own assertion that what would make him believe that the 'Ranters' existed would be the coincidence of two sort of evidences: that the existence of a group (or a number of groups loosely linked) can be established and that its shared ideology was reflected behaviourally in practical antinomianism. It bears repeating that Davis's enterprise is flawed for two reasons: his failure to differentiate between 'Ranter' myth and 'Ranters' which has led him to believe that the 'Ranters' were created by seventeenth-century conservatives and later resurrected by twentieth-century Marxist historians; and his employment of modern standards and preconceptions to study a seventeenth-century phenomenon, which explains why his search for the 'Ranters' as a external reality has been so unfruitful. Perhaps one might cheekily suggest that Davis's own 'recantation' is overdue. <fnote>J.C. Davis, "Fear, Myth and Furore: Reappraising the 'Ranters': Reply", Past and Present, No. 140 (Aug., 1993), p. 205. Jstor article. </fnote>