China has long captured the imagination of the West, and still remains an enigma in this present age despite the vicissitudes of time. While technology now permits us to catch a glimpse of China on the news, on the internet, or plausibly, even visit China; this would not have been conceivable in previous centuries, where one of the few ways in which one could come into contact with, and conceive of China was through the objects brought back from overseas trade- which was itself stimulated by a thirst for the mysterious exotic Orient as much as it was for profit. Although these goods were prized for their scarcity, aesthetic value and excellent workmanship, it was not the material alone that captivated, but more importantly, it was the non-material associations that imbued the goods with meaning, desirability and the label of 'luxury'. This fuelled the luxury trade, long underpinned by traditional court luxury, which reached its zenith in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, with the establishment of the chartered East India companies and the subsequent creation of a European market for these goods. This essay will attempt to put forth the idea that Europeans were so fascinated by Chinese luxury goods precisely because of the various functions that these goods fulfilled- it fired up the European imagination, giving it the impetus to venture out and explore the world; it played its part in influencing the new taste for the Rococo and in the definition of 'refinement'; it was amenable to the marketing techniques of the East India Companies which further heightened its appeal; and finally it stimulated European industries in their attempt to surpass the East through emulation and innovation. In short, it was through the acquisition of Chinese goods, which defined the 'Other', that one perceives the 'Self' in a clearer light. <fnote>Maxine Berg, "In Pursuit of Luxury: Global History and British Consumer Goods in the Eighteenth Century", in Past and Present 182 (2004), p. 86. </fnote>Before embarking on the main body of the essay proper, there are some issues that deserve our attention: firstly, the reference to "seventeenth and eighteenth century Europeans" in the question should not be taken to mean all Europeans, but was limited to the affluent, by nature of it being Asian luxury goods. And even within this group, there were some such as Mrs. Montagu and the adherents of the Burlington School of Taste who lamented the fall from favour of Palladianism. While it is not the task at hand to examine the interactions between the Orient and the Occident, it must be said that far from being a one-way exchange, the Chinese elite were themselves fascinated by western manufactured goods, especially clocks. It is interesting to note that both cultures used foreign 'luxury' goods in a setting that suited their own agendas, often removing the objects from their original context, transforming the functional into the ornamental. This playful assimilation, also seen in the creation of the Chinoiserie, is perhaps reflective of the confidence of both cultures, which is in stark contrast to the theories of Social Darwinism, which characterised their relations in the nineteenth century. Finally, it is important that we examine the definition of 'luxury goods'. As Vainker astutely points out: despite the high quality of silk, porcelain and lacquer, these goods were not perceived as luxury items, but as functional goods by the affluent Chinese. Instead, what they valued as luxury items would include "paintings, ritual bronzes, jades, calligraphy and other antiques and collectibles associated with a scholar-official elite and the authority to rule." Hence, luxury is defined not by high quality goods that are widely available (such as porcelain and silk in China), but by its association with the conferment of social status due to its scarcity (Chinese porcelain and silk in Europe). <fnote>In a letter from Mrs. Montagu 1749 "Thus it is happened...we must all seek the barbarous gaudy gout of the Chinese; and the fat-headed Pagods and shaking Mandarins bear the prize from the greatest works of antiquity; and Apollo and Venus must give way to a fat idol with a sconce on his head." Quoted from Dawn Jacobson, Chinoiserie, (London, 1993), p. 123. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.124. </fnote><fnote>Seen in the use of clocks as status symbols (as opposed to time-pieces) in Yongzheng's imperial household; and the French candelabra composed of inverted Chinese whistles and cups mounted on a frame. Seen in the DVD produced on the Encounters: The Meeting of Asia and Europe 1500-1800 exhibition. Picture of French Candelabra in Anna Jackson and Amin Jaffers (ed.), Encounters: The Meeting of Asia and Europe 1500-1800, (London, 2004), plate 1.9, p. 7. Picture of Yongzheng's concubine with a clock in the background in Evelyn S. Rawski and Jessica Rawson (ed.), China: The Three Emperors 1662-1795, (London, 2005), bottom left, p. 259. </fnote><fnote>Shelagh Vainker, "Luxuries or Not? Consumption of Silk and Porcelain in Eighteenth-Century China", in Maxine Berg and Elizabeth Eger (ed.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century: Debates, Desires and Delectable Goods, (New York, 2003), p.214. </fnote>The seventeenth and eighteenth century fascination with Chinese luxury goods had its genesis in the myth of Cathay, which conjured up "fantastic visions of luxury and refinement, pleasure and abundance", and were reinforced by traveller accounts of Marco Polo and the fictional Sir John Mandeville. As Jacobson observed "this view of the Chinese as being different but in no way inferior, helped to sustain the myth of Cathay, and the vision of a culture that was profound as well as peculiar." It was this perception that made possible the enchantment and respect that the Europeans had for the advanced Chinese civilisation; which manifested itself in the pursuit of Chinese goods, in the hope that one's collection might plausibly be employed as a prism through which the secret knowledge of the East might be yielded. That China during the Ming dynasty was largely cloistered from the world further enhanced its mystery and appeal, not unlike the coy mistress subtly beckoning to would-be suitors. And they came- in drips and then in droves- the Portuguese trailblazers followed by the Dutch, English and French traders who brought back taster portions of Asian goods, fuelling the imagination of the affluent Europeans further, which in turn encouraged the luxury trade. <fnote>Jacobson, Chinoiserie, p. 10 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 12-15. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.15. </fnote>It is imperative that we examine how this seemingly perennial fascination that the Europeans have for the exotic Orient featured in the particular context of the seventeenth and eighteenth century, especially in terms of sociability, civility and taste. It is important to note that in the moral debates about luxury at that time, Chinese goods were "associated not with (Persian) sensuality and excess, but with ethics, harmony and virtue...(and) in possessing things Chinese, they (the philosophes) sought to access levels of civilisation beyond the market." Hence, it was through the prism of Chinese objects that the Europeans expressed "their own aspirations to human elegance and refinement." The employment of taste as "a new means of displaying prestige", and the corresponding replacement of traditional forms of opulence (silver and gold) with elegant new 'imitative' objects, such as porcelain are integral in accounting for the vogue in Chinese luxury goods in seventeenth and eighteenth century Europe. This change in taste also reflected the changing relations in society, with the notable rise of the bourgeoisie, who rejected the gaudy decadence of the baroque (associated with the ancien regime) in favour of the lighter, more playful and asymmetrical Rococo, which "brought together commercial and cultural modernity." It is perhaps fortunate that the Chinoiserie with its freedom from classical notions of restraint and symmetry found favour with the Rococo, and was in fact a "vital ingredient in the creation of the new taste." It was in this context that Chinoiserie-which was the Western romanticised view of the East, produced in part by the imported goods- flourished, and "in turn dictated the commerce in Asian imports."  <fnote>Maxine Berg, "Asian luxuries and the Making of the European Consumer Revolution", in Maxine Berg and Elizabeth Eger (ed.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century: Debates, Desires and Delectable Goods, (New York, 2003), p. 229. </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 230. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 231. </fnote><fnote>Jacobson, Chinoiserie, p. 57. </fnote><fnote>Maxine Berg, Luxury and Pleasure in Eighteenth century Britain, (Oxford, 2005), p. 51 </fnote>While fascination with the Orient had always existed, it is necessary to look at how the East India Companies manipulated what was already in existence and transformed it into an obsession with Chinoiserie, as seen from above. As Berg astutely pointed out: these luxury goods "were a construct of the market, seeming to represent the lives and values of the East, but constructed to meet European preconception of eastern art." These commodities were prefabricated on the Chinese side to cater to Western markets; and on the part of the East India Companies, which sent out European shapes to be copied, and the initial contentment with Chinese designs soon gave way to a sudden fashion for 'chine de commande' by the end of the seventeenth century. While the East India Companies (EICs) were themselves the early products of the European fascination with China and its goods, they were indispensable in the subsequent promotion of this luxury trade, which was intrinsically tied up with the western enthralment for the East. The EICs were not merely merchants who simply pandered to the tastes of the European elite, but were market movers in the way in which they created a demand for these goods through 'customisation' and effective marketing. It is remarkable how they transformed something as functional and mundane as porcelain by capitalising on its exotic appeal and its association with civility, marketing it as a semi-luxury good, when truth be told, the differentiated decorations on the porcelain pieces belie the fact that they were to some extent, 'mass' produced goods. Moreover, they created new wants- "the dinner service with complete setting for each person was an invention of the VOC and the EIC which started importing porcelain dinner services in the eighteenth century." Therefore, though the western fascination for the Orient was present before the seventeenth-century, we have to credit the EICs for their role in elevating it to a whole new dimension with the extension of maritime trade and through successful marketing tactics. <fnote>Berg, "Asian luxuries and the Making of the European Consumer Revolution", p. 228 </fnote><fnote>Christiaan, J.A. Jorg, "Porcelain for the Dutch", in Rosemary E. Scott (ed.), The Porcelain of Jingdezhen: Colloquies on Art and Archaeology in Asia No. 16, (London, 1993), p. 188 and 200. </fnote><fnote>Berg, "Asian luxuries and the Making of the European Consumer Revolution", p. 239 </fnote>While exoticism, taste and marketing definitely contributed to the appeal of Chinese luxury goods to the West, a large measure of this preoccupation was also due to the impressive technical wizardry of the Chinese craftsmen and the secrecy which shrouded the production processes for these goods-especially porcelain- the Arcanum of which was first discovered by the Europeans only in 1709. Perhaps it is useful to point out that the luxury goods that fascinated the West were new, modern luxury comprised of "technically advanced and refined consumer objects" such as calicos and porcelain. Hence, the East enthralled the West because the latter realised that much could be learnt from the former; which would allow the West to progress through imitating and perfecting the techniques that they have gleaned from the East. It is important to note that contemporaries such as "Montesquieu, Hume and Smith wrote of luxury as an aspect of people's desire to better themselves" and "...commercial writers were keen to point out what the West could learn from the Orient." In doing so, they affirmed the moral good of luxuries in contributing to 'Progress', hence alleviating the fears of decadence and degeneration that plagued earlier preoccupations with luxury goods, and indirectly encouraged the fascination for Chinese luxury goods. While it must be said that this desire to learn from the East was more apparent than real, which is illustrated by Berg's observation that "Asian consumption was transferred to Europe but not Asian production systems", there appears to be a genuine lesson imported from the East, which is "the policy of using the fine arts and design in combination with modern manufacturing technique." Hence, "paradoxically, in imitating Asian consumer goods, perceived in Europe as luxuries, the British achieved what was actually an Asian success story-new, quality, semi-luxury consumer goods produced with advanced industrial techniques." <fnote>Ibid, p. 230 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Berg, "In Pursuit of Luxury: Global History and British Consumer Goods in the Eighteenth Century", p. 86 </fnote><fnote>Berg, "Asian luxuries and the Making of the European Consumer Revolution", p. 242. </fnote><fnote>Berg, "In Pursuit of Luxury: Global History and British Consumer Goods in the Eighteenth Century", p. 130. </fnote>In conclusion, this fascination that the Occident had for the Oriental luxury goods was not new, but was closely entwined with the captivating medieval myth of Cathay, and reached new dimensions in the seventeenth and eighteenth century with the establishment of the East India Companies (which were themselves the product of and the further stimulus to the West-East trade born of the Occidental preoccupation with the exotic, mysterious and abundant East) and the creation of European markets for Chinese luxury goods (which was previously the preserve of the European royalty). It is perhaps paradoxical that these Chinese luxury goods fascinate precisely because they have been displaced from their original cultures and grafted into new ones, but continue to give the impression that it was still possible to use them as prisms through which the West can subscribe to notions of Chinese refinement and skill. The fascination for anything 'Chinese' is apparent in the vogue for the Chinoiserie especially in the eighteenth century, and is both reflective of, and contributed to the existing enthrallment that the West had for the East, and how that affected the dominant taste in Europe. The appeal of Chinese luxury goods was also played up by the East India Companies which capitalised on the vogue for Chinoiserie, and created new wants through the successful marketing technique of making the foreign 'relevant' to the West through customisation. Finally, and most importantly, Chinese luxury goods were seen as having the role of "awakening the imagination" and were positive elements in stimulating the Europeans to better themselves through emulation and product innovation. Despite being so far removed from their original cultures, that these luxury goods were relevant and fulfilled certain functions given to them by their European possessors accounts to a large extent for the fascination that seventeenth and eighteenth century Europeans had for Chinese luxury goods. <fnote>Ibid, p.131 </fnote>