Traditional accounts on the causes of the Reformation necessarily included castigation of clerical abuses, such as concubinage, pluralism and absenteeism; the ignorance and poor training of priests and monks; and perhaps even the supposed failure of papal leadership as manifestations of the decay and decline of the Church on the eve of the Reformation. This view, and the more recent revisionist view of the topic in question has informed the main body of debate in scholarly circles, but before embarking on the essay, there are a few points that deserve attention. Firstly, the question suggests that what was 'wrong' with the Church could have led, in some sort of linear equation, to the birth of the Reformation. Following in the footsteps of Peter Marshall, "the intention is not to sift the evidence for signs of impending Reformation", and teleological history should be avoided due to the inaccurate interpretations and conclusions which may emerge from that approach. Secondly, it is ambiguous as to what constitutes 'the Church'. According to Robert Swanson, there are two main definitions: "the restricted, institutional definition, which segregated the 'ecclesiastical' from the 'secular'..." and "the body of the faithful which made up the mystical body of the church which was also the body of Christ." To limit the scope of this essay, the first of Swanson's two definitions will be taken up, noting however, that this requires a generalization of the circumstances in the various national churches. This essay will avoid a direct, simplistic answer to the question but will instead attempt to put the criticisms of the Church into perspective and suggest that there was a certain measure of continuity, rather than exclusivity to the eve of the Reformation; and to locate the essay within the confines of the changing climate of opinion that may have contributed to the perceived problems of the Church. The recurrent themes of Expectations and Reform will be examined in the following context: the Clergy, the Papacy, Doctrines and Practices, and will revolve around the issue of the function of the Church. <fnote>Peter Marshall, Reformation England 1480-1642, (Cornwall, 2003), p. 2 </fnote><fnote>Robert N. Swanson, Religion and Devotion in Europe 1215-1515, (Cambridge, 2003), p. 7 </fnote>The failure of the Clergy to live up to lay expectations of moral superiority (derived from being the agent through whom man communicated with God) and to fulfill the functions they were ordained for opened up the Church to criticisms, from without and within. 'On the eve of the Reformation, laity protested against pervasive clerical fiscalism, absenteeism, mal-administration, and concubinage..." and were joined in their castigations, by some members of the Clergy, and more notably, the humanists. John Colet, the humanist dean of St Paul's even went as far as to blame "all the ills of the Church on the secular lifestyles and 'covetousness' of the Clergy" and urged "reformation of the Church's estate". According to Duggan, even "Catholic and Protestant historians alike largely concur on the (sexual) 'immorality' of many Clergy on the eve of the Reformation." However, a reconsideration of the reaction to the abuses of the Clergy is necessary. Despite the widespread practice of concubinage, the population of Europe was not overly concerned unless this moral failing on the part of the Clergy impinged on their primary role of administering the sacraments. As Duggan articulates succinctly: "whether the clergy were 'immoral' or not, the more germane question is whether they ministered adequately to the needs of their flock."  <fnote>Steve Ozment, Age of Reform: An intellectual and Religious History of Late Medieval and Reformation Europe, (Newhaven, 1980) p, 211. </fnote><fnote>Marshall, Reformation England, p.11 </fnote><fnote>Lawrence G. Duggan, The Unresponsiveness of the Late Medieval Church: A Reconsideration, Sixteen Century Journal, Vol. 9, No. 1 (April 1978), p. 23 </fnote>Perhaps, it would be plausible to suggest that the more pressing considerations on what was 'wrong' with the Clergy would be "pluralism and absenteeism, which are frequently construed as abuses and signs of decay and pastoral neglect" The centrality of the Church in providing "contact between human beings and the supernatural order of their universe, to explain, direct, and console" is crucial to the understanding of late medieval religion; and the perceived failure of the Church in providing the above services would shake the foundations on which it was built. The Church was faced with two main dilemmas: firstly, it had inadequate jurisdiction over the appointments to benefices, which increasingly became the prerogative of the rulers. Also, clergymen seeking to further their knowledge and competence often enrolled in the universities, with the obvious consequences of being away from their benefices. Despite pluralism being widespread, it did not necessarily indicate neglect, as absentee beneficiaries were required by canon law to provide a vicar to cater to the needs of the local populace. <fnote>Ibid, p. 23 </fnote><fnote>Euan Cameron, The European Reformation, (New York, 1991), p. 9 </fnote>What proved more destructive than the above-mentioned abuses "were the words and ideas of clerics...born of an impatience with the imperfect established church and a moral vision of purified Christianity." The more prominent members of this group include John Wycliffe, Erasmus and Luther. It is noteworthy that criticisms of the Church went as far back as to the late 14 th Century (the Lollards) and were not exclusive to the eve of the Reformation. The irony lies in the fact that the Church had effectively 'dug its own grave' by educating these men-empowering them with knowledge which allowed for the formulation of reformist ideas and expectations of change, which clashed, at every level, with the vested interests of the clerical class. <fnote>Duggan, The Unresponsiveness of the Late Medieval Church: A Reconsideration, p. 25 </fnote>The fact that the Church was becoming more accessible to the Laity may have opened up the former to criticisms from their congregation. The increased interaction between the Clergy and the Laity may have led to the exposure of church flaws which may seem less apparent previously; and the printing of the provincial decrees and sermons denouncing clerical abuses, by the church, in the vernacular "might have convinced laymen not only of the widespread efforts of reform but also of the widespread problems of the church ...raising in some circles expectations that could not be realized." <fnote>Ibid, p. 14 </fnote>The Papacy was also not immune to criticisms of 'worldliness', and the Renaissance popes provided the best illustration of this by participating in the struggle for temporal power, concubinage, and as patron of the Arts. Since the thirteenth century, reformers have 'found themselves at cross-purpose with a papacy whose pastoral role had become increasingly confused with its political and economic ambitions." However, far from being a power-hungry and oppressive apparatus, it can be said that the Papacy had undermined its own power through the setting up of Universities, encouragement of printing, and even patronage of the humanists. The Papacy has often been accused of being lofty and unresponsive, but in reality, was the main impetus behind the improvement of society, largely through the channeling of Church resources into building and maintaining educational institutions that served both the state and the society at large. Most significantly, they 'took under their aegis the devotio moderna the principles of which strikingly foreshadowed the worth and dignity fully accorded laymen by the reformers of the sixteenth century.'  <fnote>Ozment, Age of Reform, p.208 </fnote><fnote>Duggan, The Unresponsiveness of the Late Medieval Church: A Reconsideration, p.16 </fnote>It is imperative to examine the doctrines and practices (in particular, the deep belief in Purgatory, the sacrament of Penance, and its derivatives such as relics, pilgrimages and most notoriously, indulgences) of the Church, which generated oppositions from the laity and clergy. Interestingly, criticisms of Church practices and doctrines existed in the late fourteenth century, in the form of Lollardy (led by the Oxford theologian John Wycliffe) called for a clear divide between spiritual and temporal power; obedience to the church authorities as far as their behaviour merited; the Bible as the only source of religious authority; condemned the doctrine of transubstantiation; and attacked the veneration of saints (and relics). The humanists also shared the view that the Church had diverged away from the one true religion, embraced misconstrued beliefs and had become too intertwined with the secular world. Convinced that grace and forgiveness could only come from God alone, Luther also harshly condemned the sale of Indulgences in his ninety-five theses. However, the cynicism surrounding the practice of Indulgences were not unique to the eve of the Reformation, and was a pervasive element in literary traditions, as seen in Chaucer's Pardoner's Tale which was written in 1400. It is interesting to note however, that the supply of indulgences was in response to the demands of the laity, and was perhaps a manifestation of the paranoia of securing one's own salvation. What is perhaps significant is that the demanding penitential system and mechanical ritualized religion offered by the Church only provided temporary relief for the laity, and had led instead to the exacerbation of fear and anxiety as reflected in the obsession with the constant absolving of sins. <fnote>Marshall, Reformation England, p. 16 </fnote>According to Steve Ozment, one of the chief failings of the Church lay in 'the absence of a distinctive concept of lay religious life and the consequent imposition upon the laity of traditional clerical ideals'; and the proliferation of confraternities, in addition to the earlier movement of the devotio moderna are perhaps indicative of the failures of the church to cater for lay piety. The advocacy of clerical piety as the zenith of religious piety had placed unrealistic expectations on the laity and precluded their search for consolation through the Church. The incongruity of this enterprise was not lost on the increasingly literate laity, who rejected the "prominent clerical ideals of obedience and sexual impurity" in favour of "simplicity, directness and respectful treatment in all spheres of their lives." Moreover, as mentioned above, the behaviour of the clergy did not correspond to the standards that church traditions had imposed on them, and policies such as enforced celibacy increased the incidence of breaches in moral standards that served to reinforce, amongst the laity, the futility of this endeavour. <fnote>Ozment, Age of Reform, p. 219 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 220 </fnote>Some historians have also suggest that the increasing desire amongst the laity for a personal and direct relationship with God, and the subsequent failure of the Church to cater to this aspect led many into the realm of mysticism. Though some have argued that mysticism could be regarded as a form of subversion, it is perhaps more appropriate to think of it as a supplementary to, rather than as a substitute for the institution of the Church. Mysticism of both the fourteenth and sixteenth century coexisted with the Church and may be seen as testament to the religiosity of the Age. There is a possibility that the multiple responsibilities of the Church in society may have led to its resources becoming over-stretched, hence, compromising on the primary role of the Church to minister the sacraments. Swanson puts forth the idea that most of the anti-clericals "wanted churchmen to behave just as churchmen, rather than officious, interfering, lordly bureaucrats." However, the Church had for centuries combined both its temporal and spiritual responsibilities without much difficulty, and it appears rather peculiar that the church would find it hard to cope with its dual roles on the eve of the Reformation. Moreover, the increased accessibility of university education provided the necessary training for aspiring civil servants, and this would have taken the burden off the Church as a source of administrative officials, implying perhaps that the Church could concentrate more on its primary, spiritual function. Although there were many problems (both discipline and doctrinal) that the Church faced, it is apparent that these problems had been in existence for the past one or two centuries, and that despite the criticisms, the aim of the reformers was not to subvert the church, but had in mind the desire to change the church into a more responsive, relevant and effective apparatus. Throughout the essay, the writer has tried to suggest that it was the rising expectations of a growing educated class (laity and clergy) and the inability of the church to keep up the pace of reform and to satisfy the needs of the laity - the disparity between expectations and reality- that led to disillusionment. Similarly, the high expectations that the Church set with regards to piety eventually led to the alienation of the people from the Church. Despite the deep-rooted flaws of the church, the attempts at reforming it suggest "men were seeking salvation and wished to find it with the help of the church." Hence, in trying to account for the Reformation, it is inadequate to merely examine what was 'wrong' with the church, but requires instead, a broader understanding of the climate and considerations (political, economic and social) of the Age. <fnote>B.Moeller 'Religious life in Germany on the eve of the Reformation', in G. Strauss (ed.) Pre-Reformation Germany, (London, 1972) p. 27 </fnote> 