<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Over a period of four hours, a mock Participative Rapid Appraisal (henceforth PRA) was performed by two groups of students each comprising about 15 individuals, one group posing as the representatives of a village community from Ethiopia and the other as NGO workers. This experience and information found in literature provide the basis for an examination of the effectiveness of PRA's. An analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the PRA technique concludes that its implementation offers an effective methodology but that its success is influenced enormously by the competence, experience, creativity and even good fortune of its organisers. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Canaan Banana, the former president of Zimbabwe, is quoted by Michael Edwards in his 1989 article entitled, "The irrelevance of development studies" as follows; <quote>"Whereas an armchair intellectual of rural development, lost in the labyrinth of misty theories and postulations, can afford to oversimplify matters and get away with it, a practitioner of rural development, that man or woman in the constant glare of various vicious shades of rural poverty and suffering, cannot." [1]</quote>The emphasis Banana puts on involvement in the development process as being indispensable for a successful development practitioner is the same idea that is central to the PRA technique. PRA is intended to achieve a synergism between the scientific, anthropological and social knowledge and the rural, cultural and historical knowledge of the PRA practitioner and indigenous people respectively. <heading>Strengths of the PRA technique</heading>The PRA methodologies are vast; its own philosophy demands and encourages high flexibility. A PRA should not follow a manual rigidly and all relevant data should be used where it is rational to do so. The technique cross checks itself by, ideally, triangulating (i.e. using three) different data collection procedures in order to minimise the risk of misinterpretation via the extraction of a trend from one imperfect data collection method. It is also self-critical, reflective and relaxed for two reasons; firstly, in an attempt to appreciate not only what is being said or seen but also what is not being said or seen; and secondly, to determine sources of error and mitigate against them. The emphasis on participation from the local people whom the development concerns is instrumental in a PRA and is supposed to empower them. Many of the activities are done with villagers or solely by villagers, giving them the opportunity to learn. The villagers are also 'empowered' to some extent by their proactive participation. On a more fundamental level, PRA's can use many modes of data capture and benefit from the respective strengths of those different modes. For example, face to face interviews provide the opportunity to assess body language and tone of voice whereas direct observation techniques, especially unobtrusive ones such as satellite/ aerial photography or recording, minimise the bias inherent in any person. This information was found in reference 2. <heading>Weaknesses of the PRA technique</heading>The numerous methods of PRA eluded to previously can be seen as a double edged sword since enormous demands are placed on the organiser to judge which techniques are most appropriate to a given project at a given time with the given resources. The wealth of choice of method could confuse a PRA's cause. In the wide context of method choice (for whatever purpose), James D. Halloran says, <quote>"methods are but a means to an end and, important though they are, they are not an end in themselves, nor should they be used, as they have been, to determine the end or define the nature of the problems to be investigated....... The danger is that knowledge is then reduced to mere perspectivalism" Halloran, JD, Mass Communication Research Methods, Macmillan, 1998, p11.</quote>The success of a development project can rely very heavily on the creativity and competence of the PRA practitioner. Their attitude also has the potential to be highly influential. For example, an impatient PRA practitioner could prevent the conception of many good ideas from local people to whom the appraisal's techniques may be alien and thus it would not be a fully participatory enquiry. The quality of data collection is of course very important and whilst the PRA technique should use only good and fair data collection methods there is the risk that data collection processes will be biased or insufficient and fall short of being meaningful. There is also the risk that a data collection method could be abused. Given the volume of data collected in PRA's these risks are exacerbated by people's tendency towards complacency when tasks have a long duration. Hierarchies in unfamiliar societies, possibly with unwritten and unspoken codes of conduct, can be difficult to detect, negotiate and understand. Their existence could affect the degree of participation actually achieved by a PRA and, consequentially, the true depth of coverage of any particular PRA may not be as deep and unbiased as its administrators believe. The PRA technique is vulnerable to such cultural idiosyncrasies to which outsiders are, through no fault of their own, oblivious. The worst case repercussion could be an exaggeration of power imbalances or inequity already embedded in the society via exploitation of the PRA by those with more control. A further weakness of PRA is that it demands that some proportion of local people give up substantial amounts of their time which may not be feasible. <heading>PRA in practice</heading>The short mock PRA described in the abstract serves as an experience of the technique in action. The appraisal was limited mainly to face to face interviews during which some diagrams and maps were drawn. The interviews themselves followed the favoured PRA technique in that they had no rigid structure. The records made from those interviews were poor because they were often unstructured, messy and sometimes incomprehensible. They are shown in appendix A. No attempt was made to collate the information recorded logically leaving the information fragmented and dislocated. This rendered much of the interview discussion worthless. When the pretend NGO representatives made suggestions for particular developments they were met with firm, almost fierce, objections from the village representatives who felt that the proposal did not offer the best solution or, as some said, any improvement. These objections were not from a few isolated villagers but were supported by much of the village cohort. This in itself does not refute the effectiveness of PRA since effectiveness should be measured by the level of success of the implemented proposals rather than their popularity amongst villagers prior to their instigation. However, it seems unlikely that very unpopular proposals would be more successful than popular ones. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The PRA technique encompasses almost every possible method for determining the best course of action for any given development scheme. It also demands that trends should be checked and checked again. It attempts to give some power to the local people in the decision making process in the hope that this will encourage a more enthusiastic, thoughtful and effective participation from them. These strengths give it the potential to be a very powerful tool. However, given the complexity and range of its constituents and the importance of their correct application it is also very difficult to use. Nor is the technique immune to the effects of the attitudes of those who use it. The opposite is more realistic; a PRA is a volatile procedure highly sensitive to style of its facilitator. 