<quote> 'No one would have believed in the last years of the nineteenth century that this world was being watched keenly and closely by intelligences greater than man's... With infinite complacency men went to and fro over this globe about their little affairs, serene in their assurance of their empire over matter. Yet across the gulf of space, minds that are to our minds immeasurably superior to ours, regarded this earth with envious eyes, and slowly and surely drew their plans against us. And early in the twentieth century came the great disillusionment. '</quote><fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P5. </fnote>So begins H.G. Wells' classic novel in which Martian life forms take over planet earth. As the Martians emerge, they construct gigantic killing machines - armed with heat rays - that are impervious to attack. Advancing upon London, they destroy everything in their path. Victorian England is a place in which the steam engine is state-of-the-art technology and powered flight is just a dream. Mankind is helpless against the killing machines from Mars, and soon the survivors are left in nothing less than a new Stone Age. Over the centuries, London has become one of Europe's leading cities. By the Victorian era, the city had reached a zenith of importance as centre of the British Empire and financial powerhouse of the world. The world's first super city. The War of the Worlds captures the grave consequences of ignorance in a period when men congratulated each other on being masters of the universe. In the years preceding the fated maiden voyage of Titanic, man knew no boundary. His ego was unbreakable; he expected his power to dominate nature. But nature inevitably finds a way. It takes a disaster to force man back into his place. The city tempts us with the power it exudes. 'The city is a place of the spectacular. It is where major historic events take place, grand architecture is constructed, big decisions are taken, great art is produced." We are constantly aware of the city's power. But what of its vulnerability? What when its power falters? How is this incorporated into the performance of the city and an instructive vision of the twenty-first century metropolis? <fnote>Borden, I, et al (eds) The City Cultures Reader, P2. </fnote>In the acclaimed 'Lights Out for the Territory', Iain Sinclair walked the 'territory' he had made his own, the streets and rivers of inner London. London Orbital sets out to map an area much less fashionable and previously uncharted; that vast stretch of urban settlement outside the city boarded by the great circle of the M25. He uncovers a history of forgotten villages, suburban utopias and hellish asylums, now transformed into upmarket housing, all the while walking (and in the case of his collaborator, Chris Petit, driving), a disappearing landscape, as the countryside is engulfed by commerce. Throughout this essay, I will make connections between London Orbital and The War of the Worlds. Although Sinclair only mentions it briefly, there are many parallels between the two narratives, especially concerning the similarities between the London portrayed by H.G. Wells and Sinclair/Petit at the dawn of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Moreover, Sinclair recommends 'the literature of the future written a hundred years ago' in order to define his quest. <fnote>Petit, Chris/Sinclair, Iain, London Orbital. * Also applies to any quotations without a footnote. </fnote>From the beginning, London Orbital identifies the grittiness of the city surrounded by the M25. We are shown the Millennium Dome, forever associated as the great landmark having no idea what to do with itself. We see the collapse of sixties tower blocks, themselves a solution to one of London's problems, until the contemporary city outgrew them. Further, the idea that the city itself is an entity that performs is shown at the beginning of London Orbital. As the tower blocks tumble in a cloud of dense smoke, we hear the cheering of onlookers. The demolishing of one of London's mistakes becomes a performance. The identity of the city's mistakes is I think, an important theme in London Orbital. The problems of the city are examined, framed in the ongoing concrete circle. Whilst in orbit, Sinclair and Petit explore the cracks, traces of subsidence in London's structure which are reflected in its surrounding counties. It is suggested by Petit that the M25 "resists editing". Certainly there are far too many connections and ideas explored in the film (which I am exploring alone excluding the book) and moreover, by the work of the many artists who play a part in negotiating the orbit, to condense into this essay. I would particularly like to draw on Sinclair's connection of the M25 with literature and specifically with H.G. Wells and The War of the Worlds. Although Sinclair only mentions it briefly, there are many parallels between the two narratives, especially concerning the similarities between the London portrayed by H.G. Wells and Sinclair/Petit at the dawn of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Moreover, Sinclair recommends 'the literature of the future written a hundred years ago' in order to define his quest. <fnote>Petit, Chris/Sinclair, Iain, London Orbital. </fnote><quote>'It seems to me now almost incredibly wonderful that, with that swift fate hanging over us, men could go about their petty concerns as they did. '</quote><fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P9. </fnote>A popular method of showing London on television today is the use of speeded up film. The camera points at a familiar part of the city landscape. We see night turn to day, flashes of traffic, a thousand buses stop and start, a hundred turns of the London Eye. We see crowds shooting right, left, backwards, forwards, like pin balls, we see lights click off and on again as day turns back to night - all within a five second clip, before it begins again. This highlights London's repetition, London as a machine. The city's senseless repletion is captured in London Orbital, simply by placing the camera next to the motorway, capturing car after van after truck pass through the frame. The M25 is a whirlpool - every vehicle caught in its relentless current. Unless the choice is made to exit the orbit, the current would drive each vehicle around it forever. This ceaseless, undramatic motion is explored in the film by Sinclair's poetic narrative. His monotone voice plods relentlessly through a series of thoughts and afterthoughts, complimented by the view from the window or the steady streaked smear from windscreen wipers - back and forth and back again. Perhaps the city itself is a series of afterthoughts. Sixties tower blocks rise to create housing space but tumble when they fail to keep pace with the contemporary skyline. The Dome is created to mark the Millennium and abandoned when people grow tired of the Millennium idea. I think the pace of the film is interesting. There is a consistent sense throughout that we are moving at walking pace, rather than driving, despite much of the action taking place within the car. This not only clarifies the feeling of senseless repetition but further emphasises the need explored in the film to step away from the rush of the city centre (skirting the primary issue as it were) in order to make discoveries, not only of the M25 but of London itself by looking closer and opening up the secrets harboured around the metropolis. Part of its process of presenting an instructive vision of the early twenty-first century metropolis is the film's ability to offer the audience a new perspective of looking closer at the M25. The film tackles Sinclair/Petits' (and their collaborators) artistic perspective of using the motorway and its connections in order to draw conclusions about the world in which they live. This is helped by the "split nature" of their project - exploring the difference between walking the orbit and driving it. As much as Sinclair's narrative acknowledges the fascinating discoveries made by walking, Petit's car journey recreates the trance like state so easy to fall into on the motorway. 'M25 is negative space - an energy drain - to enter it is to enter dead time, clockwise or anti-clockwise, the M25 is designed to test thresholds of boredom.' <fnote>Petit, Chris/Sinclair, Iain, London Orbital. </fnote>In The War of the Worlds, H.G. Wells describes the painful exodus of people trying to escape the Martians in their fighting machines, 'Never before had such a mass of human beings moved and suffered together... this was no disciplined march; it was a stampede - without order and without a goal, six million people, the rich rubbing shoulders with the poor, driving headlong...it was the beginning of the massacre of mankind." This forms a striking contrast with the millions of people orbiting the M25, all 'headlong'. <fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P97. </fnote>As Sinclair unearths more and more of the motorways unknown, the disinterest of the travellers, passing by at 70mph is heightened. Petit's part in the project is the first step towards Sinclair's journey of presenting an instructive vision of the early twenty-first century metropolis, which will eventually conclude in a mass of people, as without a goal as those described by Wells; driving round and round, going nowhere, caring only for themselves, sparing no thought for anything outside the confines of their own self-importance. 'Unseasoned artillery volunteers who ought never to have been placed in such a position bolted on horse and foot through the deserted streets, while the Martian walked serenely over their guns... The mighty engines, so great and wonderful in their power and complexity, so unearthly in their tortuous forms, rose weird and vague and strange out of the shadows towards the light. ' <fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P77. </fnote>The central theme in The War of the Worlds is Victorian England, powerful in its position as head of an Empire, and its hopeless struggle against the Martian's fighting machines - technologically far superior to the simple cannons used to defend the soldiers in London. 'It's bows and arrows against the lightning." This theme connects with London Orbital, which explores the way the human race and nature have been invaded by the machine. <fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P55. </fnote>Firstly, the commuters on the M25, whose lives are put on hold while they are 'in orbit', cease to be human and become scientific. In the film's narrative, the people become the invaders, their functions taken over by their own 'fighting machines', the millions of vehicles carrying them around the motorway. For them, the bypass is simply a means to an end. London Orbital forces us however, to perceive it in a different way. The M25 becomes separate from that which it proposes to be - the film changes the utilitarian into a concept, whether of the space itself or the space it cuts through. Sinclair's journey concludes that we live in a futile society, represented in part by the invasion of commerce and particularly the Blue Water Shopping Centre, a "retail swamp" spilling out from the city into its surrounding countryside. Thatcher's reign heralded the climate of consumerism, a nation becoming more acquisitive. On the outskirts of London, Sinclair discovered the sites of the asylums built to protect the city from the insane. Now shopping replaces the drugs of asylums - a cure for a sick nation. Sinclair dubs Blue Water "America without the hassle", giving rise to a further invasion, that of American culture, evident even on the M25. Continuing the idea of a nation of individuals who want, want, want, is J.G Ballard's view that a new kind of transient England has come into being. That with the easy access to airports like Heathrow and the speed of arrivals and departures to any other country, people can indulge in a quick identity change whenever the fancy takes them. There is an interesting connection here. London Orbital seems to suggest a battle between nature and the advancement of technology. There are many shots of birds, scattering as the tower blocks crumble. Sinclair talks of "hungry birds" and of a "sparrow pecking at the brain". In The War of the Worlds, as the Martians slowly die unable to defend themselves against earthly bacteria, a reversal of power takes place between nature and the machines. Having obliterated London and its surrounding counties, the Martians are defeated, 'I saw that a multitude of black birds was circling and clustering about the Titan...out of its hood hung lank shreds of brown at which the angry birds pecked and tore.'  <fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P160. </fnote>Before their destruction it is determined that the Martians are engaged in creating new methods for which to cause further devastation, 'I believe they've built a flying machine, and are learning to fly... It is all over with humanity... If they can do that they will simply go round the world." The Martians conceive such a machine in a period when man could only dream of learning to fly. In Sinclair/Petit's film, footage of flying birds contrasts with images of man's mechanical means of crossing the ocean, planes taking off from Heathrow, our very own invaders circling the world, 'planes in search of buildings'. <fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P145. </fnote><fnote>Petit, Chris/Sinclair, Iain, London Orbital. </fnote><quote>'People were fighting savagely for standing room in the carriages even at two o'clock. By three, people were being trampled and crushed ...revolvers were fired, people stabbed, and the policemen who had been sent to direct the traffic, exhausted and infuriated, were breaking the heads of the people they were called out to protect.'</quote><fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P85. </fnote>London orbital reflects the banality of life. Like the Siebel building, we 'float through time'; in constant search of fulfilling our own little lives. We grasp for better lifestyles, forever acquiring 'things', guarding our possessions jealously, caring little or nothing for anyone else, confined to our individual routines. H.G. Wells describes the same self absorbed attitude of his characters before the invasion of the Martians, 'I remember how jubilant Markham was at securing a new photograph of the planet for the illustrated paper... I was much occupied in learning to ride the bicycle, and busy upon a series of papers discussing the probable developments of moral ideas as civilisation progressed." It takes a disaster - be it the Martian invasion, a terrorist attack or the building of a motorway as a faster way to invade the city, in order to place everyone, regardless of age, culture or class in the same position. The M25 scraps any notion of individuality. <fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P9. </fnote>Perhaps the connection with this aridity of the psyche develops the blood metaphor identified by Sinclair, the idea of the road as the four chambers of the heart, pumping the circulation of traffic around the orbit. The opinion of the M25 is a failed bypass in a surgical sense, 'carried out far too late to sustain an ailing city', gives the impression of a sick London, rejecting the cure which was a 'bureaucratic dream'. As a patient it has lost consciousness, living in a constant state of dead time. <quote>'Far away the towers of the crystal palace glittered like two silver rods. The dome of St Paul's was dark against the sunrise, and injured by a huge gaping cavity on its Western side...as I thought of the multitudinous hopes and efforts, the innumerable hosts of lives that had gone to build this human reef, and of the swift and ruthless destruction which now hung over it all. '</quote><fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P162. </fnote>I have already discussed the effects of the M25 on the people who use it as dealt with in the film and to some extent, the impact of three different invasions on the metropolis, the alien invasion of a century ago in The War of the Worlds, the invasion of commerce leading towards the twenty-first century and the threat of terrorism as it progresses. What is the cause of these invasions? The War of the Worlds reflects on man's ignorance that his race was, firstly, the only race, and secondly, the most powerful race in the universe, only to find it fighting for existence, '"This isn't a war", said the artilleryman. "It never was a war, any more than there's a war between men and ants."' The M25 started life as a bureaucratic dream, designed for a brighter, faster future, and is today 'a fractured narrative of deletion, exploitation, subterfuge." In 2001, America found itself under a similar threat to that of H.G. Wells' Victorians. Before 9/11, no one could have doubted America's power. Its strength was limitless, represented in New York's skyscrapers, seemingly immune to destruction. Yet the terrorist attacks reduced a country (and indeed the entire Western world) from proud, upstanding citizens into nations of vulnerable ants, ever fearful of a future attack. When a metropolis has vast amounts of power mixed with arrogance - that nothing or no one could ever destroy it - it seems inevitable that it be shown the force of a greater, unexpected power. One could say the metropolis has it coming. This idea is explored in The War of the Worlds, 'So vain is the mind of man and so blinded by his vanity, that no one, up to the very end of the nineteenth century, expressed any idea life might have developed there far, or indeed at all, beyond its earthly level." There is a connection between one of the many stories unearthed by Sinclair - that of the Essex gangsters - and the terrorist attacks in America. The drug dealer Tate, one of the more dangerous figures in the underworld, was warned that he would eventually pay the price for his actions. However, he was said to be so supremely confident that he was immune to attack - he held to much power to be at risk. Still, he was shot through the head, and many believed he had it coming. Like Wells' Victorian London and twenty-first century Manhattan, arrogance came at a price. <fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P146. </fnote><fnote>Petit, Chris/Sinclair, Iain, London Orbital. </fnote><fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P6. 19 Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P5. </fnote>The film's examination of the Siebel building further highlights the idea of terrorism and its consequences. Sinclair describes it as 'A mysterious glass fortress, a keeper of information, an alien invasion - fallen out of the sky fully formed.' Its calm and foreboding aura surrounds it, giving the sense of a 'conspiracy waiting to happen'. Again there is a connection - the Martians landed on the boundary of London waiting to create havoc on the city. The traffic on the M25 does the same, orbiting around the outskirts before it pours into London. And while Sinclair speaks, we see images of the Middle East, men carrying freight boxes on their backs in a market place as the shopping paradise - Blue Water and all its glory on the motorway is described to us. Yet in the years leading towards 2001, groups in the Middle East, considered by many in the Western world to be primitive men living in the desert, regarded our power with 'envious eyes, and slowly and surely drew their plans against us.'  <fnote></fnote><quote>'It may be that, in the larger designs of the universe this invasion from Mars is not without its ultimate benefit for man; it has robbed us of that serene confidence in the future which is the most fruitful source of decadence... The broadening of men's views that has resulted can scarcely be exaggerated. '</quote><fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P171. 21 Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P170. </fnote>In the final chapter of The War of the Worlds, its narrator reflects upon the positive aspect of the Martian invasion as an event which sobered the arrogance of man. However, he continues to question the actions of those around him after the invaders are defeated. 'A question of graver and universal interest is the possibility of another attack from the Martians. I do not think that nearly enough attention is being given to this aspect of the matter.' <fnote></fnote>What are the consequences of invasions to the metropolis? And does the metropolis learn from its mistakes? Soon after the planes hit the World Trade Centre, America had bottled remnants of 'Ground Zero' and sold them as souvenirs. Bright beams of light were cast towards the sky in place of the Twin Towers while plans began to build an even taller and more impressive building in its place. Of the Siebel building, Ballard claims it a site 'post surveillance, pre terror.' The building exudes 'a discretion so absolute that criminality and vandalism were impossible concepts.' Therefore no surveillance is needed. The Siebel building is a new form of indestructible power. This changes the future of the metropolis. If we think for a moment about the beauty found by Ballard in the car crash during contemporary society's increasing dependence on technology and of the thousand slow motion replays of the moment when the Twin Towers crumpled, (and America's power was at last called to question) is it a mistake to lose all sense of danger, finding new ways with which to become immune to danger or disruption in our little lives? On the other hand has the early twenty-first century's emphasis on surveillance come too little, too late? Ballard suggests that U.S. leaders need another 9/11 to justify their secret wish to 'nuke the world'. Have precautions against future attacks turned us into a world closely watched twenty-four hours a day as we were a century ago according to Wells, scrutinized by Martians, watching our planet with envious eyes? The connection between Wells' The War of the Worlds and London Orbital ends here, for the mood at the end of the novel is optimistic, <quote>'All about the pit, and saved as by a miracle from everlasting destruction, stretched the great Mother of Cities... I realised that the shadow had been rolled back, and that men might still live in the streets, and this dear vast dead city of mine be once more alive and powerful, I felt a wave of emotion that was near akin to tears. '</quote><fnote>Wells, H.G., The War of the Worlds, P163. </fnote>The narrator of Well's story and Sinclair each reflect on a vanishing topography, of London and of the M25. However, the two narratives end differently. The War of the Worlds is positive. Catastrophe has left London in tatters but with the promise of a constructive future, busy with hope, new ideas and development. London Orbital however, concludes with the reflection of lost memories, a 'swallowing of past, present and future' - a future deemed 'boring' by Ballard. In contrast to The War of the Worlds in which mans views have been broadened and human future has been greatly modified by the fictional invasion, London Orbital reflects the atmosphere surrounding a metropolis which has come full circle, one in which we have 'become lost'. ------------------------------------- 