<quote> 'Indeed, it quickly becomes evident that beyond the level of a few clichés, there is no such thing as a standard theory of comedy in this period. Nor will we find a set of discrete competing theories, or a clear-cut transition from a satire oriented Carolean formula to a subsequent 'sentimental one'.'</quote><fnote>Hume, R, D, The Development Of English Drama In The Late Seventeenth Century, P 33. </fnote>It is not an easy task to define the writing of the fifty years following the Restoration of Charles the Second. The period reflects the perception of the world in vastly contrasting ways by the French and English cultures. The use of theatrical techniques by the differing cultures to illustrate social and political values renders the plays of this period to have built into their fabric, an overriding reflection of social consciousness and political ideas. This reflection appears to be the very essence of Restoration Drama. The difficulty lies in identifying the genre of the plays - more particularly, the Restoration Comedies. It has been rightly noted that several sorts of comedy co-existed during the period. They can be - rather clumsily - categorized as Jonsonian, Intrigue, Dryden, Manners, Farce and Sentiment. This presents a problem when we come to apply them to the plays however; for when reading Restoration Comedy, one gets a sense that it consists of many of the categories combined together. Moreover, the plays are categorized according only to opinion - 'The Plain Dealer', for example, '...is a comedy of manners according to most critics, a satire or a wit comedy according to others. Such a system of categorization obscures as much as it clarifies the playwright's aims and methods'. <fnote>Hume, R, D, The Development Of English Drama In The Late Seventeenth Century, P 36. </fnote>Although the shift from wit or manners comedy, using a satirical approach - to the rise of the sentimental approach between 1650 and 1750 is quite clear, discussing these different approaches to playwriting remains problematic. '... Exemplary theory appears even at the outset of the period (note that Mrs. Behn is busy rejecting it in 1673), while satiric theory is never obliterated.' <fnote>Hume, R, D, The Development Of English Drama In The Late Seventeenth Century, P 38. </fnote>For this essay I have chosen two plays, each using a different approach. The satiric in William Wycherley's 'The Plain Dealer' and the shift toward the sentimental twenty years later in Colley Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift'. Firstly however, I am going to discuss each of the styles and establish the clear difference between them before exploring how each approach affects the components of the different plays. The two approaches give Restoration Comedy an additional purpose than simply entertaining the audience. The satirical held up human vices and follies to ridicule or scorn. A use of biting wit, irony or sarcasm intended to expose the harsh realities of society. The sentimental approach - more aptly termed as an exemplary form of comedy, hoped to fulfil a contrasting role to the satirical approach I think. I will now highlight the main differences to be discussed. One of the differences in the approach to playwriting is the effect the social background had on the satirical and the sentimental style. Another difference lies in characterisation. Restoration Comedy appears to have relied upon two particular components to make it successful. The first is its mission to recommend virtue and discountenance vice, be it by illustrating honestly a society filled with creatures of appetite, exemplified in 'The Plain Dealer', or, in the case of 'Love's Last Shift', presenting us with one such character converted to love with unlikely suddenness. The play's success as either a corrective or an exemplary comedy is drawn from the wittily dealt with moral issues within the plot and the responses of the characters towards them. This component gives Restoration Comedy its didactic quality. Its effectiveness depends on the play's success in reflecting the characters and manners of the period - approached differently in satiric and sentimental writing. This is the second component. '... There is a distinction between comedy regarded as the vehicle of corrective satire and comedy conceived as an almost exemplary display of social grace and witty refinement.' <fnote>Hume, R, D, The Development Of English Drama In The Late Seventeenth Century, P 37. </fnote>Stemming from the differences in character between the approaches a contrast in the humour of the plays. A satirical play depends a great deal on wit and sarcasm in order to expose human vice. Although exemplary or sentimental comedy makes use of satirical wit in a similar way, (particularly in the first four acts of 'Love's Last Shift'), " Four Acts for you coarse Palates were design'd,' it is identified through the use of a more genteel and pleasant humour. <fnote>Womersley, D, Ed, Restoration Drama An Anthology, 'Love's Last Shift', P 593. </fnote>It was the use of satire however, which made Wycherley's 'The Plain Dealer' so successful. Although the main intention of the plot is borrowed from Molière's 'Le Misanthrope', Wycherley's approach depicts a savage society illustrating exactly the way he viewed the world and human nature. This contrasts highly to the refined society presented by the French play. John Dryden wrote of the play, "The author of 'The Plain Dealer'...has obliged all honest and virtuous men by one of the most bold, most general, and most useful satires, which has ever been presented on the English theatre."  <fnote> URL  Search 'The Plain Dealer', Introduction. </fnote>Written twenty years before a sentimental approach to playwriting became popular, social consciousness is clearly apparent in the satiric style. Charles the Second wanted theatre to create images which asked questions of a moral and social type. It became a place where people were encouraged to ask questions. Underpinning the philosophy of the period was Thomas Hobbes, whose theories are built into the fabric of the Restoration Comedies. The theories of Hobbes make clear he was suspicious of mans' virtue. He observed that the inclination of all men was to gain power and dominate. "I put for a general inclination of all mankind, a perpetual and restless desire of Power after Power, that ceaseth only in Death." <fnote>From Hobbes's "Leveathan" (1651). Class handout. </fnote>Evident in 'The Plain Dealer', is Hobbes's theory that, 'Every man is enemy to every man', particularly through the characters of Manly, (in theory the hero of the play), and, in a world in which he believes only a few good men exist, the two people he trusts and is deceived by, Olivia and Vernish. In Act One, it is Manly who holds up human vice to scorn in a series of brutally honest speeches: <quote> "... Know that spreading well of all mankind, is the worst kind of Detraction; for it takes away the Reputation of the few good men in the world, by making all alike."</quote><fnote>Womersley, D, Ed, Restoration Drama An Anthology, 'The Plain Dealer', P 228. </fnote>He suggests ironically, that because he is 'an unmannerly sea fellow' he resists from spreading rumours and backstabbing people 'politely' behind their backs as Lord Plausible does. In his choice to 'weigh the man, not his title', Manly does indeed suggest some degree of moral credibility, however short lived it is. The respites in his speeches of disdain for mankind come when he talks of Vernish: <quote> "But in having that Friend, I have a thousand... I have trusted him with my mistress...and the trust of beauty, is sure the greatest we can show."</quote>And of Olivia: <quote> "She is not, I tell you like other women, but can keep her promise..."</quote>The prologue states that '...the coarse Dauber of the coming scenes To follow life, and Nature only means; Displays you as you are...' At the beginning and throughout Act Two, Olivia and her female companions reveal their true characters. Lettice complains that the world is censorious, malicious false and perfidious and Olivia promptly agrees that it is a very impertinent world. She then confidently admits that women are "like the rest of the cheats in the world'. After being praised by Manly, she proceeds to tell him calmly that she has married, in his absence, a "Man of so much Honour and Experience in the world". She truly lacks humanity. Although the play is based loosely on 'Le Misanthrope', the French style, affected by a vastly contrasting social consciousness to the English, is comparable to the 'The Plain Dealer' in a similar way to the sentimental approach. Both the French style and the sentimental follow a more genteel route. Although the same inhumane nature is explored in Alceste's character, Molière at least offers a different persona in the steady and easy-going friend, Philante. Wycherley's satirical approach makes no such allowance. Philante's closest parallel is Freeman, who makes quite clear his pursuit of Widow Blackacre's money. Using an unusual technique, Wycherley has taken different pieces of material from everywhere and shaped them into 'The Plain Dealer'. Through this method, the play encourages people to question that which the Epilogue anticipates: <quote> 'Of all Loves begs you then to Rail, find fault; For plays, like women, by the world are thought (when you speak well of them), very naught'.</quote>This suggests that Wycherley wanted people to see the play and see themselves in order to find fault with their society. The play is so true to life and honest that by disliking it they would dislike who they had become. When lifting Viola from 'Twelfth Night' and placing her amongst creatures of appetite in this play, Wycherley knew exactly what he was doing. She serves only the purpose of highlighting the characters' vices, ridiculing them further. She sees through Olivia's character: <quote> "Most ungrateful woman that ever lived...that could desert you so soon, use you so basely and so lately too".</quote>After trying in vain to notify Manly of his complete lack of morality: <quote> "But did you not say, Sir, your honour was dearer to you than your life? And would you have me contribute to the loss of that...?"</quote>She only succeeds in contributing to the uneasy equilibrium reached at the play's end. When she is revealed, Manly still fails to realise the horror of his actions: <quote> "The sense of my rough, hard and ill usage of you, (tho 'chiefly your own fault) gives me more pain now 'tis over, than you had, when you suffer'd it."</quote>The persistence of her devotion to Manly seems to reward him for his actions. In a world which appears to have no values, Fidelia only makes this clearer. 'The Plain Dealer' is a prime example of what the satirical approach to playwriting set out to achieve. Wycherley's play was written for an audience perfectly primed to be pleased and instructed by theatre which held a glass to a society in need of satiric correction. It is confusing to establish if there is a clear shift in the dominant concept of humour, or rather - when satirical humour ended and sentimental began. Many followers of Restoration Comedy claim that to suggest there was a definite point when Hobbesian ridicule was abolished by an exemplary and sympathetic approach is purely erroneous. Others disagree, 'The chaotic indirection of the comic types after the collapse of the sex boom (c. 1678) gives way to an almost schematically neat division between the 'new' humane comedy and the 'old' hard comedy..." Although the old comedy was enjoying its second great period at the time when a sentimental approach first became popular, Colley Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift', is considered to be the first of the sentimental or exemplary comedies. Again, this point is argued by those who think that, 'To include Cibber in the exemplary school would be preposterous. 'Love's Last Shift' capitalises on bathos, but it does not give us models for imitation in the manner of 'The Conscious Lovers'.' <fnote>Hume, R, D, The Development Of English Drama In The Late Seventeenth Century, P 382. </fnote><fnote>Hume, R, D, The Development Of English Drama In The Late Seventeenth Century, P 143. </fnote>It is true that for a number of years, the two approaches competed and it is apparent in most of the plays that both of them have been used. Richard Steele argues in his Apology (1714) that his first play, 'The Funeral Makers', 'Virtue and Vice appear just as they ought to do'. In his preface to 'The Conscious Lovers', eight years later, he sets out the argument for serious comedy: <quote> "The greatest effect of a play in reading is to excite the reader to go see it; and when he does so, it is then a play has the effect of example and precept.'</quote><fnote>Kenny, S, S, Ed, Steele, R, The Conscious Lovers, P 5. </fnote>This effect and the creation of moral characters may be more clearly apparent in 'The Conscious Lovers' in which Steele avoided a laughter based on ridiculing the foolish, preferring 'to address himself to the goodness of the heart', than in 'Love's Last Shift'. But considering Cibber's play was written twenty-six years before Steele's, it clearly shows the transition from a satiric to the exemplary approach to character that came to typify sentimental playwriting. Again social consciousness is apparent in the shift toward the exemplary approach. The play was well tailored to its time. Cibber had detected a new spirit emerging in the theatre and women were spearheading the change. Attitudes had become straighter laced and the sentimental approach was introduced to keep the ladies amongst the audience happy. Cibber tried to include something for everyone, balancing moments of the sexually titillating with the virtuous. The play's epilogue reflects Cibber's aim, reminding the ladies that 'There's not one Cuckold made', while begging the rakes to excuse the conclusion since, 'He's Lewd for Above four Acts Gentlemen!' The central character plot begins with a moral problem in the vein of the old comedic style. Loveless returns to England having previously left his wife, Amanda, after six months of marriage. Ten years on he is in debt, while she, having remained virtuous, has inherited money. For the majority of the play, Loveless is a typical Restoration rake. Similar to Manly's character he is untroubled by any reminder of conscience from his servant, Snap; <quote> "Your poor Wife at Home broke her heart for the loss of you..." </quote>Loveless carelessly responds: <quote> "I thought London might now be a place of uninterrupted pleasure; for I hear my Wife is dead: and to tell you the Truth, 'twas the staleness of her Love, was the main Cause of my going over."</quote>Untrustworthy as he is, I find him less of a villain than Manly, for his character is really one of a grown up boy who runs away from responsibility and likes variety: <quote> "The Joys of Love are only great when they are new; and to make 'em lasting, we must often change".</quote>Now in debt he has scuttled back home in need of help. Amanda appealed to an audience which was becoming tired of wit and cynicism. Completely different to the creatures of appetite monopolising the satiric approach, she is the epitome of virtue, 'Her conversation is sober, edifying and dull, never for a moment deviating into wit... She is, in short, the typical pathetic heroine of sentimental fiction.' <fnote>Barker, R, H, Mr Cibber Of Drury Lane P 23. </fnote>She reassures herself: <quote> "All the comfort of my life, is that I can tell my conscience I have been true to virtue."</quote>Slightly different to Olivia then! All except one of the remaining characters belong to the comedy of manners. Elder Worthy is sentimental, a sober gentleman in love with Hilaria, troubled by her apparent lack of constancy: <quote> Y. WORTHY: "Have her Actions spoke the contrary? Come you know she loves you." EL. WORTHY: "Indeed she gave a great proof on't last Night here in the park, by fasting on a Fool, and caressing him before my Face, when she might have so easily avoided him."</quote>Hillaria and Narcissa are typical coquettes. They are easier to believe in as women than the straight-laced, tight-lipped Amanda: <quote>HIL: "Well, dear Amanda, thou art the most constant wife I ever heard of, not to shake off the memory of an ill Husband, after eight or ten years absence... Young widows used to have warmer wishes. But methinks the death of a Rich old uncle should be a cordial to your sorrows." AM: "That adds to 'em; for he was the only Relation I had left, and was as tender to me as the nearest!"</quote>Young Worthy is the familiar fortune seeker and although however loose of temper, he is not so bad as Freeman in 'The Plain Dealer'. He congratulates himself on settling into matrimony but has ensured there is plenty of money thrown into the bargain for him. Not to be forgotten is his plan to aid Amanda in winning back Loveless' affection: <quote> "Leave the Management of all to me; I have a Trick shall draw him to your Bed..."</quote>It is difficult to judge the character of Sir Novelty Fashion remembering that he is the character Cibber wrote for himself. Although his foppery lends to much of the humour in the play, his false impression of modesty soon reveals a rude, conscienceless and brutal character untypical of a humane and exemplary comedy. <quote> 'It is apparent that Cibber was interested less in creating a consistent coxcomb than in displaying himself as an actor in a variety of moods...he cannot resist the rough and tumble of farce.'</quote><fnote>Barker, R, H, Mr Cibber Of Drury Lane, P 25. </fnote>Sir Novelty is certainly more farcical than the unthreatening, foolish creatures, Novell and Major Oldfox. However much of the play is written in the vein of the satiric approach, it is the ending of 'Love's Last Shift', more sentimental than anything which had gone before it, which is totally compliant with the exemplary approach. It is the entirely unconvincing final scenes which made the play so successful. Loveless' previous character and the unlikelihood he would ever be converted to love only make the conclusion more sentimentally effective: <quote>LOV: "Oh! Thou hast roused me from my deep lethargy of vice; for hithero my soul has been enslaved to loose desires, to vain deluding follies and shadows of substantial bliss..."</quote>It was the probably the response of the audience which inspired Steele's comments on serious comedy, if accounts claiming that "Honest tears were shed" for 'Love's Last Shift' are true. Steele argued that, "Tears which were shed...flowed from reason and good sense and that men ought not to be laughed at for weeping till we are come to a clear notion of what is to be imputed to the hardness of the head and the softness of the heart..." <fnote>Kenny, S, S, Ed, Steele, R, The Conscious Lovers, P 5. </fnote>The perfectly resolved conclusion was so unconvincing that it prompted Vanbrugh to write the more cynical sequel, 'The Relapse'. However, it is the honest reality of the play written for a society in need of correction and the 'highly seasoned theatrical dish compounded of naughtiness and sentimentality' written for audiences of changed taste, which is I feel, the primary difference between a satiric and a sentimental approach to playwriting. <fnote>Barker, R, H, Mr Cibber Of Drury Lane, P27. </fnote>-------------------------------- 