The term 'cultural diversity' can be interpreted in many different ways. In their manifesto 'Ambitions for the arts', the Arts Council of England state that, 'We will take the broadest interpretation - as meaning the full range and diversity of the culture of this country, but with a particular focus on race and social background." As important as planning an artistic programme which accommodates a full range and diversity of culture appears to be for the arts venues in Britain, ensuring social inclusion is also standard policy for most arts schemes. On the surface of these schemes, the outlook for the future of the arts and the constant attempt to make arts accessible for everyone looks promising. The Arts Council manifesto is full of good intentions and such promises as, 'we will adopt a more modern definition of the arts' and 'we will agree that being involved with the arts can have a lasting and transforming effect on many aspects of people's lives.' These are fine words indeed, and are reflected on the welcoming home pages and programme brochures of the many performing arts venues in Britain. There will undoubtedly be sections devoted to 'Education' and 'How to join in' as a member of the community with the services they provide. It is no surprise that performing arts venues are keen to promote themselves as providers of a positive service to the community, one that provides the finest experience and the best productions and events. West Midlands Arts, The Regional Arts Board, has identified priorities in theatre and drama, two of which include cultural diversity in theatre, 'by prioritising support for international visiting work which widens cultural horizons of both audiences and artists' and social inclusion, 'in particular in priority areas such as Youth and Disabled arts/artists; through support for organisations specialising in learning and the arts; and through the removal of physical and attitudinal impairments to practice, experience and management of theatre'.  <fnote> URL  Ambitions for the arts, Page 4. </fnote><fnote> URL  Theatre in the West Midlands: Introduction. </fnote><fnote> URL  Theatre in the West Midlands: Introduction. </fnote>Let us first create a more detailed definition of the terms social inclusion and cultural diversity before exploring how an arts venue may demonstrate a commitment to each one. It is obvious that the Arts Council itself is keen to illustrate its own awareness of the importance of these concepts. Particularly in recent years, in which a review, 'The Arts and Social Exclusion' was published in September 2001, and a seminar, 'The Shared Space - Cultural Diversity and the public domain' was held in February 2002. 'There has been growing policy and research interest in the social impact of the arts; more recently the focus of attention has been on the contribution of the arts to neighbourhood renewal and social inclusion.' <fnote>Helen Jermyn, The Arts and Social Exclusion: a review prepared for the Arts Council of England. </fnote>Social inclusion is about people. It is about everyone feeling part of the local community and playing an active role in making it better. Social inclusion covers a wide range of issues - from poverty and employment to health and education. Ultimately though, its purpose is to help in shaping future and the quality of life. In January 2001, the Arts Council of England commissioned research to explore different methods of social inclusion work occurring in the arts. Due to a recently increased awareness of the role the arts play in improving the quality of community life, closer attention has been paid to evaluate the impact of the arts by policy makers in Britain, leading to the decision of the Council to invest in the arts in disadvantaged communities and committing itself to measuring the impact of that investment. The Arts and Social Exclusion review states that research has suggested the role of the arts in supporting community development is vital. Social inclusion is a catalyst for generating community development. In seeking its role at the heart of community life, an arts venue must demonstrate a commitment to the concept of social in its artistic programme - not only in the productions it presents but also in the events and services it provides for the public. Of the many aspects of social inclusion, education often plays a major role in the work of an arts venue. I shall explore this further later on. The change in national demography and its impact on cultural life, which is one of the major challenges to contemporary cultural policy, was discussed at 'The Shared Space' seminar. One way of viewing cultural diversity is to focus on the relationship between ethnic minorities and the mainstream. However, 'The Shared Space' seminar discussed the difference between making more places within the mainstream for diverse populations and changing the working of the mainstream itself. 'The ability to accommodate diversity, in short, was seen as a core item in the health check of every organisation, indicating a broader ability to deal flexibly and creatively with change and to achieve a state of equity in management of the public cultural space." Similar to the increased awareness of the importance of social inclusion, the Arts Council's commitment to Cultural diversity progressed promisingly in April 2003 when the final year of their New Audiences programme was launched with a seminar addressing the promotion and development of South Asian Arts and South Asian audiences. For this essay I have decided to compare and contrast the artistic programmes of the Birmingham Hippodrome and Derby Playhouse. Each of these is located within a city; meaning greater competition is faced for them from other venues. Their locations also mean that the Hippodrome and the Playhouse attract audiences from a wide and broadly cultural area, as they are city regional theatres with large theatre-going sectors. Although the venues are similar in these ways, they are vastly contrasting in others. <fnote>Naseem Khan, The Shared Space - Cultural Diversity and the public domain, P16. </fnote>Derby Playhouse is a producing theatre. Nearly all its productions are Derby Playhouse productions, although sometimes in conjunction with another theatre. As the Derby Assembly Rooms and the Guildhall Theatre - both run by Derby City Council are located within the same audience catchments area, the artistic programme of the Playhouse predominantly consists of play productions. The Birmingham Hippodrome is primarily a non-producing venue although it is in partnership with the Birmingham Royal Ballet and DanceXchange - companies which are based at and perform there. Its recent multi-million pound development has turned it into 'One of the finest theatre complexes in the world and a majestic combination of tradition and modernity." This obviously allows for a broader artistic programme consisting of family musicals and West End shows, International works, classical ballet and opera as well as contemporary dance and dance classes under one roof. <fnote>Birmingham Hippodrome's 2003 Season Programme, P2. </fnote>The role of the audience is a major issue to the importance of social inclusion and cultural diversity. Birmingham and Derby are each demographically complex cities. The 1991 census revealed that 78.5%of Birmingham's population is white. Ethnic minorities form 21.5% of the population. It revealed that 21,144 persons belonged to ethnic minorities in Derby, which represents 9.7% of the population. In demonstrating a commitment to social inclusion, an arts venue must also show an awareness of the accommodation of all minority groups including the disabled, the young and the old. The Arts Council's 'Ambitions for the arts' highlights their importance, 'We recognise the transforming power of the arts in relation to young people...creative partnerships can bring about profound change in how education relates to the arts and vice versa...we want to see the same principle - putting people and high quality artists and art together to create transforming experiences - applied to other sectors and ages.'  <fnote> URL  Ambitions for the arts, P4. </fnote>Is there enough evidence to support that these intentions are being carried out in the artistic programmes of Derby Playhouse and Birmingham Hippodrome? Derby Playhouse is one of the most popular playhouses in the country. It won the Barclays Award for Most Welcoming Theatre in 1999. The list of productions during the period from August 2001 to the Spring/Summer Season of 2003 included a wide range of classical and twentieth century English plays including Shakespeare's 'The Merchant of Venice' and 'Banged Up' by Colin Prescod. The production repertoire includes a number of musicals and musical plays, one man/one woman shows and pantomime, performed by both professional and amateur companies. It is clear that the Playhouse is committed to social inclusion and cultural diversity. 'Strongly rooted in the community it serves, Derby Playhouse is a vibrant cultural resource for the East Midlands and the wider region." It works to provide 'diverse seasons of the highest quality drama and entertainment for all." They promote through workshops and education programmes and are committed to lifelong learning in and through the arts. Educational activities are on offer in and outside of the Playhouse. Activities include Education Days, workshops in the theatre and Backchats, which are after-show discussions with the cast and director - open to everyone and free of charge. Backstage Tours are also free of charge, open to schools and community groups of all ages. Available for primary and secondary school groups, The Playmakers Project incorporates artistic led out-of-hours performance arts activities. <fnote> URL  - About Us Page. </fnote><fnote> URL  - About Us Page. </fnote>Derby Playhouse strives to offer equal access to everyone. Through offering such facilities as discounted seating for people with disabilities, wheelchair spaces in the auditoriums, a sign interpreted performance before most of the Main Theatre productions, enhanced hearing headsets and large print and audio - cassette versions of the Playhouse brochure, the venue is certainly striving to uphold its commitment to social inclusion. Cross -cultural understanding is promoted through the BA.d scheme - which stands for Black and Asian development. The scheme presents a wide range of activities to the local community. Anyone interested in finding out more about other cultures is welcome to join. A further development in recent years is the Arts For Everyone funded Asian Arts Exchange programme, which has caused a great deal of interest amidst the region's Asian community. The BA.d scheme works on two levels of commitment to social inclusion and cultural diversity. Firstly, it increases the Playhouse's balance between different cultures and secondly, provides an excellent chance for community and individual involvement with the arts. All activities in the BA.d scheme provide the opportunity for the public to work with regional, national and international artists. Two schemes, the 'Hip Hop' and 'Bollywood' musical groups make theatre out of the art forms of Hip Hop; R.A.P, Djing, breakdance and Graffiti in the former and a mix of old and new forms of Bollywood song and dance music to create 'Asian Fusion' styles in the latter. The BA.d 'Presenters' and 'Company' groups strive to give the local community a voice through the exploration of learning and presenting skills. Focusing on issues of this decade, the BA.d Company produces new writing to develop productions reflecting the Black British and the British Asian experience. The BA.d Ambassadors project teaches the promotional skills necessary to represent Derby Playhouse locally, regionally and nationally. This also provides an excellent form of publicity for the BA.d scheme and the Playhouse itself whilst educating through the arts. 'Committed to quality, education, access and investment in both artists and audiences, Derby Playhouse aims to build on its position as one of the leaders in regional repertory theatre...'  <fnote> URL  - BA.d Page. </fnote>The BA.d scheme at Derby Playhouse plays an important in placing the reasonably small venue at the heart of community life. Being a much larger venue, Birmingham Hippodrome's commitment to social inclusion and cultural diversity is evident more in the productions it presents and the programme of events offered each season. Promoting themselves as 'A stage for the best in the world', the Hippodrome's programme features both international hit productions from world-renowned companies and artists. The season programme for 2003 includes the Welsh National Opera Season, musicals including 'Buddy', 'The Rocky Horror Show' and 'Miss Saigon', internationally popular productions - 'The Vagina Monologues' and 'Stomp', pantomime and ballet and the comedy double act 'Bottom'. This programme has a good balance of national and international events. However, although the productions appeal to all ages and tastes being therefore socially inclusive, there is no immediate evidence of a commitment to cultural diversity in the form of a scheme - like the Playhouses' BA.d scheme. A few of the pictures in the season brochure do show an awareness of this concept. For example, the picture of the black dancer advertising 'Stomp', and the group of women from many different cultures advertising 'The Vagina Monologues'. Perhaps more solid evidence of a commitment to the concept is found in the aims of the two dance companies to the Hippodrome is home to, the Birmingham Royal Ballet and Dancexchange. Performances from these companies take place in The Patrick Centre for the performing arts, which is located in the Hippodrome complex. The Patrick Centre is dedicated to the development of the performing arts and as well as dance, presents productions performed by The Birmingham School of Speech and Drama. Dancexchange in particular is dedicated to the development of the art form, helping to generate a better quality of life and promoting cultural diversity. By promoting dance as a social activity, the company '...targets groups that through perception feel excluded...offering increased access for everyone through the ethos of the organisation and affordability'. The company also provide the opportunity for the public to get involved, offering classes and workshops suitable for all, '...whether a complete beginner or professional dancer, toddler or OAP." To coincide with Birmingham's Year of Lifelong Learning 2003, and with the ambitions of the Arts Council, the Hippodrome is 'seeking more ways to involve our audiences...to encourage personal enrichment and continual learning. Education and community activity is central to our work...involving our audiences - young and not so young - is an important part of our vision'. These ideas are put into practice in the work of The BBS Spotlight, which offers Saturday morning drama and performing arts workshops for children and evening courses for adults. <fnote>Birmingham Hippodrome's 2003 Season Programme, P2. </fnote><fnote> URL , DX Profile page. </fnote><fnote>Birmingham Hippodrome's 2003 Season Programme, P 36. </fnote><fnote>Birmingham Hippodrome's 2003 Season Programme, P 37. </fnote>Also connected with Birmingham's Year of Lifelong Learning are many of the other events on offer at the Hippodrome. Similar to Derby Playhouse, the calendar of events includes post and pre-show talks, cast meetings, theatre tours and a story making class for 5-7 year olds. The accessibility awareness at the Hippodrome is similar to that at the Playhouse. It offers easy access for wheelchair users, an Audio Description Booth, an infrared amplification system for the deaf and lift access to most areas within the venue. The awareness of social inclusion and cultural diversity in the arts is increasing. As well as evidence of a commitment to these concepts in the artistic programmes of any performing arts venue in Britain, centres such as the Drum Arts Centre are dedicated solely to developing and promoting African, Asian and Caribbean arts and culture. The awareness of the importance of the social impact of the arts and education in the arts as a catalyst for generating community development is clearly reflected in the artistic programmes of Derby Playhouse and Birmingham Hippodrome. As is the accommodation of diversity, building positive hopes for a future striving to maintain a principle of equity in the public cultural space. --------------------------------- 