<quote>'The works now being written are leading towards that great epic theatre which corresponds to the sociological situation...they are not going to satisfy the old aesthetics; they are going to destroy it.'</quote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, Open letter to Fritz Sternberg, Berliner Borsen-Courier. </fnote>The word 'epic' describes a theatre of highly complex theoretical and practical ideas which took Brecht years to formulate. His passionate belief that theatre must not only reflect the world but most importantly, change it, was the predominant theme in his work. He used his theories of epic theatre to achieve this, indirect contradiction to the prevailing genre of naturalism. Brecht suggested that before his day theatre audiences were passive, hypnotised by the performance, ready to accept whatever was said by the actor as the truth. In his epic form he proposed a theatre which would not be 'dramatic', full of tensions and conflicts, but slower-paced, giving time to reflect and compare. Perhaps his greatest challenge was to create a theatre which would arouse the spectators' interest, even before the arousal of his capacity for action was considered. The interest of audiences past left much to be desired. In the eighteenth century many theatres provided curtains for the boxes, inside which the actresses could provide better entertainment than they ever could on the stage. Theatre riots and gallery protests, although certainly indicative of a lively audience in no danger of becoming hypnotised by the performance, nevertheless called for a change in perception. Brecht's first plays were written in the chaos of post-war Germany. The vivid experiences of war, revolution and economic collapse were reflective in a number of artists' work in the early 1920's. Brecht's work as a medical orderly in the war exposed him to a Germany consumed by the ferocity of fighting. So began his response to Germany's socio-political condition in this turbulent period recovering, wounded by war and already sprinkled with the seeds of future disaster. The Nazi's had still not established themselves as a dominant party, though street fights between them and the Communists recurred regularly. By the late twenties, Brecht had, as a convinced Marxist, become more involved in the political scene. A difficult figure to study in terms of his commitment and fluctuating beliefs, it is important to note the developments and changes in the work of a man who, whilst leaving the total dedication to Marx to others, endeavoured to create theatre in which 'instruction and entertainment conflict openly.' Challenging the dream world of Dramatic theatre, his theatre would pose problems and, far from solving them, was designed to leave the spectator with a task to be accomplished in the real world, hopefully gaining the interest of even those who found 'nothing on earth more difficult and more impenetrable than politics.' <fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Mother, P29. </fnote>I am particularly interested in Brecht's development as a playwright and will therefore examine three plays which trace this. These are The Threepenny Opera (1928), The Mother (1932) and The Good Person of Setzuan (1943). Each illustrates the progression in Brecht's use of epic technique, connected by their use of specific themes and particularly in their portrayal of the plight of the individual, yet are contrasting as political and economic factors changed the background of his work. The Threepenny Opera remains one of the more difficult Brechtian plays to interpret. It certainly appears more flippant than his later outspoken plays and is famous with its failure to provoke the audience reaction Brecht intended. It must be remembered that when he wrote the play he was only beginning to explore Marxism and he did not yet fully identify with class struggle. The play claimed by many as 'the most successful demonstration of the epic theatre...the first use of theatrical music in accordance with a new point of view', is the work of a man from a privileged background grappling with his earliest attempts to make a change. <fnote>Morley, Michael, Brecht: A Study, P36. </fnote>The Threepenny Opera premiered in an ominous time in Germany. Factories were by now used to seeing lunch time performances of revolutionary propaganda. Performance and music with political purpose became popular in the German Communist party. One extremely celebrated song by Erich Weinert (music by Hanns Eisler) contributed to the hatred caused by such material by the late 1920's, <quote>'What we are playing is class-struggle to a bloody melody, We give the enemy a hefty kick, And what we are playing is dynamite, Under the backside of the bourgeoisie.'</quote><fnote>Gray, Ronald, Brecht The Dramatist, P15. </fnote>The song was directed at Germans not of the working class and the passion created by its lines 'gives a slight taste of the atmosphere in which Brecht's indisputably Communist plays were written." If his work of the period reflected something of that mood it is hardly surprising. <fnote>Gray, Ronald, Brecht The Dramatist, P15. </fnote>The Threepenny Opera offers a different perspective to many of Brecht's other works. Aided in his Marxist study by leading Marx scholar Karl Korsch, the opera expresses an interest in how people relate to each other in Capitalist society. However, what is clearly a satiracle examination of the bourgeois society of the Weimar Republic, is elegantly set against the background of Victorian England's Soho. The play demonstrated the close relationship between the emotional life of the bourgeois and that of the criminal world. Brecht altered the angle of satire used in John Gay's version, The Beggars Opera, written 200 years previously. In the original, the target was an aristocracy whose affairs were much like those in the underworld: in Brecht, it is a bourgeois society which allows there to be an underworld at all. 'Brecht had wanted to parody the customs of the middle class through those of the thieving classes. He felt the irrational killer like character of the system - there is much less difference between a business man and a gangster than is commonly supposed..." Rather than sympathising with the situation of the proletariat, Brecht here pities the Capitalist system, where man can survive only if he 'tortures unceasingly, thieves, attacks, slits the throat of and devours his neighbour.' <fnote>Weideli, Walter, The Art of Bertolt Brecht, P27. </fnote><fnote>Weideli, Walter, The Art of Bertolt Brecht, P30. </fnote>In communicating his newfound philosophy that the rank and file of the oppressors is not all that different from the oppressed, Brecht weaves a number of themes into the opera which are duplicated in his later work. An example is that of business transcending love in an amoral, capitalist world. After seeing the list of charges against him, Macheath agrees that he should flee London, instructing Polly to take over the business. Polly is sentimental but he brusquely interrupts her and shows her the account ledgers. This replacement of love with business is a direct attack on Capitalist society in which emotions are subordinated to business transactions. This is further emphasised when Polly, in conflict with Lucy over Macheath comments, "I should have kept everything on a strict business footing", which serves to accuse the bourgeois or 'business class' of being unemotional and marrying only for money. <fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Threepenny Opera, P150. </fnote>In the final scene which sees Macheath continuing his struggle to rise above his position in society - eating asparagus for his final meal - he states, "No sentimentality" when Brown enters the cell. The issue of class re-emerges in Brecht's satirically happy ending where Macheath is released and knighted by the Queen. 'The hero of a traditional opera always triumphs, and Mac is the hero of the play even we cannot or do not want to identify with him." What is obviously a counterfeit ending is emphasised when Mrs Peachum says, "How nice and easy things would be if you could always reckon with the saviours on horseback." The traditionally happy ending goes further to mock the entertainment popular with the bourgeois class. They only see what they want to see, firm in the belief that a happy ending is a certainty, oblivious to all else. <fnote>Morley, Michael, Brecht: A Study, P38. </fnote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Threepenny Opera, P177. </fnote>The Threepenny Opera deals with bourgeois conceptions, by representing them and in the way they are represented. It summarises what the spectator in the theatre wishes to see in life. He is able to give the theatre a new function for, at the same time, he sees things he does not wish to see thus experiencing his wishes not only fulfilled on stage yet criticised at the same time. Theoretically. Brecht's epic devices intended to distance a newly awakened and alert audience found favour with its spectators for all the wrong reasons. The music for example was meant to become 'an active collaborator in the stripping bare of the middle class corpus of ideas." However, the subtleties were lost on audiences who probably saw nothing more than a new kind of opera, obviously different to the Wagnerian style of Gesamtungstwerk. And yet, 'A love duet was used to argue that superficial circumstances like the social origins of one's partner or her economic status should have no influence on a man's matrimonial decisions. A trio expressed concern at the fact the uncertainties of life on this planet apparently prevent the human race from following its natural inclinations towards goodness and decent behaviour." Could the audience not see themselves reflected by the criminals - 'an oppressing class, receiving the theories of revolutionaries with the most savage malice, the most furious hatred and the most unscrupulous campaigns of lies and slander'? <fnote>Morley, Michael, Brecht: A Study, P42. </fnote><fnote>Willett, John, Brecht On Theatre, P28. </fnote><fnote>Lenin, Vladimir, The State and Revolution, P1 of 12. </fnote>What should have shown the bourgeoisie the way things really were, driving into them the belief that things must be changed, became a piece of popular theatre certainly not remembered by the upper classes, those sharks whose murders were accomplished beneath an exterior of elegance and respectability. However, I think the play is an excellent example of the Leninist way of looking at the failures in society to determine why society needs Communism. It shows the bourgeoisie to be dependant on certain political and economic factors in order to survive as a class. The bourgeoisie itself supplies the proletariat with its own elements of political and general education; in other words, it supplies the proletariat with the weapons for its own destruction. The position of the proletariat keeps the upper classes where they are but this will change - its fall and the victory of the proletariat is inevitable, and man must realise this. Brecht is able to 'project a picture of the world by artistic means: models of men's life together such as could help the spectator to understand his social environment and both rationally and emotionally to master it.' <fnote>Willett, John, Brecht On Theatre, P30. </fnote>Brecht seems to have realised that the work was ineffectual in getting its message across, indicated by his subsequent switch to a more didactic form of theatre. <quote>'Between Capitalist and communist society, there lies the period of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. Corresponding to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.'</quote><fnote>Marxist Encyclopaedia, Socialism, P2 of 3. </fnote>Brecht turned his attention away from the bourgeoisie which had celebrated his Threepenny Opera without realising it was applauding its own cynicism. He was becoming steadily more politically minded and it is observed that it is only with his didactic works of the 1930's that the new theoretical requirements are clearly posed and met after the somewhat sketchy vision of the epic theatre conveyed by The Threepenny Opera. Because The Mother has been closely observed as the closest pairing of epic theatre history and practise, one would expect to find a play preventing the emotional identification on the part of the spectator, forcing him to respond in a cool and scientific manner. Theatre had become for Brecht a naked, political weapon. He decided to 'light a candle rather than curse the darkness. The matches and candles came courtesy of the Communist party. Lighting that candle with those matches in Berlin in 1932, while Hitler's rowdies roamed the streets, beating to a pulp any suspected Jew or Communist, was tantamount to searching for a large gas leak with a flame thrower." Perhaps Brecht, faced with Hitler's ominous rise to power created in Pelagea Vlasova, a character capable of sweeping the audience along, alerting them to the fascist threat, and involving them in resistance. <fnote>Fuegi, John, The Essential Brecht, P50. </fnote>It is difficult to contemplate what must have been the impact of Brecht's Lehrstücke before highly sympathetic audiences of Communist workers in those dark days immediately proceeding Hitler's rise to supreme power in the German state. It is no wonder why people question the intended reduced emotional response of the spectator. How could such songs as 'In Praise of Communism' and 'In Praise of the Revolutionary', produce feelings of distance or coolness specific to the Verfremdungseffekte, disjointing typical perceptions of the real world to make it the subject of renewed attentiveness? In one of his earliest attempts to define his form of theatre, Brecht says 'The essential thing about Epic Theatre is perhaps that it appeals more to the spectator's reason than to his feeling. It is not the case - although this has sometimes been alleged- that Epic Theatre ...raises the battle cry 'Reason versus feelings''. It does not renounce emotion. Epic Theatre is intended to evoke an emotional response, for example, pity for the workers who fail to seize their chances in The Mother. Brecht maintains that the spectators' conditioned response to the tragic experience is to think 'this character's suffering moves me because there is no way out for him', in contrast with 'this character's suffering moves me because there is a was out for him', when confronted with a similar situation in an epic performance. <fnote>Dickson, Keith A, Towards Utopia: A Study of Brecht, P228. </fnote>The character Pelagea Vlasova illustrates the simplicity and rationality of Communism - a movement which depends on questioning and study. We see the transition in this figure between Marxist theories and Lenin's interpretation of them. In order to accomplish his ends, Lenin had to alter Marxism drastically, transforming it from a doctrine which charted the course of inevitable developments in the most advanced nations into one that set forth a strategy and a rationale for revolutionary activity in its least advanced countries. One of the ties between Brecht's convictions and Marxist thought in the play is that capitalism can only be defeated by alliances of workers and that nothing is unchanging or unfixed. 'The response to epic theatre should be, Things can happen this way, but they can also happen a quite different way.' <fnote>Walter Benjamin in Kellner, Douglas, Brecht's Marxist Aesthetic, P3 of 9. </fnote>When the play opens, Vlasova is uninterested in politics. This is a crucial starting point as the majority of the audience would have been in her position. She then re-learns her role, from fretting that her soup is not good enough for her son, to eventually understanding that the Party is more important. Despite the fact she can no longer take care of him, the Party is regarded as drawing mother and son closer together, <quote>'How much better we got on when we talked about the cause we shared, third cause which bound us as one.' </quote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Mother, P49. </fnote>The position of the individual in The Mother highlights the difference in the view of the revolutionary figure held by Marx and Lenin. As Marx saw it, 'The Revolutionary is a doomed man. He has no personal interests, no affairs, sentiments, attachments, property, not even a name to his own." Lenin rejected this as the portrait of a fanatical terrorist but admitted that, 'absolute submission to a single will, for the purpose of achieving success in work, is unquestionably necessary." Vlasova signifies all those going on a journey from human empathy, sacrificing these values for the Party. There are connections here between herself and characters from The Threepenny Opera. There is no sentiment. When her son dies her political newspapers comfort her. Her only picture of him is on a wanted notice. She ranks the importance of food firmly over the importance of religion, 'Better a torn up bible than spilt food', as Macheath places food above morality. It is we who must debate whether the ends justify the means. Lenin would certainly agree they do. Although here lies the argument that Brecht, brilliant at studying the problems in society, is closer in his thinking to Marx than to Lenin, brilliant at formulating the solution. <fnote>Dickson, Keith A, Towards Utopia: A Study of Brecht, P55. </fnote><fnote>Dickson, Keith A, Towards Utopia: A Study of Brecht, P55. </fnote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Mother, P55. </fnote>Whether Brecht was confident in the value of his consciousness raising or not, Vlasova is a down-to earth realist who, facing up to the wrongs and injustices of the situation, makes a logical decision in favour of Communism. Her grief is moving without becoming sentimental, her defence of the Party direct and persuasive. She demonstrates that the cause depends strongly upon individuals united by a common purpose. The audience is shown how the individual is able to contribute his uniqueness in the fight for revolution. Brecht's positive ending (whether we believe it or not), concludes a play in which an individual works with the Party through pitfalls, negativity and the forsaking of all else to eventually shun the idea that 'we ought to be satisfied with what we have. The power of the ruling class is secure. We would always be beaten down again and again', and truly believe that 'those defeated today will be the victors of tomorrow.' <fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Mother, P25. </fnote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Mother, P64. </fnote>After The Mother, Brecht's dramas show a movement towards the development of a richer dramatic style and a rounded, often more ambivalent presentation of character. At first sight Shen Te, alone in her kindness to the visiting Gods, appears to be another example of the exceptional individual, seen earlier in Galileo, Mother Courage and The Mother. However, unlike Vlasova, Shen Te finds herself vainly trying to fulfil the wishes of the Gods to be good, not for the good of a collective cause but 'in a world in which the exploited suffer not only at the hands of the exploiters but also at the hands of their fellows: where to exist, the individual, instead of bestowing charity, must resort to the same methods that others practise.' <fnote>Morley, Micheal, Brecht: A Study, P47. </fnote>Shen Te thus concludes, <quote>'To be good to you, my son, I shall be a tigress to all others If I have to. And I shall have to.'</quote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Good Person of Setzuan, P83. </fnote>From the three plays I have explored in this essay, I think The Good Person of Setzuan illustrates most clearly the double nature of Brecht's Epic Theatre. There is certainly a balance between instruction and entertainment. The play is an essay on morality. Written as the Nazis marched into Denmark and Norway, Brecht deals with the problems of creating a just society. His plays matured hand in hand with his Marxist/Leninist world outlook and, as from The Threepenny Opera to The Mother, his ideas have developed further in The Good Person of Setzuan. The 'twin souls' principle as Brecht referred to it, evolves from man's wish for goodness thwarted by a society which depends on the exploitation of the individual. 'The twentieth century Marxist sets a view of life and society where 'Self Love' and 'Social' must inevitably be at odds with each other." Brecht highlights this conflict by dividing his protagonist into the 'good' Shen Te and the 'evil' Shui Ta. <fnote>Morley, Micheal, Brecht: A Study, P60. </fnote>In The Mother, Vlasova allows everything of importance in her life to fade into obscurity once she is devoted to the Party. This idea continues here, as it is precisely Shen Te's devotion to an impossible ideal which transforms her into her ruthless counterpart. When her charity seems likely to bring about her own ruin, she 'becomes' Shui Ta with the intention of being cruel to be kind. Here Brecht is throwing down the challenge of whether or not it pays to be charitable. Shen Te's goodness provides her with happy relationships which she loses with every appearance of Shui Ta. However, assuming the identity of her 'evil' cousin saves her from destruction and other events in the play constitute his occasional appearance as necessary, for he takes people and reshapes them, making disastrous situations work. And here the rather complicated connection with dialectics becomes evident. Shui Ta comes out of Shen Te's goodness and evolves into a completely different personality. For dialectics the form and content of something can be quite contradictory. 'Different forces will tug a man (or a family, or a society) in different directions, and out of this 'contradiction' some movement will come; then new forces will come into play..." In order to understand the opposite and contradictory sides of Shen Te and Shui Ta, it is important to examine what each personality gains and the pitfalls of each character. In this situation Shen Te, the 'Good Woman' representing charity and utopia is the thesis. In the world of Setzuan nobody works because she provides them with everything, eventually ending in her ruin. The antithesis is the Capitalist state which the alter ego Shui Ta uses to carve a way forward. He sets up a tobacco factory forcing all those whom Shen Te helped to work for him for low wages. The pilot, Sun, who embodies the attitude of the bourgeois who sees his wife as a mere instrument of production, develops through the work given to him by Shui Ta, enforcing the idea that in Communist society, accumulated labour is but a means to widen, to enrich and promote the existence of the labourer. 'At times, people complain in frustration that they lack the means to achieve their ends, or alternatively, that they can justify their corrupt methods of work by the lofty aims the pursue." For dialectics however, there is no contradiction between means and ends - when the objective is rightly understood, 'the material conditions (means) for its solution are already presented or at least in the course of formation." In the case of Shen Te/Shui Ta, the synthesis is the progress rather than the spoon-feeding of charity. Shui Ta embodies true Leninist characteristics of achieving goodness with a hard edge, acknowledging this is often necessary. Indeed, that Communism demands as much as capitalism that evil is done so that good may come. Ideally for the time in which the play was written, a connection between Leninism and Stalinism emerges here, 'Brecht points to the lineage between Lenin and Stalin, the achievement of Lenin in seizing power, and the regression of Stalin. Brecht suggests that the backwardness of the Soviet Union, stressed by Lenin, helped produce a situation in which an autocrat like Stalin could wield absolute power..." In the play, the backwardness of the society of Setzuan and the failure to conquer it are stressed by Shen Te which then produces the ideal situation for a Shui Ta personality to gain power. <fnote>Willett, John, The Theatre of Bertolt Brecht, P193. </fnote><fnote>Marxist Encyclopaedia, Dialectics, P1 of 3. </fnote><fnote>Marxist Encyclopaedia, Dialectics, P1 of 3. </fnote><fnote>Kellner, Douglas, Brecht's Marxist Aesthetic, P7 of 9. </fnote>The intended balance in epic theatre between instructive and entertaining elements is illustrated in the other characters and the humour throughout the play. It is suggested that the play is tragic in that it shows the impossibility of human goodness, but I disagree. I do not think the humour in the play can be doubted. For example, in the general conduct of all those whom Shen Te helps, <quote>HUSBAND: Boy, food! There's a bakery on the corner. Stuff your shirt full when they're not looking! SISTER-IN-LAW: Don't overlook the raspberry tarts!</quote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Good Person of Setzuan, P39. </fnote>Shen Te's reaction when she discovers Sun's true feelings towards her while disguised as Shui Ta is comic, as is every appearance of the Gods (whose exchanges with Wong the water seller, break up the action, providing an opportunity for discussion and re-appraisal of incidents and actions already staged). The Second God admits he is 'not too keen' on spiders while they negotiate lodgings in the first scene. Moreover, considering their dramatic and picturesque entrances and exits amidst floating clouds, they are incapable of offering any useful advice and their language, particularly after Shen Te's heartfelt confession in Scene 10 is humorous, <quote>FIRST GOD: Don't go on making yourself miserable, Shen Te! She's confused that's all! (He begins to bluster) Should the world be changed? How? By whom? The world should not be changed!'</quote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Good Person of Setzuan, P105. </fnote>Throughout The Good Person of Setzuan we are reminded of the common obstacles which hinder society striving to change (become Communist) evident also in The Threepenny Opera and The Mother. Love and sentiment are criticised here. Because Shen Te cannot love all men equally, she despairs and seeks to achieve her ends by cruelty. Love, in short paradoxically gives rise to capitalism. Love is shown to be a terrible misfortune because the individual is likely to be ruthlessly exploited, <quote>SHEN TE: When I heard his cunning laugh, I was afraid, but when I saw the holes in his shoes, I loved him dearly.'</quote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Good Person of Setzuan, P80. </fnote>None of Brecht's mature dramas present a solution, though each sign posts the path towards it. Indeed, The Good Person of Setzuan lacks the positive (if somewhat contrived) conclusions of The Threepenny Opera and The Mother. For this is the play of a Marxist dreamer, dissecting where society is in the present time. The audience is not forced to accept uncritically Brecht's opinion. 'They are presented with an examination of a set of circumstances which is intended to encourage them to arrive at a rational decision in favour of the Marxist message.'  <fnote>Morley, Micheal, Brecht: A Study, P42. </fnote>In all three of my chosen plays it is clear that man's decency and fairness does not provide the driving urge to 'change the world'- only the impossible standards, with all their dangers, spur men on. Even in the illustration of the most asocial actions and attitudes, some educational effect can be gained. The conclusion of The Good Person of Setzuan seems to suggest that Brecht has done all he can by educating/entertaining his audiences to look at the world with a view to change it. The final line in the play is an urgent and pressing declaration of his wishes, <quote>'It is for you to find a way my friends, To help good men arrive at happy ends. You write the happy ending to the play! There must, there must, there's got to be a way!'</quote><fnote>Brecht, Bertolt, The Good Person of Setzuan, P109. </fnote>