'Elite interviewing has filled our lives with adventure' writes Rubins. It remains a research method with considerable potential to be 'challenging, informative...and fun' argues Steward who sites this technique as the preferred empirical tool within political science. If successful the process can indeed provide considerable insight into political phenomena. Before one can establish why such a method is so popular we must first attempt to define such a term. The appeal of elite interviewing for researchers lies in its distinctive characteristics; the strengths and its relevance to political science must not be seen as mutually exclusive and thus will be dealt with collectively. If we are to accept elitist theories of modern democracies, then elite interviewing enables the researcher to gain a unique insight into the mind of key decision makers within politics. It also certainly involves an elevated level of prestige on the part of the researcher but this should not blind us from the richness of data which may be obtained given the opportunities which may arise in the process. However there remains a host of difficulties which must be considered. Gaining access to one's desired respondent is perhaps chief among such obstacles whilst the interview process itself can be incredibly time consuming. Critics question the honesty of responses given the often self-conscious manner of high profile political figures, and emphasise the influence of the 'interviewer effect'. Producing unreliable and idiosyncratic data are common charges held against elite interviewing. A lack of experience is detrimental whilst feminist critiques have highlighted the naïve nature of the received wisdom about the interview process. The issue of recording can also cause difficulties for the researcher as can the matters of location, security and personal safety. One can draw on examples but must remain aware of the fact that researcher's experiences have varied greatly depending upon how such difficulties have been managed. The lack of literature on the subject highlights the fact that it is hard to generalize from individual experiences. Despite the apparent imbalance between potential problems and the benefits of elite interviewing, if the former are overcome, this method can lead to significant advances in political science. <fnote>Quotation taken from Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.152 </fnote>Before we can assess the strengths and limitations of elite interviewing it is first necessary to define such a method. This can be done in terms of the target group - the elite being studied e.g. Members of Parliament, or by the research technique which commonly takes the form of a semi-structured interview. This form of interview means the interviewer is prepared to be flexible, in terms of the order in which topics are introduced and, perhaps more significantly, to let the interviewee develop ideas and speak more widely on issues raised. Thus, both questions and answers are open ended. The interviewer's outline may contain varying degrees of specification and detail; it may include a checklist of topics or a list of general questions providing a mere guideline. This way of conducting interviews is said to provide ample freedom for both the researcher and the elite member to enter discussion yet ensuring all relevant themes are covered. Steward argues that there exists a continuum from which researchers select a line of enquiry. At one end lies the free interview allowing the respondent to lead the discussion. At the other, there exists a highly structured questionnaire format. Where the elite interview lies is dependant upon factors such as time and rapport between researcher and respondent. In contrast with survey sampling, standardization is neither important nor necessary; there is no standard technique involved unlike with surveying in which the same questionnaire is administered to large numbers of informants. Elite interviewing does not yield data of equal value - some elites are more valued than others. Emphasised within all definitions of elite interviewing is that it should not stand alone as an individual research method. Triangulation implies that 'the best research on elites has utilized a combination of methodological approaches to deepen the research findings'. Let us now assess the relevance of elite interviewing for political science. <fnote>Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.152 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Burnham P, Gilland K, Grant W, and Layton-Henry Z. 'Research Methods in Politics' Basingstoke Hampshire, Palgrave MacMillan (2004) p.206 </fnote>Within American political science, data from behavioural analysis in the 1950s has given rise to contrasting theories of modern democracy. However, the general conclusion drawn was that local politics was dominated by elites. Mill's The Power Elite (1956) exposed the formidable dominance of the military-industrial complex in America during the Cold War. Miliband produced a similar exposure of the British elite in The State in Capitalist Society (1969). Burke argued the political elite are necessarily wise and able to act in the interests of the electorate providing moral and social leadership as intellectual members of society. Liberal and pluralist critics site the arguments of JS Mill who advocated the developmental potential of democracy enabling individual moral and educational progression. Pure elitist theory denies political equality and regards the majority as passive and apathetic. Perhaps such a stark assessment is less suitable in today's modern western democracies. However there remains a measure of consensus concerning the considerable power of political elites. Thus, proponents argue elite interviewing remains the most appropriate means of gaining insight into the minds of significant actors within the decision making process. Political scientists such as Williams, who emphasise the relevance of elite interviewing, adopt an interpretative approach. They are interested in the interpretations, perspectives and priorities of the respondent. It is argued that political science does not merely concern measured categories and standardized, quantifiable data but rather it is about investigating how key figures conceptualize and understand the political scene around them. It seems that one's outlook on elite interviewing is dependant upon how one defines political science. As a method of data collection interviews are highly flexible allowing changes to the line of enquiry even during the interview process. They require only limited equipment and in comparison to surveys, initiate a high response rate in that interviews are scheduled for a convenient time and location. Concerning validity Denscombe argues 'direct contact at the point of interview means data can be checked for accuracy and relevance as they are collected'. Elite interviewing is said to be highly suitable for data based on emotions or experiences, particularly those of a sensitive nature; such issues may require a measure of coaxing and careful handling possible within an interview situation. It has been argued that central to the appeal of elite interviewing to political scientists is its associated level of prestige. Elite interviewing is said to bring a level of excitement to research - a measure of 'academic glamour'. However, this should not overshadow the sheer depth of insight which can be gained from this method. It is argued that within elite interviewing there exists a distinctive yet advantageous balance of power at odds with any other research method available to the political scientist. When interviewing elites the balance of power is said to rest with the respondent. It is he or she who possesses an elevated status, a high degree of knowledge about the issue in question and commonly possesses high expressive abilities given the professional nature of their position. Whilst it remains important for the researcher to be well informed about the issues, the content of the interview depends less upon his or her knowledge but rather, upon the freedom given to the interviewee. Researchers also depend on interviewees for opening up further lines of enquiry. <fnote>Quotation taken from Corbetta P. 'Social Research Methods - Theory, Methods and Techniques' London, SAGE Publications Ltd (2003) p.136 </fnote>Once access to one's desired respondent has been achieved the researcher is likely to be given a number of opportunities to acquire additional information from his/her informant. Both Williams and Steward highlight the accommodating nature of many of their interviewees once they had agreed to be interviewed. Once an initial interview has been secured a common technique for determining who else to target is to ask one's respondent. The 'Snowball' method, as it is known, can unveil valuable contacts. Williams states how some three quarters of his correspondents were a result of this method. Steward writes 'When interviewing EU officials in Brussels... I found myself being propelled along corridors to meet 'X who's working on a related topic' or 'Y who's interested in this area'. 'One significant advantage of interviewing...proved to be the access to documentation which arose as a direct by-product' states Williams. Steward goes on to describe how she was 'given the opportunity to use organization and personal archives'. She emphasises the importance of not passing up these opportunities but allowing for extra time in which such occasions can be exploited - 'strike while the iron's hot'. 'Without the interviews it is clear little documentation would have come my way' argues Williams. Let us now turn to discuss some of the problems researchers face in elite interviewing and the limitations of this method. <fnote>Quotation taken from Williams P. (1980) 'Interviewing Politicians: The Life of Hugh Gaitskell' Political Quarterly col. 51, p.312 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.156 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Williams P. (1980) 'Interviewing Politicians: The Life of Hugh Gaitskell' Political Quarterly col. 51, p.313 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.157 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Williams P. (1980) 'Interviewing Politicians: The Life of Hugh Gaitskell' Political Quarterly col. 51, p.313 </fnote>Perhaps considered most prominent among the limitations of this research method are the difficulties associated with gaining access and the sheer level of time consumption. High profile individuals may be particularly busy and will require convincing. It may prove particularly difficult to gain access to MPs and ministers who are frequently contacted by researchers and have a host of other professional commitments e.g. parliamentary, media and constituency sessions. Steward stresses the importance of one's initial contact with an informant. Concerted effort and careful preparation is required on the part of the researcher in the form of a letter in which one should briefly outline the research project and point out to the interviewee some benefit of their participation. The researcher needs to inform the prospective informant of how he or she can be contacted. Steward highlights the importance of the use of departmental headed-notepaper so the recipient is aware of the one's institutional affiliation. Telephone calls require the researcher to be 'prepared, polite and persistent'. Researchers are commonly 'fobbed off' by gatekeepers used to dealing with such people or directed to 'one size fits all' programmes whereby the researcher's contact with actual elites is minimal. Rivera, Kozyreva and Sarosvkii note 'respondents in more politically unstable environments may be a good deal more suspicious' if approached by researchers. It may prove easier to gain access to elites in established democracies. However, elites in foreign countries may be more accommodating if they feel they are able to learn something of the politics within the researcher's native country. Either way, these points illustrate the difficulties that researchers face concerning access. Estimates vary with regards to the average time spent on the interview process. Steward recommends no more than four interviews in a day although perhaps even this is a rather ambitious target when one considers the implications of travel, analysis and review. For young and inexperienced researchers the interview process can be draining, demanding high levels of concentration. 'Buffer time' needs to be accounted for so that unforeseen circumstances can be handled. Given the difficulties in gaining access and the time intensive nature of elite interviewing it is essential that the researcher has ensured the information he or she requires cannot be found elsewhere - 'the golden rule is to make the most of the time you have allotted'. Questions can be sorted into essential, necessary and desirable categories. It is also important that the researcher knows as much about the topic as possible prior to the interview. Many researchers are over-ambitious in the number of interviewees they seek to conduct. The researcher has to learn to recognise the point at which the interview return is minimal - the 'saturation point'. This will commonly depend upon levels of experience. <fnote>Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.153 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.154 </fnote><fnote>Grant W. 'Elite Interviewing' Lecture, University of Warwick (2005) </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Burnham P, Gilland K, Grant W, and Layton-Henry Z. 'Research Methods in Politics' Basingstoke Hampshire, Palgrave MacMillan (2004) p.208 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.155 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Burnham P, Gilland K, Grant W, and Layton-Henry Z. 'Research Methods in Politics' Basingstoke Hampshire, Palgrave MacMillan (2004) p.208 </fnote>A lack of experience itself can create limitations within the process of elite interviewing. The researcher has to decide whether the technique is suitable for his/her own personality. Techniques can be learned and skills can be developed but it remains only natural that some make better interviewers than others. Williams argues that his own personal status as a biographer was influential in getting access to members of elites but goes on to say how he had, on occasion, failed to give politicians sufficient freedom to voice their opinions. Securing access can simply depend on who you know. Williams describes how Labour MP Anthony Crosland happened to have been his closest friend as undergraduates and who was thus 'always entirely frank with me'. Steward describes how the process of conducting a semi-structured interview becomes easier with experience. The inherent paradox, she argues, is that with increased experience, the more an interview seems like a normal conversation - it is crucial to keep site on one's objective and to remember that it never actually is. Related to experience is the realisation that some groups of elites make better interviewees than others. Williams describes the difficulties he faced when it came to interviewing trade union leaders who tended to be 'difficult, hard to contact, sometimes reticent to the point of suspicion, in other cases talkative but rambling and irrelevant'. In contrast civil servants are widely regarded as a valuable source - 'professional politician-watchers, forever comparing their style and approach' writes Williams, who made great use of interviews with civil servants in his biography of the former Labour Chancellor Hugh Gaitskell. Williams highlights the self-conscious nature of politicians as respondents which caused numerous problems. Political opponents of Gaitskell would, perhaps subconsciously, go out of their way to find something favourable to say about him. More frequently politicians may adapt their views about the past to fit a stance they adopted later. This habit to interpret the past in the light of present events makes it impossible to accept all they say at face value. The question of honesty on the part of the interviewee is also questioned by critics who emphasise the influence of the interviewer effect. <fnote>Williams P. (1980) 'Interviewing Politicians: The Life of Hugh Gaitskell' Political Quarterly col. 51, p.306 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Williams P. (1980) 'Interviewing Politicians: The Life of Hugh Gaitskell' Political Quarterly col. 51, p.311 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Williams P. (1980) 'Interviewing Politicians: The Life of Hugh Gaitskell' Political Quarterly col. 51, p.304 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Williams P. (1980) 'Interviewing Politicians: The Life of Hugh Gaitskell' Political Quarterly col. 51, p.304 </fnote>Aside from the common criticism that elite interviewing produces atypical and unrepresentative data, it is also argued that the validity of elite interviewing is threatened by the interviewer effect. The sex, age and ethnic origin of the interviewer affects the amount of information the interviewee is willing to divulge. The personal identity of the interviewer will affect the level of rapport between the two participants. In Rubin's seven stage interview model, building rapport is considered an essential stage and best set at the beginning if the interviewer is to obtain honest responses. Finch states that women interviewing women can often minimise the process of building rapport. Similarly, shared class, ethnicity or nationality can perform the same function. Such issues are rarely alluded to in literature upon elite interviewing argues Oakley, who questions the received wisdom on the interviewing technique - despite the interview situation, certain social norms have to be obeyed e.g. the interviewee may ask questions of the researcher. Politicians may ask researchers of their political ambitions. Sexism, homophobia or generally patronizing attitudes can all be involved in the interview process. Hogget writes that the accounts of methodology within textbooks represent 'sanitised versions of a much messier reality'. Concerning presentation researchers are advised to be punctual and to dress in a manner that would suit the professional environment of the interviewee. Good interviewing requires sensitivity and attentiveness and for the interviewer to be able to tolerate silences without becoming anxious. The effective use of probes and prompts is also a skill an interviewer must acquire. The issue of how to record the interview is also a potential source of problems. The use of a tape recorder requires permission and may inhibit the informant - the situation may feel somewhat artificial. The use of a tape recorder and note-taking is advised. One must ensure sound quality is audible. For similar reasons, concerning location, researchers are advised against conducting interviews in bars or busy cafes or over lunch for all such circumstances can complicate proceedings. <fnote>Grant W. 'Elite Interviewing' Lecture, University of Warwick (2005) </fnote><fnote>Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.160 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.160 </fnote>One would perhaps not associate the issues of personal safety and security with political science research but within elite interviewing these are concerns which must be addressed. Steward describes a time in which she could not meet an activist from an anti-racist organization at his office for fear of arson attacks from nearby extreme right-wing groups. Although infrequent, sexual harassment is more commonly conducted towards female interviewers than towards male researchers. In unfamiliar locations researchers often conduct interviews in pairs for matters of safety. <fnote>Steward G. 'On the Record: An Introduction to Interviewing' in Burnham P. 'Surveying the Research Process in Politics' London, Pinter (1997) p.158 </fnote>Thus, despite the host of difficulties and the perhaps perceived imbalance between the number of obstacles and limitations against the advantages and strengths of elite interviewing, if overcome, elite interview can be incredibly beneficial to the field of political science. If we are to accept a somewhat elitist approach towards modern democratic systems, that is say that significant decisions are now made by small groups of highly qualified and knowledgeable individuals, then elite interviewing remains the most relevant and insightful method in seeking to understand the perceptions of such actors. This said, those who advocate elite interviewing also stress the importance of triangulation. Elite interviewing must be used in tandem with other methods of political science research to produce coherent and supportive data. Whilst the emergence of online elite interviewing, developed at the Department of Political Science in Australian National University, may minimise some of the potential problems such as lack of time and finances, it seems there can be no substitute for ample preparation and experience. 