<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This essay begins by investigating quaternions. The emphasis is on their relations to rotations in four dimensions. It then progresses to a more general overview of division algebras with the aim of investigating proofs by Hurwitz and Frobenius. It then explores the Cayley-Dickson construction and a brief foray into the octonions and SO(8). It closes with a brief account of the Freudenthal square, a relationship between the normed division algebras and the exceptional Lie algebras. Acknowledgements: Thanks to Tim Honeywill, Professor David Mond and Geraint Williams for advice, guidance and inspiration and above all to Dr. Allan Muir for without his skill, wisdom and patience this essay would not have been possible. </abstract><heading>1 Introduction: Real and Complex Numbers</heading> FORMULA  and  FORMULA  are both normed division algebras. An algebra is a vector space with a multiplication and left and right distributivity. A division algebra is an algebra A such that if ab = 0 then a = 0 or b = 0 for  FORMULA . A normed division algebra is an algebra with the additional property that A is a normed vector space with  FORMULA  where  FORMULA  is the norm of the elements and  FORMULA . "This implies that A is a division algebra and that  FORMULA ." [B2002] That  FORMULA  is a division algebra is easily seen. We have  FORMULA  so  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  is a normed algebra. We also see that  FORMULA  generates SO(2), the groups of rotations in two-dimensional space. When  FORMULA , the map  FORMULA  is an isometry. We see that when  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  is a rotation. This follows from  FORMULA . Theorem 1. The group SO(2) consists of all multiplications  FORMULA  by complex units. Proof: The matrix of the rotation is  FORMULA . We can see that det R = 1 so  FORMULA . • This essay will explore other such algebras and investigate hypercomplex numbers. We will also research some applications to geometry, uses in rotations, construction of hyperdimensional objects and some interesting algebras. 2 Dual, Double and  FORMULA  Take a number of the form a + bi for  FORMULA . Let us find a rule satisfying  FORMULA  for  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and such that the distributive law is satisfied. We require that  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . We can see that this multiplication  is both commutative and associative. Then we can write  FORMULA . There are three cases to consider KS89 , the first being  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . This means that a + bi can be written as  FORMULA  with  FORMULA , the complex numbers. The second case is  FORMULA . Then we set  FORMULA . So a + bi may be written as  FORMULA  with  FORMULA . These are the double numbers. The third case is  FORMULA . We have  FORMULA , we may write a + bi as  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  These are the dual numbers. <heading>3 Quaternions</heading>The story of William Rowan Hamilton and his discovery of quaternions is familiar to all [H2004]. His 'Eureka!' moment and subsequent etching of the relation  FORMULA  into the stone of the Brougham bridge is part of mathematical legend. Quaternions become familiar during some elementary course in the algebra of rings. However, it was probably discussed as a brief example of a division ring with only a brief mention as regards to rotation.  FORMULA  is a beautiful object to consider and some of its applications to rotations in three and four dimensional Euclidean space are equally beautiful, if not more so. Hamilton was interested by how  FORMULA  was linked to 2-dimensional Euclidean geometry. He was desperate to find an algebra serving the same purpose for 3-dimensions. He later wrote that his son, William Edwin, would ask at breakfast: "Well, Papa, can you multiply triplets". His answer was always: "No, I can only add and subtract them" [H2004, H2000]. William Edwin was referring to Hamilton's attempts to construct an algebra with elements of the form z = a + bi + cj where  FORMULA . Addition is a simple matter but, as Hamilton discovered, multiplication proves to be a much more complicated issue. We need a rule satisfying  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and such that the distributive law is satisfied. Let us use  FORMULA . This is easily seen to satisfy the above requirements. We also notice that the multiplication rule is commutative and associative. The problem arises when we come to division. Take  FORMULA  and we see that this equation has no solution. It can be shown that for ever multiplication rule satisfying the above conditions, there exist z 1,z2 such that z1x = z2 has no solution. Hamilton's own block was caused by (a + bi + cj)2. He was considering triplets with i2 = j2 = - 1 and expected to have (a + bi + cj)2 = a2 - b2 - c2 + 2abi + 2acj + 2bcij. The problem lay in the fact that Hamilton required  FORMULA , to form a division algebra. We see  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . leading Hamilton to consider the, somewhat absurd, requirement that ij = 0. Then he realised that (a + bi + cj)2 = a2 - b2 - c2+2abi+2acj+bc(ij+ji) and that he could then write k = ji = - ij with k linearly independent of i and j. This was quite a breakthrough, since anticommutativity was not often considered at this time. Then came the inspiration while walking alongside the Royal Canal and quaternions were born. We recall that a quaternion is an element (a, b, c, d) of  FORMULA . The quaternion is usually expressed, with respect to a basis {1, i,j, k}, in the familiar form a + bi + cj + dk. We may multiply a pair of quaternion expressions using the distributive law and employing the basic relations:  FORMULA . So we see that for two quaternions a = a1+a2i + a3j + a4k and b = b1 + b2i + b3j + b4k we have  FORMULA . The algebra formed by this operation of quaternion multiplication is commonly denoted as  FORMULA . Example 1. Take the quaternion  FORMULA . We may write this as  FORMULA . It is easily seen that  FORMULA in the same way that  FORMULA can be written  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . For each quaternion q = a + bi + cj + dk there exists a conjugate quaternion  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . It is also true that  FORMULA  which is strictly positive for all quaternions except the zero quaternion. This means that a norm  FORMULA  may be defined and hence an inverse  FORMULA  for all q = 0. We see that  FORMULA  implying Lagrange's four-square theorem, every positive integer is the sum of four squares, through Euler's four-square identity  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . Theorem 2. H is a non-commutative, associative division algebra. Proof: When we show that  FORMULA  is a ring, we need only investigate distributivity and associativity.. Multiplicative associativity can be easily shown:  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  We can show distributivity since  FORMULA  and right distributivity is shown similarly. Now, for  FORMULA  let us have xy = 0, then  FORMULA . One of the norms must be zero, without loss of generality say  FORMULA . The norm is zero when the components of x are zero, hence x = 0. Then, since this proves that  FORMULA  is an integral domain, it is simple to show that there is a muliplicative inverse and thus prove the theorem. So we now have that the quaternions  FORMULA  are a non-commutative, associative division algebra. As an alternative proof, let  FORMULA  be the real algebra that has the basis 1,i,j,k under the usual relations. Then, with some work, we can see that this defines an associative algebra structure on the real algebra  FORMULA . We consider the real linear automophism  FORMULA  given by  FORMULA . We see  FORMULA . We define  FORMULA  so that  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . So  FORMULA  is an associative division algebra. • There are many other useful representations of this algebra, most commonly used and useful forms are the following. 1. A quaternion q = a + bi + cj + dk may be considered as a formal sum of the scalar element a and the element x = bi + cj + dk of  FORMULA . Multiplication of two quaternions of this form  FORMULA  takes a form expressible in terms of the dot and cross products of 3-dimensional vector algebra:  FORMULA  2. Let us denote the imaginary element of  FORMULA  as I. This is so as to avoid confusion with the quaternion basis element, i. The matrices  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  satisfy the same relations as i,j, k. We can also introduce the unit matrix element,  FORMULA , for the first quaternion basis element we find  FORMULA . This has the form  FORMULA  for  FORMULA  We note that the associativity of quaternions now follows automatically from that of matrices. An interesting thought here is to consider the quaternion group group  FORMULA . We see  FORMULA , with  FORMULA  if we say j = ik. We then have a representation  FORMULA  with  FORMULA  being the group of invertible 2x2 matrices with entries in  FORMULA  - with  FORMULA  with  FORMULA .  FORMULA  is a representation since  FORMULA  so  FORMULA  is a homomorphism. Furthermore,  FORMULA  where  FORMULA  is the group generated by A,B since it is obvious that there is a bijection  FORMULA  and hence isomorphism [JL2004]. 3. We now fix the quaternion q = a + bi + cj + dk and then consider the function  FORMULA , left multiplication by q, that is given by  FORMULA . We note that the composition of functions such as this is given by  FORMULA . Then we deduce  FORMULA  and we note that this depends essentially upon the associativity of quaternion multiplication; this point is worth remarking on, because the higher-dimensional algebra of octonions is not associative so the same procedure cannot be carried through. We discuss this in detail later on. Since Lq is a linear operation on  FORMULA  we can get a matrix representation for it, and hence for q, by examining how it acts upon the standard basis {1, i,j, k}. This yields  FORMULA  Obviously this can be written in the form  FORMULA  with Ai being standard 4x4 matrices which again behave algebraically like the quaternion basis. Note, one can similarly define a linear map  FORMULA  by  FORMULA  but to get a similar application of associativity one needs to work with representation by transposed matrices. There are many intriguing relationships to be explored between these different representations and are worth exploring simply for entertainment and interest's sake. An interesting fact is noted below. A Lie group is a set G which has both group structure and k-manifold structure for  FORMULA , with both the maps  FORMULA  defined by  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  given by  FORMULA  being differentiable. That is, G is a subset  FORMULA  which is diffeomorphic to  FORMULA  and is associative, closed, has multiplicative inverse and identity, Now, Theorem 3. H is a Lie group. Proof: H is diffeomorphic to  FORMULA . Hence  FORMULA  is a 4-manifold since we can see  FORMULA  is bijective and  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  are differentiable. It is easily seen that  FORMULA  has group structure under addition as well as multiplication. Then the condition that there exists a map  FORMULA  is satisfied. • <heading>4 Quaternions and Rotations</heading>Let us suppose that q is an unit quaternion, defined as a quaternion of norm 1, so that we have  FORMULA . Let x be a quaternion of the form bi + cj + dk such that  FORMULA . We can treat it as an ordinary element of  FORMULA , since its norm is the usual Euclidean norm. Then, we have  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . The map  FORMULA  preserves lengths. We can see that it then follows that this linear map will define a rotation of 3-dimensional Euclidean space. A homomorphism is defined from the multiplicative structure of  FORMULA  to the group special orthogonal group SO(3) of rotations in Euclidean three-space. This means that the multiplication of quaternions is mapped to the composition of rotations. Theorem 4. The map FORMULA  is onto. Proof: All elements of SO(3) are determined by both a unit vector  FORMULA , in  FORMULA , considered as the axis of the rotation and an angle  FORMULA  considered as the angle of rotation around  FORMULA . Note: There exists a slight ambiguity here since a rotation through  FORMULA  about the axis  FORMULA  gives the same result as a rotation through  FORMULA  about the axis  FORMULA . We shall now consider the quaternion  FORMULA Our goal will be to show that it will map to this rotation. Consider  FORMULA  It is obvious that n commutes with both the terms of q so we can re-write the product as  FORMULA , since q is a unit quaternion. Thus  FORMULA  is invariant under the rotation induced from q and it follows that it is the axis of that rotation. Let us consider an unit vector  FORMULA  and let this vector be perpendicular to  FORMULA , so  FORMULA . Using the scalar-vector notation which has been discussed previously, we see  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . This gives  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . So  FORMULA is in the positive sense of the rotation from  FORMULA  to  FORMULA . Any rotation may be captured by a unit quaternion mapping of the form  FORMULA , so we can now observe that this mapping is actually 2:1 since we know that  FORMULA  gives the same rotation. So we see that this can be used to to resolve the ambiguity noted above. • <heading>5 Loose ends</heading>We may pursue this a bit further by taking note of the fact that for unit quaternions, the 2x2 complex representation discussed in a previous section is a unitary matrix  FORMULA . So we have  FORMULA  since  FORMULA  and furthermore  FORMULA . The set of unit quaternions forms a group under multiplication which is isomorphic to the special unitary group in two dimensions, SU(2). In general, SU(n) denotes the group of complex, n x n unitary matrices with determinant 1. After his discovery, Hamilton dedicated his life to quaternions and their application to geometry. Many universities used quaternions for work in  FORMULA , as naturally as vectors and scalars are the standard method in the present day. There were quite a few battles fought between the 'vectorists' and the 'quaternionists', although vectors were finally accepted as the standard. Indeed, many mathematicians and physicists were particularly vicious about quaternions. Kelvin himself opined, "Though beautifully ingenious, the quaternions have been an unmixed evil to those who have touched them in any way". Faced with opposition by luminaries such as Kelvin, it is not surprising that vectors were victorious over quaternions. It must be noted, however, that vectors are much simpler to use, although their use is quite mechanical and not as much fun as the quaternions. The development in the understanding of linear algebra, means that many of the amusing properties of quaternions can equally and sometimes more profitably seen as a special case of a matrix group. This is in fact a great pity since quaternions are beautiful objects, worthy of study although they are not regarded as highly as they have been in the past. The above theorem relating quaternions to three-dimensional rotations may simply be regarded as a group homomorphism  FORMULA . Simply put, it is a representation of the group SU(2) by real 3x3 matrices. The mapping was shown earlier to be 2:1 so the inverse map cannot be regarded as a representation of SO(3) by complex 2x2 matrices. However, it is a kind of double-valued representation, if we allow ourselves to be a bit lax regarding the double-valued nature of the inverse mapping. Namely, it is what is known as a spinor representation. It is possible to put an equivalence relation on SU(2) such that  FORMULA  are equivalent. Then the inverse map may be treated as a one-one map from SO(3) to the set of equivalence classes. For  FORMULA , the double cover of SO(n) is Spin(n) [H2003, CS2003]. What are spinors? Spinors are two-component complex column vectors. They were discovered by Elie Cartan and re-invented by Pauli and Dirac to describe spin, a fundamental property of the elementary particles. An n-dimensional spinor of a certain type is an element of the vector space on which a real Lie group called the spinor group Spin(p,q) acts [C81]. Spinors first became prominent with the advent of quantum mechanics. This happened when Dirac realised that a spinor representation of an electron's state was required for the correct relativistic equations for describing the electron. In quantum theory the double-valuedness is not a big obstacle as in classical physics since the observable properties of a system are expressed through quadratic expressions of the wave function, removing the  FORMULA  factor. They are still used today within particle physics where bosons and fermions require either tensor or spinor descriptions. They are also used within research on loop quantum gravity, the main rival of M-theory as a budding GUT. <heading>6 The Tetrahedral Group</heading>Here follows a fantastic diversion for the next two sections. As we know, there are five regular or 'Platonic' solids. Namely these are the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, icosahedron and the dodecahedron. Now an unit quaternion can represent a rotation in 3-dimensional Euclidean space. The rotation groups of these solids are useful in other areas of mathematics but here we ask how does this relate to quaternion rotations? First consider a regular tetrahedron ABCD in which the vertices are arranged so that by looking inwards from the vertex D towards the mid-point of the opposite face, the order of the vertices ABC in that face is clockwise. Such a direction will be referred to as an outward-pointing normal to the tetrahedron. We can achieve any even permutation of {A, B, C, D} by a rotation, so that the group of rotations is A4, with  FORMULA . There are three distinct types of group elements. First are the rotations which fix a single vertex. For example, we find a rotation leaving D fixed and cyclically permuting (ABC) by rotating about the outward pointing normal to the face ABC through  FORMULA . Let us call this rotation D1. D1 2 is a rotation through  FORMULA  about the same normal. We call this rotation D2. A1, A2, B1, B2, C1, C2 are similarly defined. We now define the second type of rotation through  FORMULA  about the line perpendicular to the two edges AB, CD. We shall denote this rotation AB, the permutation (AB)(CD). Rotations AC and AD are similarly defined. The third type of rotation is the identity Id. The cubes of the first type and the squares of the second type are equal to Id. We only need two examples to generate these rotations. Let us choose D1 and A2. Denote these by a, b and the other permutations may be calculated as:  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA   FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA   FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . The presentation of the group is  FORMULA . Let us describe the tetrahedron in coordinate form. Opposite edges are at right angles so we can arrange AB parallel to the y-axis and symmetrically placed with respect to the x - z-plane but below the x - y-plane. We then write  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . We arrange CD parallel to the x-axis, symmetrically placed with respect to the y - z-plane and above the x - y-plane. Then  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . Letting the edges be of the same length and the position vectors be unit vectors we have  FORMULA  Using the quaternion formula for a rotation we have  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . The quaternion representations of the remaining rotations may be calculated from the presentation given above. <heading>7 A Four Dimensional Regular Hypersolid - The 24-Cell</heading>We consider quaternions corresponding to elements of A4, together with their negatives. We can take these quaternions as 24 distinct points in four dimensions. They are unit quaternions and so lie on the surface of the unit 4-sphere  FORMULA . These points are taken as vertices of a hypersolid and form a polyhedron by joining each vertex to its nearest neighbours. We may define distance on the surface of a sphere in terms of angles separating vectors to those points from the centre of the sphere. A quaternion analogue for the cosine rule is needed. We consider a triangle which is defined by two quaternions q, q' and their difference q - q'.  FORMULA . Comparing this with the cosine rule  FORMULA  gives  FORMULA  We start with a quaternion and calculate the cosine of the angle with all other quaternions. We see the largest cosine not equal to 1 is  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . So we set up a network, G, with 24 vertices and an edge for each pair of vertices whose angle cosine is  FORMULA . Every vertex has 8 neighbours. Take Id,A1. The common neighbours to these two vertices are -B2, -C2, -D2. Exploring in this way while examining angles between edges, we find the smallest hypersurface polyhedron to be an octahedron. The hypersurface must be built from regular three-dimensional solids of which there are only five types, so most are easy to eliminate making the work a lot simpler. The six vertices  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  form a typical octahedron the bracketed pairs here being opposite, non-connected vertices of the octahedron. To complete the task we find the centre of the octahedron as the mean of any of these opposite pairs. We then normalise it to unit length so that it lies on S3 and use this as a projection centre for stereographic projection of the vertices onto  FORMULA . Joining pairs of points by line segments according to the adjacency information contained in the network G gives a three-dimensional projection of the four-dimensional regular solid. This three-dimensional projection may be displayed on a Maple worksheet as displayed. This beautiful object is called the 24-Cell [S2001]. <heading>8 Four-dimensional rotation: An introduction</heading>We regard SO(4) as the group of rotations for four-dimensional Euclidean space. This would include rotations such as those of the 24-Cell. We may consider some quaternion pairs as rotations in four-dimensional Euclidean space. Take two unit quaternions  FORMULA .The double-valuedness also happens with SO(4) so the quaternion pair  FORMULA  obviously gives the same map as the pair  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  give the same projective map. There exists a relationship between SO(4) and SO(3) x SO(3). More accurately, there is an isomorphism between the projective groups  FORMULA  since the projective map  FORMULA  is given by  FORMULA  [CS2003]. Take a rotation  FORMULA . We know that  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . Theorem 5. Eigenvalues of orthogonal matrices have unit modulus. Proof: Let  FORMULA  be an eigenvalue which corresponds to a certain eigenvector x. Take the complex transpose so that  FORMULA  for  FORMULA . We know that A is real so  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . Since x is an eigenvector it is nonzero and as such  FORMULA . • Since the eigenvalues of A have unit modulus by (5) we can write them as  FORMULA  We take the corresponding eigenvectors to be  FORMULA  and so we may choose a new real basis for  FORMULA  to be  FORMULA  We will take these vectors to be an orthonormal set. We see that  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  We also see  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  With respect to the orthonormal basis {e1, e2, e3, e4} the matrix form is now  FORMULA  We may interpret this as a product of commuting rotations, R1(θ) in the (e1,e2)-plane and R2(φ) in the (e3, e 4)-plane. <heading>9 Quaternions and four-dimensional rotations</heading>Take any unit quaternions r, s. Then we may regard the mapping  FORMULA  as a rotation. Let us consider the case  FORMULA . Then we get the rotation  FORMULA  discussed in the previous section. Similarly, for  FORMULA  we get  FORMULA . Finally, the rotation A is given by  FORMULA  with respect to the orthonormal basis {e1, e2, e3, e4}. We will discover an expression for the quaternions r, s without considering a change of basis. Let us consider the quaternions corresponding to a rotation through θ in any plane. We suppose that a non-zero quaternion q is fixed under the mapping  FORMULA , with r, s being unit quaternions. We split the quaternions into scalar and vector parts by writing  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  is equivalent to  FORMULA  - or to  FORMULA . So we see  FORMULA . The scalar and vector parts of this equation may be considered as: <list> FORMULA (1) FORMULA ,(2)</list>with  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ¸ FORMULA . We then (scalar) multiply equation (2) by x and (1) gives  FORMULA . Hence α = 0 or a = c. So equations (1), (2) become  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . Let the orthonormal quaternions q1, q2 span a two-space, and suppose it is invariant. Then: <list> FORMULA  (3a) FORMULA  (3b) FORMULA  (4a) FORMULA  (4b)</list>So from (3a), (3b)  FORMULA  (5) for some  FORMULA . To both sides of (4a) we take the scalar product by x2 to get B ■ (x1 x x2) so B takes the form  FORMULA . Substitute back into (4a), (4b) and use (5) to find  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  (6)  FORMULA  Thus b2 = d2 = λ2. The quaternions we need are  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  since they are unit quaternions. The rotation clearly occurs in the orthogonal two-space with q1,q2 held fixed, The orthogonality conditions  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  or  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  are satisfied by all q in this space. We are thus able to move  FORMULA  past the qis in any expression. In particular,  FORMULA  Then  FORMULA . The angle between q and q1 is then given by  FORMULA . Thus  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and then  FORMULA   FORMULA  (7) <heading>10 Quaternion expression of four-dimensional rotation</heading>To find the quaternion expression for the rotation A, an orthogonal 4x4 matrix, we first determine its eigenvalue structure in terms of θ, φ and the basis {e1, e2, e3, e4). Then rotation R1(θ), discussed above, will have quaternion expression  FORMULA   FORMULA  (8) given by an application of the results in the previous section. Similarly, R2(φ) will be found to have quaternion expression  FORMULA   FORMULA  (9) Then the quaternion pair (r, s) representing the four-dimensional Euclidean rotation A is obtained by r = r 1r2 and s = s1s2. <heading>11 Composition of orthogonal 4-by-4 matrices</heading>As we stated earlier, there exists a relationship between SO(4) and SO(3) x SO(3). So any rotation in four dimensions can be written as q' = rqs where r,q,q',s are quaternions and r = a + bi + cj + dk, s = w + xi + yj + zk are unit quaternions. As previously, let  FORMULA  be a rotation. Then we can write  FORMULA . Quaternion multiplication is associative, so if we write R for the matrix representation of right multiplication by r and S for the matrix representation of left multiplication by s, then rqs = RS since  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  so A(q) = rqs = R(S(q)). So A = RS. The bigger problem is to demonstrate that this construction gives every orthogonal matrix. This is the problem of actually finding r and s when you're given an orthogonal matrix. We can write  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . These are easily seen to be isometric with the origin as a fixed point so they are rotations in  FORMULA  about the origin. We see  FORMULA . From RS we can find a  FORMULA . Writing  FORMULA  we see that  FORMULA  with  FORMULA  FORMULA   FORMULA  FORMULA   FORMULA  FORMULA   FORMULA  FORMULA   FORMULA  FORMULA   FORMULA  FORMULA   FORMULA  FORMULA   FORMULA  FORMULA  Theorem 6. Every 4×4 orthogonal matrix is given by the construction involving the matrix multiplication of the representation of left and right quaternion multiplication. Proof: It is easily seen that the sum of the elements of T is equal to  FORMULA  and the complementary minors of T are zero. For 2-by-2 complementary minors  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  of A, an orthogonal 4-by-4 matrix, we have  FORMULA  or  FORMULA  depending on  FORMULA  by Jacobi's Minor Theorem, proved in [GR2000]. Then T has at least one non-zero entry so its column are linearly dependent and the rank of T is 1. So there exist a, b, c, d, w, x, y, z such that  FORMULA  and T takes the required form. So each matrix of a 4D rotation is composed of matrices R and S representing left and right multiplication by the quaternion pairs (r, s) or (-r, - s). • Problem solved! If we look carefully through the above work, we can easily see how the quaternion pair (r, s) form an orthogonal matrix. Example 2. Take the simple example of  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . If we want the rotation  FORMULA  then we find the matrices R, S and find  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  with  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . We are rotating vectors in four dimensions so let us have co-ordinate axes 1, i, j, k with O the origin. Let  FORMULA . Then we can see that  FORMULA  is a rotation by  FORMULA  about the origin in the 1i plane and  FORMULA  about the origin in the jk plane, whereas  FORMULA  is a rotation of  FORMULA  about the origin in the 1i-plane and  FORMULA  about the origin in the jk plane.  FORMULA  is a rotation by θ about the origin in the 1i plane, R1(θ). The matrix  FORMULA  of rotation A from Section 1 is given by the matrix representations of r = r 1r2 and = s1 s2 where  FORMULA  giving the rotation  FORMULA . Thus we conclude our brief exploration of the link between quaternions and rotations. <heading>12 Hypercomplex number systems</heading>Consider an expression of the form  FORMULA  where all the  FORMULA  are arbitrary reals. Addition  FORMULA  is simple so consider multiplication. We write  FORMULA  where  FORMULA  are real and uniquely determined by choice of α, β. There are n 2 choices of α, β and n + 1 choices of  FORMULA , so n 2(n + 1) such numbers in total. We have  FORMULA  as the result of applying the distributive law. We obtain  FORMULA  by rewriting  FORMULA  as  FORMULA  and replacing this by  FORMULA  A system, with addition and multiplication, as defined above is known as an hy-percomplex number system of dimension n + 1 [KS89]. The expressions are called hypercomplex numbers. The complex numbers, dual numbers, double numbers and quaternions are all examples of hypercomplex numbers. In all hypercomplex number systems it is always true that  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  for real a, b and distributivity holds. <heading>13 Classification of the Division Algebras</heading>A normed division algebra is a division algebra with a norm  FORMULA , as defined in the introduction. The familiar hypercomplex number systems are all normed division algebras, although this is not necessarily true for all such systems. We will now show that R, C, H and O are the only normed division algebras. Consider the composition law,  FORMULA . First we note that the inner product  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . This is easily seen since  FORMULA  by  FORMULA . Also,  FORMULA  since  FORMULA [CS2003]. For conjugation,  FORMULA  we have  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . This is easily seen since, by the previous paragraph,  FORMULA . We have  FORMULA  since the previous result gives  FORMULA . Then it becomes apparent that  FORMULA  since  FORMULA . We let S be a subalgebra of n-dimensions, containing 1 and i, an unit vector orthogonal to S. Then  FORMULA  and (i,a). We now evaluate composition, conjugation and the inner product on the Dickson double algebra, S + iS. We have (a+ib, c+id) = (a,c)+ (b, d) since (a, id) = 0, (ib, c) = 0,  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  so  FORMULA . Lastly,  FORMULA  so  FORMULA . Letting D = C + iC, which is a normed division algebra when  FORMULA  for  FORMULA . Expanding gives  FORMULA . So D is a normed division algebra when  FORMULA , or equivalently, when C is an associative normed division algebra [CS2003, KS89]. 19 We have C = B + i'B. B must also be an associative normed division algebra with i'bc = i'cb, in other words B must be commutative as we will now see. For  FORMULA  we have  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . Letting B = A + i"A we can show that A is a commutative, associative normed division algebra with trivial conjugation,  FORMULA . Suppose  FORMULA  and we see that since  FORMULA  so  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . So we can write the following, due to Hurwitz: Theorem 7. R, C, H and O are the only normed division algebras. Proof: The real numbers R are commutative, associative and have trivial conjugation. The complex numbers C is a commutative, associative algebra. The quaternions H is an associative normed division algebra. The octonions O is non-associative so its Dickson double algebra is not a normed division algebra. • It is important to remember that a normed division algebra is not necessarily a division ring, or any kind of ring. The fundamental properties of rings include associativity under multiplication. The octonions O is a normed division algebra which is non-associate. Therefore, it is not a ring. The next two theorems, due to Fronebius, are of great interest to us. It enhances the link between the normed division algebras and division algebras in general. Theorem 8. Every associative division algebra is isomorphic to one of R, C or H. Proof: Let A be an associative division algebra. Let  FORMULA  and consider xa = a. Multiplying on the left by b, we have b(ea) = ba = (be)a so be = b and A has an identity. Elements ce form a subalgebra R which is isomorphic to R. If R is not all of A then it contains a subalgebra C which is isomorphic to C So if  FORMULA  and e are linearly independent, the set of elements C of the form αe + βa forms a subalgebra isomorphic to C This is proved by showing that a satisfies a quadratic equation with negative discriminant. If we say dim A = n, we have that the system of n + 1 vectors,  FORMULA , is linearly dependent and that, for some m, a is a root of the mth degree equation  FORMULA . The general mth-degree polynomial can be written  FORMULA , as a product of linear and irreducible quadratic polynomials. We may replace x with a and since P(a) = 0, we have Pi(a) = 0, for some i, because A is a division algebra. We see that a cannot satisfy a linear equation since e and a are linearly independent. Therefore, a satisfies an irreducible quadratic equation - its discriminant is negative. If C is not all of A, then it contains a subalgebra Q which is isomorphic to H. So, if  FORMULA  do not belong in the same subalgebra C then the set Q of elements of the form  FORMULA  forms a subalgebra isomorphic to H. In C we choose an element b such that  FORMULA , and in a subalgebra C we choose b' fulfilling the same condition. b, b' are scalar multiples of a, a! so Q, with elements  FORMULA , and Q', with elements  FORMULA , coincide. Let c = b and c = kb + k'b'. Then, unless k' = 0, the set of these elements Q" coincides with Q' and Q. We assume that bb' + b'b = ke for real k and b2 ,b'2 = - 1 since this is easily proved. We choose d = kb + 2b' so c 2 = (k2 - 4)e. So k2 - 4 < 0. Let  FORMULA  and we see  FORMULA . We also have  FORMULA   FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . So  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and to show that Q" is a subalgebra we need only evaluate the following products. We have  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . Thus, any product is a linear combination of the elements so Q" is a subalgebra. It is isomorphic to H by the following. We must show that e,c,c, cc forms a basis of Q". Since c and c belong to distinct complex subalgebras they are linearly independent, so we need only show the same for cc. To prove, we suppose cc = αc + βc + γe. Multiplying on the left by c gives  FORMULA . Rearranging, and then taking the difference of the two expressions gives  FORMULA . But it is impossible to find a real β which avoids a contradiction. So the elements form a basis. We have Q" = H since we can see the multiplication rules we examined above give the multiplication table of H. If Q is not all of A, we must show that A is not a division algebra. Take c not in Q and  FORMULA  where  FORMULA , the imaginary unit of C. Now,  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA ,, so  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . Then we see that  FORMULA  so  FORMULA . But ix = c is not solvable for  FORMULA . So we have a contradiction [KS89]. • More generally we have a proof that A is a normed algebra, which implies the result we are looking for by Hurwitz's theorem. Theorem 9. Every alternative division algebra is isomorphic to one of R, C,H or O. Proof: The ideas upon which the previous proof was based also hold for an alternative division algebra. The first thing we realise is that this theorem can be stated as follows: Every alernative division algebra is isomorphic to a normed division algebra. Then the rest follow by Hurwitz. So we need to define an inner product such that A must be normed, such that  FORMULA . We define a conjugation operation on A. If  FORMULA  and e, the identity, are linearly dependent then  FORMULA . If a and e are linearly independent, then  FORMULA  is a subalgebra of A. C also contains  FORMULA , the conjugate of  FORMULA . Let also  FORMULA , the quaternion subalgebra, and take a to be the conjugate in the quaternion algebra. We see  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  where k is real. Then  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  since if not, a is a multiple of 1. This lets us deduce  FORMULA and  FORMULA . The conjugate of ab is  FORMULA  so  FORMULA . We define an inner product  FORMULA  on A. The properties of inner product  FORMULA  if a = 0, (a, b) = (b, a), (a, kb) = k(a, b) and (a, b + c) = (a, b) + (a, c) are obviously implied by the deductions we have made. We see  FORMULA  since  FORMULA  for a=0. Then  FORMULA  and it follows that  FORMULA  so that A must be normed. The result follows by Hurwitz. • <heading>14 The Brauer Group of F</heading>We now explore another way to classify associative division algebras that is, perhaps, not so direct. The Brauer group arose out of an attempt to classify division rings. To get started we need a few definitions and redefinitions. A ring A is known as an F-algebra if it  FORMULA , the center of A and it is a finite dimensional vector space over F. A simple F-algebra is an F-algebra A over a field F such that A is simple and so has no nontrivial ideals. We now redefine the associative division algebra. An F-algebra A is known as a division algebra if the units of A are the quotient ring A/{0} [S99]. As we know, the opposite ring  FORMULA  to an ring R has the same additive group structure as R but has a new multiplication  FORMULA . If A is an algebra over F, then so is  FORMULA . An R-module is a set that has multiplication and addition operations, forming an abelian group under addition and satisfying  FORMULA   FORMULA  and  FORMULA  for  FORMULA  a ring with identity and  FORMULA . An R-module is simple if it has no nontrivial submodule. M n(A) denotes the algebra of n x n matrices over the algebra A. We have that M n(D) is a simple algebra for a division algebra D over F. Lastly, an Artinian ring A satisfies the descending chain condition so that if  FORMULA  is the set of all ideals in A such that  FORMULA  then  FORMULA  such that  FORMULA for  FORMULA . Theorem 10. Let A be a simple F-algebra. For some division algebra D and some positive integer n, there is an isomorphism from A to Mn(D). Proof: Let M be a simple A-module. A-module structure is given by the ring homomor-phism  FORMULA . This is injective because A is simple so its kernel must be A or {0}, and is not A since a homomorphism has  FORMULA . By Schur's Lemma, a name familiar from representation theory for another different lemma, we have  FORMULA  a division algebra. Then  FORMULA  by the Double Centralizer Theorem and  FORMULA  is isomorphic to a matrix algebra over  FORMULA . • Note: The Double Centralizer Theorem states that for an Artinian ring A with center F and a subalgebra  FORMULA  over F the following holds.  FORMULA  is simple,  FORMULA , if  FORMULA , then  FORMULA  and if B is central simple over F, so is  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . For a proof see [H78]. Theorem 11 (Schur's Lemma). If S is a simple R-module then  FORMULA  is a division algebra. Proof: The proof is quite simple. Since  FORMULA  is a ring, we show that every nonzero endomorphism  FORMULA  is invertible.  FORMULA  is a submodule of S and if  FORMULA  then  FORMULA  so  FORMULA  since S is simple.  FORMULA  is a submodule of S and  FORMULA  if  FORMULA  again because S is simple. So φ is an automorphism of S, and is thus invertible in  FORMULA . • An F-algebra A is central simple if it is simple and  FORMULA . It is easily shown that an F-algebra is central simple if and only if it is isomorphic to M n(D) for a division algebra D over a field F. Theorem 12. An F-algebra is central simple if and only if it is isomorphic to Mn(D) for a division algebra D with center F. Proof: A is simple so, as we have just shown, it is isomorphic to some Mn(D) for a division algebra D over field F. Mn(D) has the set of dIn as center, for  FORMULA . Conversely, Mn(D) is central simple because matrix algebras are simple. • We briefly define the tensor product. Take three A-modules say R, S, T and a bilinear mapping  FORMULA . We construct an A-module P and a bilinear mapping  FORMULA  with the property that to any bilinear mapping φ there corresponds an unique homomorphism  FORMULA  such that  FORMULA . Such a module P is called a tensor product of R and S, denoted  FORMULA . We note that  FORMULA  and if D is a division F-algebra then  FORMULA . Theorem 13. The tensor product of two central simple F-algebras is another central simple F-algebra. Proof: We first show that  FORMULA  is simple. Suppose that I is a nonzero ideal of this tensor product and let  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  for  FORMULA  linearly independent over F. We choose  FORMULA  to have few nonzero  FORMULA . Assume  FORMULA  and if  FORMULA  then  FORMULA . A is simple so the ideal Iai generated by a1 is A. Then we have  FORMULA . So we can find  FORMULA ,  FORMULA , which is a sum of tensors with the same number of nonzero  FORMULA  as z. For  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  but  FORMULA  since  FORMULA  has fewer nonzero  FORMULA  than z.  FORMULA  since the  FORMULA  are linearly independent over F. Then  FORMULA  and hence in F. Letting  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  implies  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  and so  FORMULA . So, by definition,  FORMULA  is simple. It remains to show that  FORMULA  is central. We identify F with  FORMULA , so that it is clear that  FORMULA  since  FORMULA  involves two F-algebras. Then  FORMULA  is an F-algebra. Let  FORMULA  with  FORMULA  linearly independent. Then  FORMULA  for  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . Write  FORMULA  and, since  FORMULA , for  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  implying  FORMULA . So  FORMULA for  FORMULA  and so  FORMULA . Therefore,  FORMULA  is central over F. Then  FORMULA  is central simple. • The last theorem, and the one following, are needed to define an operation on a particular group: Theorem 14. If A is a central simple F-algebra, so is  FORMULA  its opposite and  FORMULA . Proof: From the definition of the center of a ring Z(A) we see that the center of  FORMULA  is just the center of A,  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA  is central over F where A is central over F. We also see that  FORMULA  is a simple algebra if A is simple since the right ideals in A map injectively to the left ideals in  FORMULA , and vice versa. We define a map  FORMULA . This map is obviously a homomorphism, since it respect addition a multiplication in the given tensor product. Since  FORMULA  is simple and a nonzero map, it is injective. It is surjective since  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  have the same dimension over F. So we have an isomorphism to  FORMULA . • We say that A,B are similar  FORMULA , where both A and B are central simple F-algebras, if  FORMULA  such that M m(A) = M n(B). This is easily seen to be an equivalence relation, satisfying symmetry, reflexivity and transistivity. We let [A] denote the equivalence class of A, a central simple algebra. We denote  FORMULA , the set of such equivalence classes. The Brauer group of a field F, Br(F), is an abelian group defined as follows. It is the set Br(F) under the operation  FORMULA . Br(F) is closed under the operation as we have seen.. We have  FORMULA , so  FORMULA  so the identity is [F]. We have  FORMULA  because  FORMULA . Then Br(F) is an abelian group since the tensor product is both associative and commutative. Theorem 15. We can show that there is a bijection between the elements of Br(F) and the division algebras D with center F, mapping D to the element represented by Mn(D). Proof: We have  FORMULA  so all representatives of a certain element of Br(F) have the same basic division algebra D. Then  FORMULA  so it is easily seen that Mn(D) and Mm(D) represent the same element. • So we have proved that there is a bijective correspondence between the division algebras D over F and the elements of Br(F) [S99]. Example 3. We do not progress deeply into this subject matter so our example is very simple. Take Br(R) the only division algebras over R are R itself and H. So we can see that Br(R) = Z/2Z. There is a huge number of Brauer groups, of course, since we can have F = C,F = Q and all other fields. It is possible also to calculate Brauer groups for commutative rings and there is more application throughout Galois cohomology, although this is far beyond the scope we wish to discuss. <heading>15 Cayley-Dickson construction</heading>Before we get around to Cayley-Dickson construction, we need a couple of definitions. Recall the definition of an algebra and a division algebra is an algebra with multiplicative identity and multiplicative inverse. We see that ax = b and ya = b are uniquely solvable so if ab = 0 and  FORMULA , b = 0 [B2002]. The associator is a trilinear map on an algebra A,  FORMULA , given by [a, b, c] = (ab)c - a(bc). An algebra is power-associative,  FORMULA , if the subalgebra generated by one element is associative so [a, a, a] = 0. An algebra is alternative, (aa)b = a(ab),(ba)a = b(aa), if the subalgebra generated by two elements is associative, when [a, a, b] = 0. If the subalgebra generated by three elements is associative [a,b,c] = 0, then A is associative. Cayley-Dickson construction is a process by which we may create  FORMULA -hypercomplex numbers. These new hypercomplex numbers are constructed from  FORMULA -hypercomplex numbers. This is done by the process of defining the multiplication rule for the  FORMULA -dimensional hypercomplex numbers in terms of the four  FORMULA -dimensional hypercomplex numbers. If we let h1, h2 be two  FORMULA -dimensional hypercomplex numbers and write each h1, h2 as an ordered pair of  FORMULA -dimensional hypercomplex numbers, A, B, C and D,  FORMULA , then the Cayley-Dickson process defines the multiplication of h1 and h2 by  FORMULA , where D* is a conjugate of D and c is a field parameter. Let us try to create some of the algebras we have already met. Consider this with Cayley-Dickson multiplication rule for (a; b) and (c; d), with  FORMULA . We have (a;b)(c;d) = (ac - bd;ad + bc) with  FORMULA , since  FORMULA . Take the complex numbers a + bi and c + di where  FORMULA , and  FORMULA . Then (a + bi)(c + di) = (ac - bd) + (ad + bc)i. This shows that (ac - bd; 0), (0; ad + bc) correspond to (ac - bd), (ad + bc)i respectively. Let us write  FORMULA . We need to introduce  FORMULA , another imaginary unit, with  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . Consider the Cayley-Dickson multiplication of two quaternions defined as ordered pairs of complex numbers, (a; b), (c; d), with  FORMULA . We have  FORMULA . Take two quaternions, each in terms of two complex numbers,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  where  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . Compare this with the above. We see that there is a term consisting of  FORMULA . This is a new imaginary number  FORMULA . Similarly, let  FORMULA . We define the octonions,  FORMULA  as the ordered pairs  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . Multiplication of U and V is given thus:  FORMULA .  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  are the new elements introduced by applying the Cayley-Dickson process. So, we begin to wonder, why are there no other division algebras? Indeed, why can't we have an infinite chain of algebras, each constructed by applying the Cayley-Dickson process to the previous algebra? As we have noted earlier, R is a commutative division algebra with trivial conjugation. C is also commutative but trivial conjugation is lost. For quaternions, we lose commutativity and associativity is lost for the octonions. As we go on, our algebras lose properties. Let us define a c-algebra as an algebra with conjugation,  FORMULA  such that c(c(A)) = A and c(ab) = c(b)c(a). The c-algebra is real if a = c(a), and nicely normed if  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  for  FORMULA . If A is nicely normed,  FORMULA  [B2002]. If A is nicely normed,  FORMULA . If A is also alternative it is a normed division algebra. This is seen by  FORMULA  . Applying the Cayley-Dickson construction to the c-algebra A, gives A'. (a, b) are the elemtents of A', as shown earlier. This leads us to the conclusion that A' is never real, A is real if and only if A' is commutative, A is commutative and associative if and only if A' is associative, A is associative and nicely normed if and only if A' is alternative and nicely normed and A is nicely normed if and only if A' is nicely normed. A' is never real: The elements of A' are  FORMULA  so  FORMULA  so A' is not real. A is real if and only if A' is commutative: Let A be real so a = c(a) and ab = c(ab) = c(b)c(a) = ba. Then  FORMULA  so A' is commutative. Conversely, let A' be commutative. Then  FORMULA . So dc(b) = bc(d) so a = c(a) and A is real. A is commutative and associative if and only if A' is associative: Let A be commutative and associative so ab = ba and (ab)c = a(bc). Then  FORMULA   FORMULA  while  FORMULA   FORMULA . We can see that these are equal since A is commutative and associative, so A' is associative. A is associative and nicely normed if and only if A' is alternative and nicely normed: A is associative and nicely normed so  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA   FORMULA . Similar for (c,d)[(a,b)(a,b)]. So A' is alternative and nicely normed. Converse is simple. That A is nicely normed if and only if A' is nicely normed is a simple proof. So we see that we can only construct a small number of division algebras by applying the Cayley-Dickson process [B2002]. <heading>16 Octonions, Sedenions and the Special Orthogonal Group SO(8)</heading>The octonions were first discovered in late 1844 by John Graves, shortly after quaternions came to light. He expounded his new "octaves" to his college friend, Hamilton. Unfortunately, Arthur Cayley discovered octonions in 1845 and beat Graves to publication: they became known as "Cayley Numbers". The octonions are another hypercomplex number system; as shown it is a non-associative, normed division algebra. From the Cayley-Dickson process we know it is an alternative, nicely-normed c-algebra. The multiplication table for O takes the form displayed. The octonions are given the form  FORMULA  [H2004, H2000]. <table/>There are a few interesting facts about octonions, which we will investigate below. Despite this, they are largely ignored - even more so than the quaternions. There are many reasons for this, including the fact that Cayley was more concerned with the link between quaternions and hyperelliptic functions; that Cayley numbers were a mathematical oddity that arose from his research with no practical application. The quaternions form SU(2), a double cover of SO(3) as well as the link to SO(4). However, O is both useful and beautiful; and much of the rest of the essay is devoted to exploring how [CS2003]. Since associativity fails, it is sensible to investigate the multiplication operators before we proceed. We define three maps,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . Tx is well-defined as the product of Rx and Lx in either order since (Lx)(Rx)y = (Lx)yx = x(yx) = (Tx)y = (xy)x = (Rx)xy = (Rx)(Lx)y. We see that  FORMULA  since the inner product  FORMULA  implies  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . This is known as the first Moufang law [CS2003]. We recall that a reflection in a vector x is expressed as  FORMULA . Given our previous study we see, FORMULA . An inverse loop is a set with element 1, binary operation xy and inverse satisfying  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . We see that  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  are equivalent so xyz = 1. An isotopy is a triplet of invertible maps preserving the relation. So  FORMULA  mean  FORMULA  and (a,b,c) mean that xyz = 1 implies  FORMULA . These notations can be considered equivalent. A monotopy is defined to be one of the three invertible maps in an isotopy. If xy = z implies  FORMULA  then c is a monotopy. We see that c is a monotopy if and only if there are elements α and β, companions, such that  FORMULA . This is since  FORMULA  so  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  so  FORMULA . We see that  FORMULA . Now we shall prove that multiplications by unit octonions generate SO(8) in the same way that the complex numbers and quaternions generate SO(2) and SO(4) respectively. First, it is easily seen that if x(ry) = (xr)y for octonions x,y we have r is real so that the octonions are strongly non-associative. We may then prove that if α, β is a pair of companions for c, then any other pair has the form  FORMULA  for real n. Let  FORMULA  for all x, y, and set  FORMULA . If we let  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  we have  FORMULA . Putting  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and then  FORMULA ,  FORMULA , we have  FORMULA  for all x, y showing that n is real. Theorem 16. If  FORMULA , then  FORMULA such that  FORMULA  is an isotopy. Proof: We may write  FORMULA . We have  FORMULA . We see that  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  are bimultiplications by unit octonions since the first was found earlier to be  FORMULA  and the second is  FORMULA . c is the product of 2n unit bimultiplications. So  FORMULA  [CS2003]. • We have seen earlier that a and b are unique up to scalar multiplication. - 1 keeps a and b in SO(8) so  FORMULA . (a, b, c) is an orthogonal isotopy if  FORMULA . The group of such isotopies is a 2:1 cover of SO(8), the spin group Spin(8). The spin group has an outer automorphism known as a triality automorphism such that  FORMULA . It is clearly an automorphism and we see that it is an outer automorphism, so not a conjugation. It is simple that PSO(8) has a triality automorphism since if  FORMULA  we define  FORMULA . ([a], [b], [c]) arising from the orthogonal isotopies (a,b,c) is isomorphic to PSO(8) with triality  FORMULA . Triality takes  FORMULA  for every unit octonion x. Then SO(8) is generated by the left, or right, multiplications of octonion units. This is a result of applying triality to the fact that SO(8) is generated by the bimultiplications. We also see there is a 2:1 map from both triples (a, b, c) and (-a, -b, c) to c. This is then a representation of Spin(8), the double-cover of SO(8). The triples (a,b,c) for which c fixes 1 form Spin(7), the double-cover of SO(7). If we apply the Cayley-Dickson process to octonions and then repeat this continuously we find a chain of c-algebras with dimension 16, 32, 64,..., 2n. It is important to remember that these hypercomplex number systems are not division algebras. The 16-dimensional c-algebra is known as the algebra of sedenions from sexdecim [B2002]. This algebra is non-commutative, non-associative, non-alternative and is not a normed division algebra. So it is possible for  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  but ab = 0. It is power associative  FORMULA  so [a, a, a] = 0, the subalgebra generated by one element is associative. Each element can be represented as  FORMULA  or by applying the Cayley-Dickson process. Take two octonions a, b and the sedenion s 1 = (a; b). The multiplication of sedenions is given by  FORMULA . The multiplication of the two sedenion elements  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  is given by  FORMULA  for  FORMULA . Summation is over the permutations of the sedenion cycle,  FORMULA .  FORMULA  is given by  FORMULA  if  FORMULA  is an even permutation,  FORMULA  if  FORMULA  is an odd permutation, and  FORMULA  otherwise, Lastly,  FORMULA  if  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  otherwise. <heading>17 The Freudenthal square</heading>We now explore very briefly a relationship between division algebras and Lie alge-bras. The Freudenthal-Tits Magic Square is an array of algebras. The entries of the array are the result of the Jordan algebras of 3 × 3 Hermitian matrices.over R,C,H,O tensored with R,C,H and O. We can construct a commutative but nonassociative product a ◦ b = 12(ab + ba). Any algebra which satisfies the identity a◦ (b ◦a 2) = (a ◦b)◦ a 2 is known as an Jordan algebra, which are power-associative. <table/>We can extend this to a Freudenthal rectangle, a 4×5 array, by including the Jordan algebra R. <table/>The entries are all Lie algebras formed by the operation  FORMULA  defined by Tits. This operation is for  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  is the space of imaginary elements of A, which are orthogonal to 1. Recall that for a ring R its derivation Der(R) is a mapping  FORMULA  such that  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  [D94, B2002]. Remember that a Lie algebra is an algebra g over a field F if its multiplication  FORMULA  satisfies  FORMULA  and the Jacobi identity  FORMULA . A semisimple Lie algebra is a Lie algebra formed of the direct sums of simple Lie algebras. The classical complex simple Lie algebras are  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  corresponding to Lie groups  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . A semisimple Lie algebra is a Lie algebra formed of the direct sums of simple Lie algebras. It is also given by the following theorem [V74, H2003, B89]. Theorem 17. A complex Lie algebra is semisimple iff it is isomorphic to the com-plexification of the Lie algebra of a connected, compact matrix Lie group So we know that  FORMULA  has complexification  FORMULA  and is the Lie algebra compact, simply-connected matrix Lie group  FORMULA .  FORMULA  is the complexification of  FORMULA  the Lie algebra of the compact, simply-connected Spin(n). Lastly,  FORMULA  is the complexification of  FORMULA , the Lie algebra of the symplectic group Sp(n). A root system is a finite real vector space with an inner product  FORMULA , together with a finite collection R of vectors in E satisfying: <list>The elements of R span E FORMULA , then so is  FORMULA .The only multiples of  FORMULA  are  FORMULA ,  FORMULA .4 If  FORMULA  then  FORMULA .5.  FORMULA  is an integer.</list>The elements of R are roots and the dimension of E is called the rank of the root system. Theorem 18. Every irreducible root system is isomorphic to one of: <list> FORMULA . FORMULA . FORMULA . FORMULA .The 'exceptional' root systems  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA [H2003]</list>The algebras formed by the operation defined by Tits, above, are the exceptional Lie algebras and a few corresponding to he classical root systems, see [V74, H2003, B89]. <heading>18 Summary</heading>Thus concludes our brief foray into the world of normed division algebras. An interesting fact to close here is that quaternion representations of rotation groups may be fundamental to the underlying structure of our universe. The standard model insists on an infinite Euclidean space created by inflation. The plasma that filled space shortly after the big bang fluctuates in density, causing temperature fluctuation in the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation. The standard model predicts these fluctuations, but on larger scales they are not detected. Consider the 4-manifold S3 and finite universe S3/ Γwith Γ a group of isometries. There are a few explanations for the missing fluctuations but the simplest is that a spherical universe will not support large scale fluctuations, analogous to the way an unit circle will only support wavelengths  FORMULA . The observable evidence is inconclusive with  FORMULA  so although the universe is indicated to be spherical, there is no conclusive evidence. To recognise a spherical universe we must find which spaces are possible. The operation is similar to our construction of the 24-Cell. We find that the possible symmetry groups are the cyclic group  FORMULA , binary dihedral  FORMULA , binary tetrahedral  FORMULA  of order 24, binary octahedral  FORMULA  of order 48 and binary icosahedral  FORMULA  of order 120. The corresponding spaces S 3/Γ are among the likeliest construction of our universe [W2004]. <heading>19 Appendix A: More on Lie groups and Lie algebras</heading>We quickly tour the area of Lie groups and algebras in greater detail. The collection of classical Lie groups is made up of the general and special linear group, orthogonal groups, the unitary groups and the symplectic groups. They are all examples of matrix Lie groups, a subgroup G of  FORMULA  such that if any sequence  FORMULA  converges to A then  FORMULA  or  FORMULA . Theorem 19. Every matrix Lie group G is a Lie group. The proof is given in most good Lie theory texts. Example 4. i)  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  are (matrix) Lie groups. The matrix Lie group is a group G such that G is a closed subgroup of  FORMULA .  FORMULA is a subgroup of itself, and if (An) is a sequence in  FORMULA and  FORMULA  then  FORMULA  or it is not invertible by definition. If  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  then  FORMULA  are all real. So  FORMULA or A is not invertible. ii) Many of the subgroups of  FORMULA are (matrix) Lie groups, including the special linear, symplectic (special) orthogonal and (special) unitary groups. This can be shown by using methods similar to above. iii)  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . Of course, O is not a Lie group since associativity fails. iv) Take  FORMULA . We define the group product by  FORMULA . Associativity is easily checked, with  FORMULA . G has an identity and an inverse for each element. The product is smooth as is the inverse element map, hence G is a Lie group. A matrix Lie group is compact if all convergent sequences  FORMULA  converge to an  FORMULA  and there exists a c such that  FORMULA  for all  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . Example 5. U(n) is a compact group since  FORMULA  and  FORMULA is preserved under limits. If A is unitary, the column vectors are orthonormal. Then  FORMULA . ii)  FORMULA  is not compact. For  FORMULA , if  FORMULA  we do not always have  FORMULA . Similar idea for the other classical Lie groups. A matrix Lie group G is connected if for  FORMULA  there exists a continuous path  FORMULA  in G with  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . We say G is simply connected if every loop in G can be shrunk continuously to a point in G, as well as G being connected. Now a Lie algebra of a Lie group G is given as  FORMULA . Theorem 20. Let  FORMULA be smooth and for each  FORMULA  for  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  is surjective then  FORMULA  is a manifold. Then  FORMULA . Proof: We are familiar enough with differential topology to recall that  FORMULA . Now, we let  FORMULA  be a chart on X around x. The map  FORMULA  is constant since  FORMULA . So  FORMULA . Then  FORMULA . But  FORMULA  is injective. We also have  FORMULA . But  FORMULA  is surjective so  FORMULA . • This gives a neat way to calculate the Lie algebra of a given Lie group since we see that  FORMULA . Example 6. We have that  FORMULA is a Lie group. It is simple to see that this has group and manifold structure, and that  FORMULA  given by  FORMULA  is diffeomorphic. Amazingly enough, H is the corresponding Lie algebra. We remember that the Lie algebra of G a Lie group is the tangent space to G at the identity,  FORMULA . In this case,  FORMULA for  FORMULA . As we know, this is equivalent to  FORMULA  for  FORMULA  with  FORMULA . Then we see  FORMULA . The matrix exponential is defined by  FORMULA . The Lie algebra of a matrix Lie group G, for X an n x n matrix, is given by  FORMULA . The classical Lie groups have their own Lie algebras; we have already stated which are the classical Lie algebras and which Lie groups they correspond to. It can be shown that the Lie algebra of a matrix Lie group is a real Lie algebra. Think of the more abstract definition of a Lie algebra, in terms of Lie brackets. If V is a finite-dimensional real vector space, then Vc the space of linear combinations  FORMULA  for  FORMULA  is its complexification. Theorem 21. Let g be a finite-dimensional real Lie algebra. The bracket operation on g can be extended uniquely to gc, its complexification as a real vector space, making gc into a complex Lie algebra, the complexification of g. Proof: We see that  FORMULA  is real bilinear and that it is skew-symmetric. Since the operation is skew-symmetric, it is complex linear in both factors. So we verify  FORMULA  to show bilinearity. We see  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . (10) The Jacobi identity hold for  FORMULA . It holds for  FORMULA  since the LHS of the identity is linear in x for fixed y, z. The identity then holds for  FORMULA  and  FORMULA . The same argument is made for y and z. Uniqueness is obvious since the bilinear bracket operation must be  FORMULA . • The classical Lie algebras are classified by Theorem 17. Then the classical root systems  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  are assigned to  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  respectively [V74, H2003, B89]. 