The FPOE, put simply, asks us  how one can be sure that the other side to a bargain will fulfill their contractual obligations or not. This essay will essentially deal with two things - firstly, how the medieval merchants solved the fundamental problem of exchange in long distance trade; and secondly, how this helped lead to the prosperity of the Venetian Republic and Portugal before 1700. Venetian Republic and Portugal were the pioneers of the long-distance trade and it was these states which effectively opened up long-distance international trade in the first instance. <fnote>EC104 World Economy: History & Theory. TOPIC2 Lecture notes. </fnote>One of the most problematic issues in the world is undoubtedly the question of scarcity, that is, the allocation of scarce goods and services. Such a problem of scarcity is probably best solved by voluntary exchange between states. It is universally recognised that the ability to exchange or trade contributes greatly to greater economic efficiency and development. This is because trade enables states to exploit comparative advantage and division of labour. Through trade, states would also benefit from specialsation of goods and services as well as technological advancements. Hence, it would be foolish for merchants in one state not to trade with merchants in other states. However, a merchant first had to overcome the FPOE in order to enjoy the benefits of trade. In order to enter into a mutually beneficial exchange relationship, both sides must commit to abide by their contractual obligations. For instance, a lender will not lend without being sure that the borrower will not renege on the contract. A formal structure had to be formed in order that merchants could trade freely without the worry of the other party reneging. Once a state could mitigate the FPOE, exchange of goods and services could take place and all those involved would benefit from it through greater prosperity of the state. A merchant would not straightforwardly enter a mutually profitable exchange unless he is confident that the exchange can indeed make him better off because the merchant is convinced that the other party involved will act in a manner that will make him better off. The problem that arises here is that one of the parties could very easily renege and violate the contract. Quite basically, a necessary condition for exchange is that "one will not enter into an objectively profitable exchange relationship unless the other party can commit to fulfill his contractual obligations". Such a setback is best explained using the theory of Prisoner's Dilemma. <fnote> URL  </fnote><figure/>The FPOE can be presented using the "one-sided prisoner's dilemma" (OSPD) or the "Game of Trust" as shown above. In this game, there are two individuals, Player I and Player II. Player I can either initiate exchange or not. When Player I decides not to initiate an exchange, both players gain ''. If Player I initiates exchange, Player II has the option of either to exchange/cooperate by fulfilling his contractual obligations or not. If exchange is efficient, the parties will be much better off than it would be the case if they did not exchange. Player I gains -W > 0 and Player II gets W>0. However, Player II can gain much more ( > W) by reneging; leaving Player I with <0 which would make him even worse off than he would be had he not exchanged to start with. This is the very essence of the fundamental problem of exchange. According to the OSPD, if Player I initiates exchange, the best option for Player II to take is to renege. For Player I, it is best not to initiate exchange in the first place. In this case, the only mutually beneficial outcome would be achieved through non-cooperation. The absence of cooperation means that exchange will not take place. Therefore, the extent to which a state can benefit from exchange depends on the ability of the group to mitigate the associated FPOE. Institutions are able to mitigate the FPOE by encouraging decision-makers to commit themselves in contractual obligations. By linking past conduct with future reward, they are able to reduce the benefit of reneging, hence promote cooperation. In a system based on beliefs in social sanctions and economics reputation, a merchant who had cheated in the past would lose out in future business because of the loss of reputation due to bad past conduct. If the loss of reputation is greater than the relative gain he would obtain by reneging, exchange will take place. In this instance, "economics institutions are defined as a system of social factors - such as rules, beliefs, norms and organisations - that guide, enable and constrain the actions of individuals". The structure that each merchant faces almost forces him to take the actions that make up this structure in the first place. In other words, structure makes structure. Each social factor that makes up this system helps keep structure in place - rules act as a guide and coordinate behaviour; beliefs and norms encourage individuals to follow the rules even though they are not obligatory; communities and business networks produce and/or influence the making of rules and regulations and make them known to merchants. <fnote> URL  </fnote>Yet such bilateral or multilateral reputations mechanisms were prone to fail because the ruler of the state would so easily be tempted to abuse the rights of merchants. The merchants needed a system whereby the threat of collective action was credible. They required an organisation that provides "collective protection in foreign lands, secure trade privileges and to watch over the strict observance of those already in effect". <fnote>De Roover's (1965),  URL  pg. 15 </fnote>Trade expansion and market integration during the medieval period were greatly aided by the emergence of an institution which satisfied such attributes - the merchant guild. One strategy used by a merchant guild to overcome the FPOE was the use of ostracism to achieve security. The following is the citation of the agreement made in 1261 between the Flemish merchants from Ghent, Ypres, Douai, Cambrai and Dixmude all of whom purchased English wool. it sums up how the system worked: "for the good of the trade, any cleric or any other merchant anywhere in England who deals with sales of wool falsely with any merchant in this alliance.., by giving false weight or false dressing of the wool or a false product.. and if they do not wish to make amends, we have decided that no present or future member of this alliance will be so bold as to trade with them". There was also a "man to view and judge the grievances and to persuade the wrongdoers to make amends". If any member of the guild acts against the rules and regulations, that merchant "shall be excluded from selling, lodging, eating, or depositing his wool or cloth in ships with the rest of the merchants...and anyone violating this ostracism, he shall be fined 5s". <fnote>Moore, 1985, pg.301) </fnote><fnote>Moore 1985. Pg.298.  URL  </fnote>During the late medieval period, as merchants found themselves dealing more and more with other merchants overseas due to the expansion of markets, they found it necessary to employ overseas agents to act on their behalf. Overseas agents would help reduce the cost of long-distance trade and save time as well as eliminating the risk of travelling abroad. However, if the overseas agents were to carry out trade efficiently, it was necessary for them to have full control over the merchant's capital. Another institution that managed the agency relations became available if merchants were to hire agents abroad in order to prevent the agent reneging or cheating in business. After the 11th century in Italy, the patron system emerged to govern agency relations based on bilateral reputation and state enforcement. For example, a Genoese agent would act truthfully because of the fear that if he did not, his relations with a particular merchant would come to an end. Furthermore, in a reputation mechanism, an honest agent would be rehired and paid a lot more than a cheater agent is likely to be. Venetians, on the other hand, developed an institution which relied heavily on contract enforcement and the state of Venice established a tight control over trade within Venice and abroad. The City's administrative control over trade signified that it was able to inspect agents' conduct as well as punish cheaters. The subject of the FPOE posed a great concern for all medieval European merchants and the solutions they found were very important in laying the foundations of the future developments because the institutional development during the period had a lasting impact on the European development. The Venetian Republic before the turn of the eighteenth century is a great account of the state having found a wise solution to the FPOE. By mitigating the FPOE effectively, the Venetian Republic was able to become the richest and most successful Western European economy between the 11th and the 16th century. Venice contributed to the re-opening of the Mediterranean economy to Western European commerce, developed links with Northern Europe, transferred Asian and Egyptian techniques to the West. Venice eventually became a pioneer in glassblowing, making of silk, sugar production, book production and decorative arts. Nevertheless, its biggest achievement was the advancements in shipbuilding - it had an Arsenal building ship types suitable for Venetian commerce as well as suitable for conditions of trade in the Mediterranean. Greater trade led to further changes in ship structure and navigation techniques allowing the construction of bigger ships. Moreover, there is evidence that Venice imported a lot of foodstuffs from all over the world. Venice could only become the most successful of the North Italian city states because it created a republic dominated by a merchant capitalist elite. The creation of an institutional framework favourable to merchant capitalism laid a strong foundation for the prosperity of the Venetian Republic. In the case of Portugal, it was never as rich as Venice. However, it contributed a lot in opening up new commercial routes with Africa and Asia. Portugal also pioneered the European expansion into the Atlantic aided by developments in ship design and navigation techniques. This could only be achieved because Portugal was also successful in mitigating the FPOE, although its geographical location also played a major factor in its success. The Fundamental Problem of Exchange exists in any transaction of a trade or exchange though it is no where as serious an issue as it was during the medieval period. Times of commercial ascendancy were accompanied by periods of expanding exchange relationship. Therefore, it can be concluded that the ability to exchange influences greatly economic performances over time. In other words, an enhanced ability to exchange fosters prosperity, as was the case with the Venetian Republic and Portugal. However, as we have seen so far, such a commercial ascendancy of Venetian Republic and Portugal was only possible because they were successful in finding an effective solution to the fundamental problem of exchange. Furthermore, a coalition can prevail even if a legal system exists. A support for this claim is gained from the observation that the Venetians had developed an institution to govern agency relationships. Their institution relied heavily on contract enforcement provided by the state which also established a tight control over trade in Venice and abroad. Venice's exclusive trading rights in various localities abroad and restrictions on entry provided Venetian merchants with the stream of rent required to induce them to retain their affiliation with the city. Furthermore, the city's administrative control over trade provided it with the information required to evaluate agents' conduct and to punish cheaters. Finally, the gains to the Venetians from this system provided it with the political support it needed to perpetuate. Hence the feature of the Venetian institution is the absence of collective punishment. 