<heading>Q1</heading><list>YBEU = GDP index at current pricesYBEZ = GDP index at constant 2001 pricesCHVJ = Consumer Price Index (CPI)</list>The index has 2001 as its base and its reference year. <heading>Introduction</heading>This assignment is about comparing the two most common, and probably reliable, methods of measuring inflation in the UK. Inflation can be defined as a sustained rise in the general level of prices and inflation rate is the rate at which the price level increases. GDP deflator is a weighted average of the prices of different goods and services, where the weights represent the importance of each of the goods and services in GDP. It measures the price of output relative to its price in the base year, that is, it is an index number - set equal to 100 in the base year. A simple GDP deflator formula goes like this:  FORMULA  In more detail, the GDP deflator can be calculated by dividing the YBEU by YBEZ and multiplying the value by 100. That is,  FORMULA  YBEU, or GDP index in current prices, can be obtained by the formula ∑PitQit; and subsequently, YBEZ (or GDP index at constant prices) is obtained by ∑Pi0Qit . By doing this I found out that the price index for the GDP deflator is a Paasche index. The Paasche Index is the cost of current quantities at current prices divided by the cost of current quantities at base period prices. (Let Pc=current prices, Qc = current quantities, Pb = base period prices, Qb = current quantities) Paasche price index =  FORMULA  Comparisons show that the formula for the GDP deflator and the Paasche index has the same configurations. This is because:  FORMULA  This is of the form of the Paasche price index. In other words, the GDP deflator is a form of the Paasche index. <heading>CPI vs. GDP deflator</heading>In order to make the CPI series comparable with GDP deflator, the CPI figures had to be re-referenced. The re-referenced CPI figure could be obtained by dividing the original CPI figures by GDP deflator and multiplying by a hundred. Now the two series can be cross-referenced and compared. Although the CPI and the GDP deflator are both reliable measures of inflation in the UK, they each show different trends or movements in prices between the period 1997 Q1 and 2004 Q3. This can easily be illustrated by plotting a graph as shown below. <figure/>Using the 'data analysis' function of 'tools' in excel, I was able to compute the correlation coefficient of the two series, which worked out to be -0.9899 to four decimal places. The figure is very close to 1 which indicates that the two series are very closely linked and therefore do not vary too greatly. It is also a negative figure which signify that if one goes up, the other decreases and vice versa. Though the CPI and the GDP deflator move together most of the times, this is clearly not the case for our example above. The pink line, indicating the trend of the CPI, moves downwards where as the GDP deflator indicates that inflation is going up. Firstly, the GDP deflator is a price index measuring changes in prices of all new, domestically produced, final goods and services in an economy. The GDP deflator is not based on a fixed market basket of goods and services. The basket is allowed to change with people's consumption and investment patterns. Therefore, new expenditure patterns are allowed to show up in the deflator as people respond to changing prices. On the contrary, the CPI doesn't use all goods, rather it uses a specific basket of goods which consumers are likely to use. It measures the price of a fixed basket of goods and services purchased by a representative consumer over a given period relative to the price of the same basket in some base year. Briefly, the GDP deflator reflects the overall changes in price levels in the economy, while the CPI reflects more on what the consumer faces. Using CPI allows us to measure inflation facing consumers and using GDP is better for measuring the inflation in the economy as a whole. For instance, prices of imported goods will not be included in the GDP deflator. Therefore, the GDP deflator would not reflect the rise in the cost of living faced by consumers. <heading>Q2</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>The purpose of this assignment is to seasonally adjust time series effectively. A time series is a set of measurements, ordered, or progressing over time. To be a seasonal time series, the data when graphed must contain seasonal components. The aim of the seasonal adjustment is to smooth out and average out any seasonal factors so that the general trend can properly be observed rather than irregularities. The source of the data was ONS Databank online. Firstly I had to select a quarterly data series which had a seasonal component in it. Without it, it would serve no purpose for this assignment. To do this, I had to initially spend time exploring different series by selecting them and displaying them on-screen. I decided to use the Retail Sales Index (RSI) because the seasonality could be seen very clearly in the graph as a cycle within each year. Figures for Retail Sales Index (RSI) from 1994 to 2002, therefore, is given in table 1 under Xt. These figures indicate how much firms have been spending on retailing in each quarter of years. It can easily be observed from the data that in addition to having a general trend, they also fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to seasonal spending patterns. Once I had imported the data into Excel, I firstly singled out the period between 1994 Quarter 1 and 2002 Quarter 4, as required. It was then necessary to estimate the trend of the data. To do this, the averages over successive runs of four quarters were required. It is assumed that the RSI consists of a trend component (Tt), a seasonal component (St) and an irregular component (Rt). The relationship of these components in such a multiplicative model is formulated in the following way  FORMULA  <heading>The Trend Component</heading>The trend of the series is determined by calculating moving averages. The idea is to find averages over successive runs for four quarters. If Xt equals the observation of the variable at time t, the average over the first four quarters can be worked out by  FORMULA  Here, the number 2.5 is used because the average is associated with some point between quarter 2 and 3. This gives the first trend value for the data because it smoothes out seasonal and irregular movements over the first four quarters. The process is then repeated by obtaining X*3.5 - by replacing quarter 1 of year 1 by the first quarter of year 2, that is, X₁by X5. Once the 4-quarter moving average is obtained, the next step is to average X*2.5 and X*3.5 to get X*3.  FORMULA  This is the centred 1-quarter moving average. By repeating the processes as explained above, I was able to derive the table of results as shown below. <table/>The 4 point moving average of any particular quarter X*t is taken as the trend component of that particular quarter. It allows us to take averages for each quarter. Using Xt and the computed X*t, the de-trended series index for each quarter is given by Yt =Xt /X*t. The de-trended series is illustrated in table 2 below. An index greater than 1 shows that the actual sales are greater than the 'average'. <table/><heading>The Seasonal Component</heading>To obtain the index for the four quarters, I chose to take the geometric mean of the de-trended series index for each quarter. That is, for Q1, I computed the geometric mean of 1994 Q1, 1995 Q1, 1996 Q1 and so on using the 'geomean' function of excel. As the purpose of this exercise is to seasonally adjust time series, it was now necessary to average out the irregular factors over corresponding quarters of Yt, in other words, obtain the average seasonal factor. To do this, I had to first calculate the arithmetic mean, in this case it was 1.003369293. Then, I rescaled the seasonal indices so that they average out to 1.0. In this case I scaled up each index by 1.0/1.003369293 = 0.99664. Table 3 below illustrates this in more detail. <table/>A general pattern can be noticed from table 3. It is that the seasonal index for quarter 4 is generally above 1 whereas for quarter 1, the values are well below 1. <heading>The Seasonally Adjusted Series</heading>Finally, the seasonal component can be removed by calculating Zt=Xt/St. in other words, the RSI for each quarter is divided by its corresponding seasonal index to de-seasonalise it. Table 4 shows a complete table of results consisting of original series as well as the seasonally adjusted series. <table/>Graph 1 below plots the unadjusted series Xt and the adjusted series Zt. It can be noted that the unadjusted series show much less fluctuations as compared to the original series which fluctuates a lot between quarters. <figure/><heading>Conclusion</heading>The correlation coefficient for the two series is 0.827 to three decimal places. This can be worked out using the 'correl' function of excel. This means that there is a relatively strong relationship between the two series, and seasonal fluctuations are not too great. The closer the value of the coefficient to 1, the closer the relationship between the two series. Both for adjusted and unadjusted, the RSI has been steadily increasing from the year 1994 Q1 up till the year 2002 Q4. Data such as the RSI will always be subject to seasonal fluctuations. For instance, the sales for the last quarter of each year is a lot higher than sales in the first quarter of the year. This is probably due to the rise in consumption during the holiday season and firms therefore sell more goods and services. Retail sales reach the lowest during the first quarter without exception. However, the de-seasonalised series demonstrates a more general overview of the change in sales over the course of 8 years. Seasonally adjusting the data allows us to see how much retail sales has changed over the years. It minimizes seasonal fluctuations so that any irregularities in the trend can be overlooked. Such knowledge of seasonal fluctuations is vital information for retailers and producers alike because using the information, they are more or less able to estimate how much to produce and how much to stock up during these seasons. For instance, according to their knowledge of higher retail sales during the last quarter of the year, producers will produce more and retailers will stock up in anticipation of future higher consumption. 