The First Theorem of Welfare Economics guarantees that a competitive market will exhaust all the gains from trade: an equilibrium allocation achieved by a set of competitive markets will necessarily be Pareto efficient. Under these conditions, competitive markets also lead to efficiency involving the allocation of resources over time and under uncertainty. As education is not a homogenous product, this essay first argues that in the market for tertiary and higher education, it would be more efficient for educational institutions to operate as profit-motivated firms instead of state sector agents. Nevertheless, market failure exists and equity issues are omitted in the First Theorem of Welfare Economics. Therefore, the second part of this essay examines the situations in which state intervention in the education system, especially that for basic education, is warranted. Before concluding, a few caveats and policy recommendations for a quasi-market solution in the education sector would be highlighted. <fnote>Varian, 2003, pg 556 </fnote>A Pareto efficient allocation is one where there is no way of making some individual better off without making someone else worse off and there are no mutually advantageous trades to be made. Referring to figure 1, point f satisfies the three conditions for Pareto efficiency. Consumption efficiency is achieved when consumers' indifference curves are tangent to each other on the contract curve. Ie:  FORMULA  where MRS denotes the marginal rate of substitution between education and all other goods in consumption by a consumer. Production efficiency is also attained when producers' isoquants are tangent. <fnote>Varian, 2003, pg 545 </fnote>Ie:  FORMULA  MRTS refers to the marginal rate of technical substitution and it measures the rate at which the available technology allows for the substitution of one factor for another in the production process. MPL denotes the marginal productivity of labour which is the increase in output due to the employment of one extra unit of labour. MPK is the marginal productivity of capital and is the increase in output due to the employment of one extra unit of capital There is allocation efficiency when  FORMULA  ie: the rate at which consumers are willing to trade education for all other commodities is equal to the marginal rate of transformation, MRT, which is the rate resources can be used to transform the production of education to all other commodities. The First Theorem of Welfare Economics demonstrates that competition, along with maximizing behavior on the part of institutions leads to a Pareto efficient outcome. <figure/>According to The Economist, Americans like the British have realized that their system of large "one-size-fit- all" public schools was failing badly. America spends about 8.2% of its GDP (Gross Domestic Product) on education, significantly more per head than the international average and far more than countries such as Hungary and Singapore whose schools do better. In Britain, it appears as if the money poured into education was going to waste. Inputs have been increasing by around 2% for the past ten years but outputs have only increased by 1% a year, implying that productivity has been falling by around 1% a year. Public organizations, according to Alchian, do not directly concentrate the cost and benefits on decision makers. Hence they have an incentive to shirk. The market process, on the other hand, forces schools to compete for students and schools inept at providing services would lose their 'customers' (students) to other schools. The organization of public schools protects educators from such competition because payments are not made directly by the students receiving the services, nor do public employees bear the consequence of poor service. By contrasting private and public educational systems with data on 59,000 high school students, Coleman et al (1982) found that, after controlling for family background variables that predict achievement, children attending private schools learn at a faster rate. Therefore the evidence, in agreement with the First Welfare Theorem, suggests that public provision is costly not only in terms of current expenditure but also in terms of forgone investment in human capital. <fnote>The Economist, " Comparing notes", 12 October 2000, The economist print edition </fnote><fnote>The Economist, "Back to School", 28 September 2000, The economist print edition </fnote><fnote>The Economist, "Pick a number, any number", 3 November 2005, The Economist Print edition </fnote><fnote>John R. Lott, Jr ,1987, pg 477 </fnote><fnote>One difficulty with the Coleman et al findings is that they fail to examine what differences in family characteristics cause certain children to be sent to private schools in the first place. For example, the decision to send a child to a private school may signal the presence of other parental investments in their children, which may be responsible for some portion of the differential rates. However since this last effect cannot explain all of the difference, the study does confirm Alchian's prediction. </fnote>Although equality is deemed desirable, many argue that the reality of the transfers produced by public provision of education coincides much more closely with "Director's Law" which states that public expenditure are made primarily for the benefit of the middle class. Peltzman (1973) found that the effect of subsidized higher education has been to shift students to public universities without greatly affecting total higher education enrollment. He concluded that the effect of such subsidies has been to transfer wealth to middle and upper-income families who would have sent their children to college anyway. In addition, John Lott proposes that governments willingly bear the costs associated with public provision because it reduces the costs of other governmental actions- in particular the costs of transferring wealth. Therefore, arguments for public provision of higher education on grounds of equity are unconvincing. <fnote>John R. Lott, Jr, 1987, pg 488 </fnote><fnote>John R. Lott, Jr, 1987, pg 489 </fnote><fnote>John R. Lott, Jr, 1987, pg 497 </fnote>To enhance efficiency in the tertiary education system, the strategy that follows is to use market forces (with regulation where relevant) to allocate resources with taxpayer subsides in respect of external benefits and redistributive activity to promote access. It is argued that since consumers (university students) are matured enough and there is sufficient information on good universities available, so long as each student knows only the prices of the goods (university and degree course), he can determine his demands. Moreover, if the market functions well enough to determine the competitive prices, we are guaranteed an efficient outcome. Universities, however, are not the conventional firms of economic theory (Winston, 1999): they neither make a 'well-defined', homogenous product nor do they always seek to maximize profit. Thus red-in-tooth-and-claw competition is not necessarily the best environment for higher education. Therefore the role of the government in this system is to promote access by making available funding and scholarship grants, provide quality assurance with regular inspection of the general education standards in schools and setting incentives for the provision of subjects like music, drama, or some languages which are less able to flourish in a more market-oriented system. In this manner, government would serve its proper function of improving the operation of the invisible hand without substituting the dead hand of bureaucracy. <fnote>Nicholas Barr,2004 , pg 324 </fnote><fnote>Nicholas Barr, 2004,pg 331 </fnote>In sum, the first part of the essay has shown that in the presences of perfect information and perfectly competitive markets, it follows from the First Theorem of Welfare Economics that the resulting competitive equilibrium is Pareto efficient. Nevertheless, acknowledging the fact that in reality market failures like externalities, imperfect information and monopolies exist, the second part of this essay examines the circumstances in which it would be more efficient for government to intervene in the provision of education, especially basic education. Education is not a public good nor does it face general increasing returns to scale. Nevertheless, education creates important external benefits concerning productivity, shared values and civic participation. These benefits may be difficult to quantify but cannot on that account be ignored. Referring to figure 2, because the marginal social benefits (MSB) of education exceeds the marginal private benefits (MPB), left to profit-motivated private schools, the amount of education provided, Q, would be less than the socially optimum level, Q*. <fnote>Nicholas Barr, 2004, pg 301 </fnote><figure/>Furthermore, in a market system for early education, since children (the immediate consumers) are not well-informed, decisions are left mostly to parents. However, parental preferences may be inefficient because they might themselves have imperfect information or they might not consider the child's best interest but those of the family as a whole. Hence government intervention in the form of publishing a list of school fees or regulating them would help to ameliorate the problem of imperfect information. <fnote>Nicholas Barr,2004, pg 300 </fnote>In small communities and rural areas, the number of children may be too small to justify more than one school of reasonable size, so that competition cannot be relied on to protect the interests of parents and children. As in other case of natural monopolies, where the First Welfare Theorem does not hold, the alternatives to profit-motivated schools are unrestricted private monopoly, state-controlled private monopoly and public operation---a choice among evils. This argument is clearly valid and significant, although its force has been greatly weakened in recent decades by improvements in transportation and increasing concentration of the population in urban communities. <fnote>Milton Friedman, " The role of government in education" in Economics and the Public interest, New Jersey: Rutgers college </fnote>To summarize, in a free private enterprise exchange economy, government's primary role is to preserve the rules of the game by enforcing contracts, preventing coercion, and keeping markets free. Beyond this, there are only three major grounds on which government intervention is to be justified. Firstly, the existence of positive externalities in which the action of one individual yields significant gains for other individuals for which it is not feasible to make them compensate him. Secondly, where there is imperfect information and the situation complicated by intergenerational distributional and efficiency issues which arise when parents act as stewards for children. Thirdly, in the presences of a 'natural monopoly' which makes effective competition impossible. In all three circumstances voluntary exchange is impossible and thus the First Welfare Theorem breaks down and it would be more efficient for schools to function as state sector agents. <fnote>A natural monopoly arises where there is large fixed costs and the ideal solution in this scenario would be for the natural monopoly to operate the service and provide education at price equals marginal cost. A lump sum subsidy would then be provided by the government to keep the school in operation </fnote><fnote>Milton Friedman, " The role of government in education" in Economics and the Public interest, New Jersey: Rutgers college </fnote>Before concluding, three caveats are to be considered when determining if the education system would be more efficient under profit-motivated schools or state sector agents. Next, a few alternative policy recommendations would also be suggested. Firstly, it is implicitly assumed in this essay that state sector agents are neither profit-seekers nor price takers and that the existence of profit-motivated firms signals the presences of perfect competition. However, in reality government policies like ranking of schools could induce competition, albeit imperfect, amongst state sector agents. Secondly, there are a few measurement problems associated with the results under both systems. Using standardized test scores to judge the effectiveness of the educational outcome is an imperfect measure per se. While it is possible to measure the quantity of some inputs (teachers' and pupils' time, buildings and equipment) it is not possible to accurately measure their quality. Therefore, while theories supporting separately both the case for private and public provision of education exist, in reality it is difficult to judge base on the outcomes, which system is more effective. Moreover, it is also difficult to ascertain the optimal level of provision for education because viewed as a positive externality, the amount of education chosen by an individual in a market system would generally be less than the optimal amount. However if claims of the screening hypothesis are valid, then education leads to but does not cause an increase in individual productivity. When increased productivity leads to higher income, an individual may acquire more education than is socially efficient. Therefore neither the market system nor central planning seems to be able to ascertain the optimal amount of education to be provided. <fnote>Nicholas Barr,2004, pg 298 </fnote>Thirdly, a theory is only as useful as its application and application of any theory has to take into account the context. For example, under certain conditions, the First Welfare Theorem may provide a strong case for private provision of education, however, in countries like Singapore there is an even stronger case for schools to be state sector agents. The government has included in the national curriculum social studies to inculcate nationalistic values and emphasizes the importance of racial harmony which is essential in a multi-racial society like Singapore. The problem, however, lies in drawing a line between providing for the common social values required for a stable society on the one hand, and indoctrination inhibiting freedom of thought and belief on the other. In contrast, in developing countries like Kenya it might be better for society to have more profit-motivated schools competing for students as it is not uncommon for teachers in state schools to go on strike to demand higher pay. These strikes could happen before the student's examination and are detrimental to the child's education. Therefore if they could afford it, most Kenyans would rather attend private schools to get a better education. In this case, congruent with the First Welfare Theorem, on efficiency grounds schools should be profit-motivated firms. However, on grounds of equity the government has to intervene to ensure that the poor are not left behind. <fnote>The conditions are mentioned in the first part of the essay and include factors like perfect competition and government failure </fnote>In view of the above mentioned loopholes in both systems, a quasi-market solution is recommended. Under the voucher scheme, governments could require a minimum level of education which they could finance by giving parents vouchers redeemable for a specified maximum sum per child per year if spent on "approved" educational services. Parents would then be free to spend this sum and any additional sum on purchasing educational services from an "approved" institution of their own choice. The educational services could be rendered by private enterprises operated for profit, or by non-profit institutions of various kinds. The role of the government would be limited to assuring that the schools met certain minimum standards such as the inclusion of a minimum common content in their programs, much as it now inspects restaurants to assure that they maintain minimum sanitary standards. In fact the education system in Britain appears to be heading in this direction as can be seen from the policy recommendations in the recent schools white paper. For example, allowing schools to become independent trusts, with more say over admissions, staffing and finances. Local authorities are to be "champions" for good schools, rather than education providers. A "schools commissioner" and network of advisers would also be there to help parents make informed decisions. <fnote>Milton Friedman, " The role of government in education" in Economics and the Public interest, New Jersey: Rutgers college </fnote><fnote>BBC News," Prescott in blow to school reforms", 18 Dec 2005 </fnote>In conclusion, this essay first showed that it follows from the First Welfare theorem that for higher education it would be more efficient to have profit-motivated institutions. Nevertheless, due to market failure, government intervention is warranted to improve efficiency and equity. However, the law of Glasser states that if it says "one-size-fit-all" it fits none at all. Hence one has to take into account the caveats involving measurement problems and context when trying to apply theory in reality. 