<heading>Introduction</heading>Quine's naturalized epistemology, if accepted, puts an end to the search for certain (or rather "certain") knowledge. Subtleties aside, Quine denies the possibility of our beliefs being justified, in much the same way as our actions are sometimes denied ethical value. Thus, the traditional epistemic enquiry is all but drained of content, and Quine urges us to abandon the project altogether and turn to the empiric issue of how beliefs and theories about the outside world are generated in the human brain. In this essay I will try and outline Quine's project and his reasons for 'naturalizing epistemology'. I will begin by discussing his claim that traditional epistemology is a "lost cause", move on to his vision of epistemology as an empiric discipline, and lastly discuss the various philosophic implications of naturalizing epistemology. <heading>Quine's case against a complete 'theory of knowledge'</heading>Quine describes the traditional epistemic project as an attempt to find a dynamic logical link between sensory experience and theory. From our experience we create wide-ranging theories about the outside world, the most systematic being the laws of nature as revealed by science. The purpose of traditional epistemology since Descartes has been to provide us with intellectual and linguistic tools with the use of which we may ascertain when our theories correspond with the actual state of things and when they do not. Epistemology was to tell us when and how our beliefs and theories were justified. A proper logical system of justification would maybe one day bridge the gap between theory and reality, and provide us with the foundations of science; much like mathematics would eventually be reduced to logic. Drawing on the analogy to mathematics and logic Quine divides the epistemic program into two parts: conceptual reduction and doctrinal reduction. Through conceptual reduction the philosopher tries to reduce his theories about the external world to phenomenal features of our indubitable sensory experience. Quine refers to Carnap's Der Logische der Welt as the most successful attempt to, by logical deduction, go from theory to experience. But, Quine asserts, because of the complex or holistic manner in which experience generates empirical meaning, we will never be able to discover a precise logical relationship (a "point to point" relationship) between physical terms and phenomenal terms. The other part of the epistemic project, doctrinal reduction, failed according to Quine, with Hume. By doctrinal reduction Quine refers to the process of logically obtaining theory (e.g. the laws of science) from our sensory input. But Hume, Quine argues, showed that the creation of a theory always involves an element of unsubstantiated generalization (e.g. identity). <heading>Naturalized epistemology</heading>Quine concludes that logical validation of science on the basis of observation is impossible. What we are left with is a normative epistemology in which justification becomes a matter of convenience or semantics, not logic. Here Quine urges us to abandon our traditional epistemic search for justification: since all of epistemology is a normative enterprise we will never be able to logically prove the truth of any belief on the basis of experience of the outside world. In Quine's opinion our best course of action if we want to understand the connection between sensory stimulation and theory is to immerse ourselves in the empiric study of how sensory input generates mental/neural representations in human beings. Quine himself talks of "settling for psychology", but a more modern version of his essay "Epistemology Naturalized" might have emphasized the different processes by which the brain makes neural patterns in its nerve-cell circuits and manages to turn those neural patterns into mental images. The question of how consciousness arises from neural circuits in thalamus and cortex will have to be addressed. <heading>Is naturalized epistemology a subject-matter of philosophy?</heading>Quine urges us to accept that our only source of information about anything comes through our sense organs in the form of mental representations of the outside world. In a Wittgensteinian fashion he asserts that the sceptic's challenge is but a figment of our over-analytic imagination. I am not in a position to argue for or against his attack on traditional, logical epistemology, and I wonder if anyone really is. Who can know for certain that certain knowledge is impossible? Two other issues seem pressing at the moment. Does epistemology cease to be a philosophic enterprise in Quine's naturalized form? And secondly, is normative epistemology as useless or impossible as Quine will have us believe? The answer to the first question must be no. Epistemology in Quine's natural form investigates how sensory input leads to mental theories and representations of the world. This enterprise has already been subdivided into parts in psychology (e.g. psychophysics, attention, memory, or schema-theory) and neuroscience (i.e. how different neural structures contribute to perception and dynamic mental images). But nowhere in these disciplines is there any talk of the relations between "evidence", "justification" or "knowledge", and there is no such thing as researching an organism's "true" or "correct" perception of its environment. Some thinkers have been inspired by Quine, but also by philosophers such as Alvin Goldman and Thomas Kuhn to advocate naturalistic epistemology, an epistemology which emphasizes empiric investigation rather than a priori conceptual analysis. Contrary to Quine however, naturalistic epistemology recognises a crucial difference between knowledge and true belief, focusing on the psychological processes that produced that belief. If the process was sound we may call the resulting representation of the world "accurate" or "knowledge". Quine's naturalized epistemologist on the other hand, does not assess whether or to what extent the input "justifies" the output. But then again, according to Quine, this is the only reasonable route to take since the input leads to, but doesn't ever "justify", the output. But is this true? Why should we abandon traditional epistemology altogether, especially if it satisfies our intellectual curiosity? In his essay "What is naturalized epistemology?" Jaegwon Kim asserts that normative epistemology is indeed possible. He makes an analogy to ethics, saying that just like a car may be "good" in virtue of certain factual properties; a belief may be "justified" because of certain properties such as its being coherent, rational, "indubitable" or logically deducible from another "indubitable" belief and so on. Quine is saying that for centuries we've been trying to find rational and normative systems that encompass these different properties, and that we should now be ready to admit that the project is impossible. Epistemology is obviously possible, articles are published every day, but will it ever amount to anything more substantial? Must it? Shall I sign up for an optional course in modern epistemology or functional neuroanatomy? Once again, ones allegiance in this matter seems to bear on personality traits rather than reason. 