<heading>Introduction</heading>How does neurobiological development constrain cognitive development? The ambiguity in this question lies in the word 'constrain'. Cognitive development usually refers to the development of different cognitive skills (such as language) as one passes through childhood into adulthood. Alternatively, cognitive development may refer in a more general sense to the overall evolution of intellectual capacity during a person's life. Piaget's stage model exemplifies an attempt to describe cognitive development in this latter sense of the phrase, and aptitude tests such as WAIS are designed to describe it quantitatively. Neurobiological development on the other hand is the gradual unfolding and maturation of the brain as a result of hereditary and environmental influence. This biological development causes cognitive development, so in what sense can neural development constrain cognitive development? This question can perhaps be approached by looking at pathological as opposed to normal cognitive development. For instance, children with fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) develop small and malformed brains as a result of disproportionate amounts of alcohol in the womb. As a result they develop attentional and perceptual deficits, irritability and impulsivity, and general mental retardation (Passer & Smith, 2001). Here, I suppose, deficits in neural development constrains cognitive development in that they prevent normal development. Cognitive development, both the development of specific cognitive functions and cognitive development in the more general sense of the phrase, is about adapting to and learning from one's environment. In the textbooks, the brain's ability to adapt and learn is referred to as its being plastic. During development, different neural structures will be especially plastic at different points in time (particularly during early childhood). During this period (usually referred to as a critical or sensitive period) the brain will respond to appropriate environmental stimuli (such as spoken language) by profusely generating new synapses, extending axons, instigating cell growth etc. If the environmental stimuli appropriate for a specific neural structure do not appear during the critical period it will sometimes prevent the organism from ever developing the function properly. In other words, a critical period is an abrupt decline in plasticity. For instance, cataracts convert the optical lens into an opaque diffuser making it impossible for patients to distinguish shapes properly. In children, if the defect is not corrected in time, the neurons of the visual system will not have had time to fine-tune themselves in the presence of visual stimuli, and the system will remain undeveloped leaving the children permanently unable to distinguish shapes (Kringelbach & Engell). The brain is in some senses a muscle and many of its visual, cognitive and other functions require good training at certain early stages if they are to develop normally. Thus cognitive development is constrained to these particular critical or sensitive periods. I begin by discussing the nature of plasticity and critical periods, with examples from the research on the visual system. Then I shall discuss how plasticity relates to cognitive development in general and, as an example, its specific instances as critical periods in language acquisition. <heading>Plasticity and critical periods</heading>There is abundant evidence for critical periods for higher cognitive functions in man (Kringelbach & Engell; Banich, 1997; Thomas, 2003). But much of what we know about the neurobiology of plasticity and critical periods comes from experiments involving vision and visual cortex, and draws on the Nobel Prize winning research of Hubel and Wiesel (1962). Using eye-patches or fuzzy lenses Hubel and Wiesel would close one eye of kitten and monkeys at various early stages of visual development (visual deprivation). Later, upon opening the eye, the researchers would determine if the experimental animal had developed deficits in its visual system, and if so, whether the damage was permanent. The critical period for the visual system of a cat was found to be from about four weeks until about four months. The critical period for monkeys starts immediately after birth and does not end until the age of about one year (Kringelbach & Engell). During these periods the visual system arranges neurons to respond to visual stimuli. Even excessive visual training will result only in slight improvement if exposure to visual stimuli does not occur until after the period is over. Conversely, visual deprivation following normal development of visio-neural structures during the "assigned" critical period will have no effect on cortex (Cooper, 2004). Hubel and Wiesel also showed that they could instigate the development of some normal visual functions: if raised in a visual environment that featured only vertical lines kitten developed visiocortical structures that respond mainly to vertical lines and not at all to horizontal lines. Harlow et. al. (1965) discovered critical periods in social development of monkeys, and there is much evidence for critical periods in human cognitive development, especially language which I will discuss shortly. But first a short word about the biology of plasticity. The analogy of the brain as a muscle that requires training during certain periods is not a wholly correct one. Rather, according to Sherman's famous competition hypothesis (1973) different functions (including cognitive functions) compete for space in the brain (Kringelbach & Engell). Thus the plasticity of the brain allows for a neural structure that cannot carry out the function it was genetically "designed" for to engage in the function of another nearby structure. At the cellular level the competition hypothesis can be explained as an instance of Hebbian synapse strengthening, the essence of which was summed up by Shatz (1992): "Cells that fire together wire together". A critical period is a time when synapses are especially plastic. However, the brain cannot remain permanently plastic without using more of the body's energy, and the adult brain uses a fifth of the body's energy supply and similar proportions of oxygen. Evolution allows fine-tuning (a critical period) of the brain only when it is necessary - evolution constrains cognitive development. <heading>Critical periods for cognitive functions in man</heading>So how, more specifically, does neural development constrain cognitive development. How do critical periods affect cognitive development? By age 6 months the brain is already 50% of its adult weight. Cells grow larger and extend new dendrites, many axons develop myelin sheath and new synapses are formed. By age 5 it's up to 90% (Passer & Smith, 2001). The brain has acquired its mature structure at about 17, and at this time cognitive development, in the "growth" sense of the word (and also as measured by intelligence tests) comes to a halt and begins a slow descent that lasts throughout adulthood (Mackintosh, 1998). Evolution thus, calls cognitive development to a general halt. The effects of cognitive deprivation (e.g. social isolation) during these childhood years differ between neural systems (Thomas, 2003). Even with adequate nutrition infants raised in an environment with severely limited opportunities for exploration and interaction with objects and others experience massive delays in motor and cognitive development. In two follow-up studies the majority children who had been adopted quite early had catched up and were functioning within the normal range after several years in an "enriched" middle class environment (Eysenck & Keane, 2000; Kringelbach & Engell). This suggests that infancy and the early childhood years are the years where maximum cognitive development can occur. With intensive training however many cognitive functions can develop later than usual (Thomas, 2003). Of the neural systems the ones least susceptible to such catch-up growth seems to be those responsible for language. In Biological Foundations of Language Eric Lenneberg (1967) hypothesises that human language acquisition is "an example of biologically constrained learning" and since his book many studies have confirmed his position. A critical point in lingo-neural development seems to be the onset of puberty. Many studies show that if a child is deprived of language up until this point, no subsequent level of exposure to language will permit effective use of syntax, rhythm or grammatical structure (Kringelbach & Engell; Newport, 2002). Conversely, peak proficiency in a given language appears in those who were exposed to the language in infancy or very early childhood. For second languages data shows that if acquisition occurs before the ages of 5-7 years the person's competence will be equivalent to that of a native speaker. For every year that passes after the age of 7 there will be an exponential decline in the subject's ability to understand the particular grammar and syntax of the language. After the age of 16 there is no further exponential decline (Newport, 2002; Eysenck & Keane, 2000). Naturally there are individual differences in ability to learn languages, but these too seem to increase with age (Newport, 2002). Interestingly, age of exposure does not seem to affect all aspects of language equally. Acquiring vocabulary and semantic processing (i.e. meaning) tends to occur normally in late learners. Rather, error frequently occurs in the representation and manipulation of the formal properties of the language (e.g. phonology, morphology, syntax) (Newport, 2002). Neurobiological findings strongly support the idea of critical periods in language acquisition. PET and fMRI scans show strong left hemisphere activation for processing native language, in bilinguals as well as monolinguals. The neural structures used to process a language learnt after the age of seven will be bilateral and partially or entirely nonoverlapping with those that process native language (Newport, 2002). All in all these and similar results provide strong evidence for a critical period in developing the neural structures that process phonology and grammar. <heading>Conclusion</heading>What I have tried to do in this essay is to get to grips with the question how neural development can be said to constrain cognitive development. I hope the aside on plasticity in the visual system will be excused, but it was a good way for me to get to the details of critical periods. I rather sympathise with the conclusion in that second section that evolution needs to allow highly plastic learning (development of cognitive skills) only from now and then - evolution limits endless cognitive potential to what is useful for human survival only. The phenomena critical periods in language acquisition seems to be a very typical topic to discuss when considering the neural constraints on cognitive development. Perhaps some other cognitive functions (particularly memory) should have been considered in this essay (as should the severe neural constrains on cognition that arise in aging), but there isn't room or time to do so. 