Stabilisation policy is policy undertaken by governments in an attempt to modify fluctuations in the business cycle by reducing the size of peak and troughs. Economists have differing views about the extent in which policy should be used to stabilise the economy. At one end of the spectrum are economists such as Milton Friedman who believe that government attempts to stabilise the economy can actually do more harm than good whilst at the other are those who believe that government policy is a very successful tool in economy stabilisation, for example to avoid high unemployment and inflation. In theory monetary and fiscal policy has the potential to be a very powerful tool in affecting the economy and theory suggests that it can be used by policy makers to improve macroeconomic performance. However, in practice the application of the theory is not always straightforward as issues such as macroeconomic uncertainty, lags, and credibility of government policy come into play. Within the Keynesian Fixed Price Model, monetary and fiscal policy can theoretically be used to stabilise the economy. Consider a depressed economy where the target output level is at  FORMULA  but the economy is at  FORMULA . It is possible to use fiscal policy such as an increase in government spending, monetary policy such as an increase in the money supply or a combination of both to stimulate the depressed economy. <figure/>As can be seen in the above diagram an expansionary fiscal policy such as an increase in government spending shifts the IS Curve to the right from IS to IS' increasing output and the interest rate. However, we must consider what is happening in the economy to cause this shift. The increase in government spending increases output from Y 0 to Y 1 through the multiplier effect so increasing the demand for money. Given fixed money supply the money market is now out of equilibrium as transactions demand for money results in demand greater than supply. To restore money market equilibrium the interest rate must rise to induce savings. This is generated by the sale of government bonds. In a closed economy this interest rate rise will reduce investment and thus offset or 'crowd out' some of the output increase caused by the expansionary fiscal policy. Output will move from Y 1 to Y 2. In an open economy such as the UK where exports account for 27% of GDP, the increase in the interest rate also affects output through the exchange rate. The interest rate increase causes an appreciation of the pound which reduces demand for UK exports while increasing demand within the UK for imports from abroad. Next exports decrease. This 'crowds out' further the stimulus to the economy from an expansionary fiscal policy. Expansionary fiscal policy is less effective in an open economy than in a closed economy as an expansionary fiscal policy crowds out spending not only in interest-rate sensitive capital goods industries but also in export and import-competing industries. <figure/>An expansionary monetary policy such as an increase in the money supply shown above shifts the LM curve to the right from LM to LM' so increasing output and decreasing the interest rate. Intuitively, given output and hence demand for money, the increase in money supply creates a disequilibrium in the money market that is corrected by a fall in the interest rate from R 0 to R 1 (discouraging saving and thus increasing personal holdings of money). In a closed economy this lower interest rate stimulates an increase in investment so output rises from Y 0 to Y 1. This in turn increases money demand, which means that the interest rate must rise from R 1 to R 2 in order to induce savings and restore the money market to equilibrium. In an open economy the reduction in the interest rate triggers, in addition, a depreciation of the domestic currency which increases net exports. However, due to the increase in domestic GDP caused by an increase in net exports, imports rise. It can therefore be seen that it is uncertain how a depreciation affects net exports and therefore output. However, it is known that as long as the Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfied a depreciation causes an increase in net exports and therefore output (Blanchard, O. 2002 p416). An expansionary monetary policy has an increased effect in an open economy due to its stimulation of net exports as well as investment. An extension of this theory would be a mix of monetary and fiscal policy. In this case the IS and LM Curves would shift right simultaneously meaning that only output increases and there is no change in the interest rate. This would eliminate crowding out and mean greater effect of policy on the economy. <figure/>The extent to which stabilisation policy can be used in practice is a different question. Boltho (1989) compared three periods (1870-1913, 1922-1937 and 1950-1979) in which the first two periods governments carried out little stabilisation policy whereas in the last stabilisation policy was used widely. He concluded that the 'overwhelming impression is one of much greater cyclical stability in the three decades from 1950 than in the two earlier periods shown' (Boltho, 1989 p1715). We can see supporting evidence of this in the comparison over the three periods of the standard deviation of GDP and the co-efficient of variation of GDP. In the UK the standard deviation of annual percentage changes in GDP for 1870-1913 and 1922-37 were 2.35 and 3.35 respectively whilst for 1950-79 the figure is much lower at 1.94 (Boltho, 1989, Table 2 p1716). The co-efficients of variation paint a similar picture with UK figures of 2.22 and 1.73 in the periods 1870-1913 and 1922-37 respectively compared with a large fall to 0.49 in 1950-79 (Boltho, 1989, Table 2 p1716). Various explanations apart from stabilisation policy for this change were looked at. Firstly the theory that post 1950 stability may stem from stability within international economies especially if exchange rates are fixed, secondly, the changed structure of economies in the post-war period, for instance with the shrinking of the volatile agricultural sector. However, 'the most plausible explanation appeared to be the greater direct and indirect role of government' (Boltho, 1989 p1723). <fnote>Co-efficient of variation takes account of the size of the country and is calculated by standard deviation divided by mean. </fnote>One of the biggest criticisms of the use of stabilisation policy is uncertainty and disagreement among macroeconomists about the state and future of the economy. For instance when the central bank or government is formulating policy they must take many factors into consideration when deciding the extent of the policy such as the unemployment or inflation rate. Uncertainty can be illustrated with consideration of the UK economy in the late 1980s. The economy was at the peak of the cycle with a large fiscal surplus. However, the future health of the economy was overvalued by policy makers with output, spending projections and the level of output relative to its trend overestimated. Fiscal policy was relaxed in response to these estimations with a tax cut of £6 billion introduced in March 1988 followed by a further £3.5 billion in March 1989 (The Treasury, 1997, p4). The purpose of this was to create a balanced budget, however, the economy deteriorated with the surplus falling much faster than expected and entered recession. There was an error of £50 billion between actual output and the initial projection of the late 1980s (The Treasury, 1997, p4). An additional example can be seen with the breakdown of the Phillips Curve in 1970s. Monetary Policy makers in the UK had been using demand management to exploit the Phillips Curve trade-off between unemployment and inflation to stabilise the economy (See figure 4 below). However, the model only held with static expectations. One expectations became adaptive as inflation became more persistent in 1970s the trade-off no longer existed. Stagflation, a combination of high unemployment and inflation, prevailed. Figure 4: The Phillips Curve This shows that economics is not an exact science and that models can predict incorrectly. It must be considered if it is wise for stabilisation policy to be used to a large extent if it may actually create more harm than good. Perhaps uncertainty should lead to less active policies (Blanchard, O. 2002 p514). Even if a policy appears to be the correct course of action to take for a particular situation stabilisation may not always work because policy only takes effect with lags. There are both inside and outside lags. Inside lags occur because of the time taken for a body such as the Monetary Policy Committee in the UK to recognise developments in the economy and respond correctly such as with a change of interest rate. Outside lags occur once interest rates have been adjusted and factor in the time it takes for these changes to be translated into adjustments in investment spending and effects on equilibrium aggregate demand and output. GDP and Inflation in the UK are not dependent on what the interest rate is now but rather on what it was one to two years previously (The Treasury, 1999c, p3). Policy makers must be sure that they use stabilisation policy with careful consideration of these lags as otherwise monetary stimulus or restraint may come too late. For example, stimulus may come once the recession is over and GDP is returning to potential so adding to output expansion (Figure 5). Stabilisation policy could actually exacerbate economic fluctuations rather than tame them. REAL GDPTIME <figure/><figure/>It is possible perhaps to think of an example of policy restraint happening too late in the UK currently. Perhaps the recent interest rate cuts of the Central Bank may affect our economy when a shock to demand such as a widely discussed housing market crash or simply a downturn have already come into play. The interest rate cuts could actually worsen a future recession. Stabilisation Policy cannot work without the credibility of those formulating and executing the policy. Governments have political as well as economic considerations. For instance, although a contractionary fiscal or monetary policy such as disinflation may be economically sound, a government may not want to carry this out as, for example, it may not want to fight an election in a recession it has created. This is the so-called 'Political Business Cycle'. Expectations play a key role within stabilisation policy as if the markets do not believe monetary or fiscal policy to be credible then the policy will not have the planned effect. An example of how expectations affect credibility could be seen in the UK in the 1990s. The UK's departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992 destroyed the credibility of the Government. Despite a revision of monetary policy via the targeting of RPIX inflation the objectives of monetary policy remained unclear and lacked credibility (The Treasury, 1999b, p8). Despite a government commitment to maintain inflation below 2.5%, expectations where consistently higher (Figure 6) and actual inflation remained consistently above the 2.5% target (The Treasury, 1999b, p9). <figure/>In order to increase the credibility of stabilisation policy and increase the extent in which it can be used effectively, countries including the UK (1997) have introduced independent central banks. These banks use the Taylor Rule as seen below (1) to keep inflation (π) at target inflation (π') by targeting the interest rate (r):  FORMULA  (1) The UK Government claims that this new approach has been very successful in stabilising the UK economy through a period of considerable instability in the global economy (The Treasury, 1999a, p5). Inflation has remained at target and interest rates low. However, Benjamin Friedman (2000, p13-14) questions how transparent and credible inflation targeting is. He believes that central banks cannot solely focus on inflation without consideration for real economic outcomes and that the problem comes because the target of these economic outcomes is not transparent within the central bank monetary policy framework. There is always a temptation for central banks to pursue a more expansionary monetary policy (J. Bradford Delong, 2002, p384), however, this is not consistent with an aim of low inflation. The extent to which stabilisation policy should be used is a contentious issue. Although empirical and statistical evidence suggest stabilisation policy does work, it is difficult to isolate that policy is the sole reason for a more stable economy. Persistent examples from the UK such as stagflation within the 1970s, overestimation of future output in 1980s and the lack of credibility of government within the 1990s leading to a reduction in effectiveness of policy are all key examples of how stabilisation policy can go wrong. However, there is no doubting that if used correctly stabilisation policy can be a powerful tool within the macroeconomy. The success of independent central banks may yet remain to be seen but so far the success of the monetary policy committee of the Bank of England seems to suggest that we are on the correct lines to using stabilisation policy more efficiently. We must, however, exercise caution. 