There are many ways in which La Déclaration des droits de l'homme was a machine de guerre against the Ancien Régime - a social order which had been established throughout Europe from as early as the tenth century. The term machine de guerre, however, is open to interpretation; this paper will examine how the Déclaration responded to the problems of the Ancien Régime, will examine whether the Déclaration included or provoked any kind of violent conflict towards the Ancien Régime thus warranting the usage of the word guerre and will study whether or not it was 'avant tout' produced for these purposes. 'Ancien Régime' is a term which was created by thinkers and authors of the Enlightenment period to combat and belittle the then existing social and political order which 'was characterised... by aristocratic privilege, on that of the state by monarchical absolutism of divine right." During the 1780s, in particular, the population of France began to question the increasingly apparent injustice present in society - largely due to a number of wars which bankrupted the country, resulting in widespread poverty coupled with the fact that 'the progress of the Enlightenment had undermined the ideological foundations of this established order." The Third Estate began to demand power and freedom and wanted to suppress privilege and acquire equal rights from the one percent of the population which was made up of the nobility. <fnote>Soboul, A., The French Revolution in the History of the Contemporary World in Kates, G., ed., The French Revolution, Recent Debates & Controversies, London 1998, p. 25 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 26 </fnote>La Déclaration des droits de l'homme was formally adopted by the National Assembly on 26 th August 1789 and lists, in 17 brief and numbered Articles, a series of rights which, although supposedly taken directly from the Cahiers de doléances of French regions, were meant to state the universal rights of man. In this way the Déclaration was a machine de guerre against the Ancien Régime as its fundamental argument is that all men are born with natural rights, such as liberty and property; government and authority were introduced and should only exist to protect those rights - a philosophy which went against what the Ancien Régime represented. The first article of the Déclaration states that: 'Les hommes naissent et demeurent libres et égaux en droits." and that man has the rights of 'la liberté, la propriété, la sûreté et la résistance à l'oppression. ' These basic liberal principles of the right to own property, freedom and security were decided by the nobility during the Ancien Régime and the conspicuous schism between the estates meant that liberty and power depended on wealth, wealth depended on property, property depended on status and status depended on birth. The Déclaration sought to prevent this occurrence by outlining each man's right to own land and that the law 'doit être la meme pour tous, soit qu'elle protégé, soit qu'elle punisse." This particular article calls for a separation of powers - a concept, again, completely contradicting the injustice of the Ancien Régime. Indeed, article 6 goes on to say that: 'Tous les citoyens... sont...admissables à toutes dignités, places et employs publics, selon leur capacité et sans autre distinction que celle de leurs vertus et de leurs talents." This article is a direct attack on the Ancien Régime; public positions and occupations were inherited or decided by the nobility - leaving members of the Third Estate without a voice. The awarding of these positions on merit indicated a shift in power and an opportunity for change - as, thus far, all the high-ranking members of the Church, Army, government and judiciary had been held by the nobility and these were the positions the Third Estate had to occupy if their ultimate goals were to be achieved. <fnote>Art. 1er, La Déclaration des droits de l'homme, 26 August 1789 </fnote><fnote>Art. 2, Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Art. 6., Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote>The Bastille was, for many, the epitome of the Ancien Régime and, although this bastion of injustice had been torn down a month prior, there were still many injustices in the judiciary system at the time the Déclaration was published. The Déclaration stated that: 'Tout homme étant presume innocent jusqu'à ce qu'il ait été declare coupable." Magistrates were also to be denied review power over legislation and a new legislature was seen to be the best way to ensure equality and fairness in the judiciary. Due to fear of the judiciary or the infamous letters de cachet, people's opinion and freedom of speech was oppressed during the Ancien Régime. The members of the National Assembly were aware that this was the most important factor if the required shift in attitude was to take place. This can be seen in the language used for the eleventh article of the Déclaration; whereas others are a list of rights, this is almost a call to reason, hinting that without this the grievances of the Third Estate can never be answered: 'la libre communication des pensées et des opinions est un des droits les plus précioux de l'homme'. The freedom of speech and religion had been inspired by the writers and thinkers of the Enlightenment period who had called for people to question and become educated about the systems of religion and government which had, under the aegis of the Ancien Régime, oppressed them for so long. <fnote>Art. 9., Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Art 11., Ibid. </fnote>The Déclaration also tried to create a sense of belonging to French society. During the Ancien Régime many French citizens did not feel French and certainly many of them had little or now sense of belonging to a nation. The Déclaration mentions the words 'société' and 'devoir'; the National Assembly realising that a nation in such a disorder as France was in the latter stage of the 1780s needed to be unified if a revolution was to be carried out with as little violence as possible. Important too was 'the closing of the gap between the people and its representatives." This has been nonexistent during the Ancien Régime and the Déclaration was intended to be written in such a language that it could be understood by all men and the document was short enough to be distributed easily and relatively cheaply. The language was also intended to remain as close as possible to the cahiers - ensuring that the people felt that it was their needs and grievances against the Ancien Régime which were represented in the Déclaration. <fnote>Baker, K. M., op. cit., p. 131 </fnote>The Déclaration can also be seen as a machine de guerre in that it (albeit inadvertently) did, at least in some way, contribute and even provoke much of the violence throughout France in the early 1790s. After the capture of the Bastille in July 1789 the revolutionaries saw that things could be achieved by force and the Déclaration played its small part in waging war against the Ancien Régime in that it in no way explained how its rights should be achieved. This led to wide misinterpretation of the document given that 'many of the previsions of the Déclaration remained profoundly ambiguous.'  <fnote>Ibid., p. 129 </fnote>However, it can be argued that the Déclaration was not avant tout une machine de guerre contre l'Ancien Régime. The Déclaration, for the National Assembly, was of paramount importance as it 'gave the National Assembly a statement of universal, eternal, natural principles to legitimate its defiance of an absolute Monarch." It became almost a symbol of the Assembly and was arguably more important for their identity and to attempt to unify (or, at least, give that appearance) 'an assembly profoundly divided over the nature and purpose of its text' than it was as a document combating the Ancien Régime. The National Assembly freely admitted that the Déclaration was a 'text still provisional and incomplete' and that it merely 'took the form of a short, concise preamble to the constitution'. Indeed, article 16 in the document itself refers to a constitution directly hinting that this document does not have the power to outline the law and that a constitution must follow. <fnote>Ibid., p. 130 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 95 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 129 </fnote><fnote>Baker, K. M., Fixing the French Constitution in Baker, K. M., ed., Inventing the French Revolution, Cambridge 1990, p. 261 </fnote><fnote>Art 16., op. cit. </fnote>The Déclaration is not solely a machine de guerre contre l'Ancien Régime in that it also mentions that the citizen has a duty to the society the document seeks to create and, although it adopts the socialist principle of 'from him according to his means to him according to his needs', it does insist that all citizens must contribute to the state. The fact that the Déclaration was concise and readable also indicates that it was not avant tout une machine de guerre contre l'Ancien Régime and, especially in such unsettled times, important seemed not only to combat the Ancien Régime, but that, in fact, the 'concern for social order became one of the principal motivations behind... many of the articles." Although the sense of society which the Déclaration tried to create was a different idea to that during the Ancien Régime, the Déclaration intended to be a worldwide document - not specifically for Frenchmen. <fnote>Baker, K.M., The Idea of a Declaration of Rights in Van Kley, D., ed., The French Idea of Freedom: The Old Regime and the Declaration of Rights of 1789, California 1994, p. 192 </fnote>In conclusion the Déclaration des droits de l'homme was, in some ways, a machine de guerre contre l'Ancien Régime. The articles themselves attempt to destroy all that was unjust in French Society at that time concerning: national sovereignty, a representative system of government, separation of powers, judicial equality, presumption of innocence, the right to resist oppression, right to property, right to security and freedom of speech. Furthermore, the word guerre can be appropriate given the violent response it provoked against the Ancien Régime. However, it cannot be said the Déclaration was avant tout such a machine de guerre given the other important reasons for the document's founding. In short, the Déclaration seemed more, or at least as concerned with satisfying the need of a particularly volatile time in French history and, whilst it was a seminal piece of legislation in the downfall of the Ancien Régime in France and all over Europe, other objectives such as giving the National Assembly something to justify their calls for change and unifying an unsettled nation are too significant to overlook. 