A response to the perceived failings of the criminal law to deal with the growing problem of anti-social behaviour, the government's Crime and Disorder Act 1998 marked a controversial break from the traditional policy of diversion and deinstitutionalisation. The compatibility of Anti-Social Behaviour Orders (ASBOs) with various fundamental principles of criminal law has come into question due to its overlapping status between civil and criminal procedures. The government presents ASBOs as a necessary mechanism operating within a legitimate system [1]. As the criminal law is a code of norms of conduct, ASBOs simply reinforce this concept of acceptable behaviour in relation to those who have shown disregard for it. Although this perspective is grounded in practical experience, the government, naturally biased towards justifying its own policies to maintain support for future elections, is not necessarily primarily concerned with the principles of criminal law. Consequently, whilst being useful in an informative sense, much of the government's literature on this subject is coloured by political rhetoric [2]. ASBOs embody New Labour's philosophy of 'zero-tolerance.' These measures respond to recognition of the impact of persistent low-level offending, and a corresponding need to address criminal behaviour at its early stages. Far from undermining the criminal law, it may be argued that ASBOs have an important, complementary role in addressing genuine problems without the need for further investment by the criminal law. It is vital that the criminal law is flexible, and willing to evolve with society. The potential scope of ASBOs may be worryingly wide, yet Keogh's defence of local authorities' 'sensible use' (Keogh, A., 'Anti Social Behaviour Orders? Practical notes', 2003) is supported both by local evidence [3] and by the availability of viable alternatives [4]. Furthermore, the decision in R v McCann [2003] EWCA Crim 983 established a criminal standard of proof ('beyond reasonable doubt') to the primary legal test of the causation of 'harassment, alarm or distress' (Crime and Disorder Act 1998 s.1(1)(a)), affording greater protection against trivial usage. In response to criticisms of the system on human rights grounds, proponents of ASBOs adopt Bentham's utilitarian perspective on the minimising of harms. The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) exists to protect the interests of the public as well those of private individuals. Home Secretary David Blunkett's focus on the 'need to shift the balance from the minority that spread fear and distress to the majority that want to win back their communities' (Home Office Action Plan:'Together - Tackling Anti-Social Behaviour', October 2003, at p.1) exemplifies this stance. Accordingly ASBO procedures, through their use of hearsay evidence, shift the balance from that of the general criminal law to a victim-centred approach. Rather than undermining the criminal law, this addresses a recognised problem of the system [5]. The criminal law faces problems due to alienation not only of the victims and witnesses, but of the public at large [6]. Through swift, resolute action dealing with very visible forms of crime and harassment, procedures aimed at anti-social behaviour endeavour to revive faith in the institutions and enforcement of criminal law. Finally, the purposes of an ASBO do not conflict with the principles of criminal law. The government emphasises that the purpose of an ASBO is not punitive (Hansard, Lords, 3 Feb 1998, cols 512-514). The subject is not branded with a criminal record. Nor, it is argued, do the frequently-adopted publicity campaigns have a stigmatising, retributive goal; publicity is simply necessary for the enforcement of the orders [7]. The primary aim is to deter from crime; to demonstrate behaviour which society will not tolerate. This establishment of clear boundaries is often welcomed by low-level offenders, as an impetus to rehabilitation [8]. Academic commentary on the subject looks sceptically upon these defences of ASBOs. In contrast to those who experience or suffer anti-social behaviour on a daily basis, academic criticism of the procedures involved has a relatively sheltered and abstract basis. Nevertheless, whilst taking the possibility of political bias into account, the principles and procedures of criminal law are the primary concern of such academic theses. The broad scope of ASBOs is of concern due to the vague application criteria [9]. Contrary to what Ashworth describes as the principle of minimum criminalisation (Ashworth, A., Principles of Criminal Law, 4 th edn. 2003, at p.66), the potential for wide usage of ASBOs may lead to the trivialisation of sanctions and the stigmatic labelling of youth offenders. Whilst the general understanding is that criminal law should be first educative, then threatening and then punishing, Ashworth identifies the danger that 'resort to an ASBO would become all too tempting a shortcut, for it would show the authorities as having taken resolute action' (Ashworth et al., 'Neighbouring on the Oppressive', 1998, 16 Criminal Justice Matters, Feb 7-14). The condition that alternatives must have failed or been less effective [10] is left so open to subjective interpretation that it is inadequate to prevent such abuse. Where criminal law demands certainty to ensure justice, ASBO procedures are vague. Due to the subjective basis of a test of 'harassment, alarm or distress' there is a danger of injustice arising out of discrimination and varying perceptions of what constitutes anti-social behaviour [11]. Alongside academic critics, MPs and peers raised concerns that this subjective foundation would result in what Ashworth dubs 'an Undesirable Persons Act' (Leng, Taylor & Wasik, Blackstones Guide to the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, 1998, at chapter 1). Moreover, there is a corresponding danger of the blurring of the boundary between crime and morality. A similar lack of certainty exists in the provisions of an ASBO, which effectively amount to a personalised extension of the criminal law. The severe consequences for breach of an ASBO [12] undermine the principle of proportionality between the crime and the punishment. Procedures of the criminal law, such as the high standard of proof, the fault requirement and the inadmissibility of hearsay evidence, are designed to afford protections proportionate to the consequences of a conviction. As an ASBO also results in an infringement of civil liberties, it would seem to undermine such principles of protection through its categorisation as a civil procedure. Bypassing these principles is justified by arguments of efficiency, speed and the need to prosecute where adequate evidence would not be available; yet this gives the State too much power. The adoption of a civil procedure is also used to legalise a disregard for the principles of double jeopardy [13] the protections of the ECHR, and the statutory provisions for disclosure of evidence contained within the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996. Yet, perversely, ASBO hearings are also not subject to the Civil Procedure Rules. The above arguments, presented both in defence of and in opposition to the hypothesis that anti-social behaviour procedures undermine the criminal law, demonstrate a tension between the theory and the practice of criminal law. It should be noted that if the decision in R v McCann [2003] EWCA Crim 983 was correct then this entire argument is redundant, as the case for classification of ASBOs as part of a criminal procedure is lost. However, even David Blunkett acknowledges that 'the dividing line between crime and anti-social behaviour is not precise' (Home Office Action Plan: 'Together - Tackling Anti-Social Behaviour', October 2003, at p.19). It is too soon to come to a conclusion as to how far anti-social behaviour procedures, and the extensions of the 2003 Bill, will undermine the criminal law; yet, arguably, the mere potential to do so is sufficient cause for concern. Although the need to bypass the criminal law may be justifiable in practice, it is clear that, in so doing, fundamental principles and procedures are being undermined. [1] c.f Interview with Andy Thomas, Anti-Social Behaviour Manager with the Derby Crime and Disorder Reduction Partnership, 05 November 2003 [2] c.f Home Office Action Plan: 'Together - Tackling Anti-Social Behaviour' (October 2003), [3] c.f. Interview with Andy Thomas, Anti-Social Behaviour Manager with the Derby Crime and Disorder Reduction Partnership, 05 November 2003, at question 2. [4] c.f. Home Office Action Plan: 'Together - Tackling Anti-Social Behaviour' (October 2003), [5] The Criminal Justice Act 2003 makes provisions for the protection of all witnesses, not just the most vulnerable, through the option to give evidence via TV link. [6] c.f. Community Safety Partnership - Executive Summary, Derby Crime and Disorder Audit 2001, at p.6: '[The reasons for not reporting crimes] . . . the most common reason was a feeling that "police could have done nothing" followed by "police would have done nothing,"'[7] c.f. Interview with James Powell - Crime Reporter for the Derby Evening Telegraph, 05 November 2003, at question 6. [8] c.f. Interview with James Powell - Crime Reporter for the Derby Evening Telegraph, 05 November 2003, at question 7. [9] c.f. Crime and Disorder Act 1998, Section 1(1) [10] c.f. Crime and Disorder Act 1998, Section 1(1)(b) [11] c.f. Derby Crime and Disorder Partnership Annual Report 2001-02, pp. 48-61: Part 4.1 Anti-Social Behaviour 2001-02, , at p.59 (on the findings of the British Crime Survey 2000) [12] c.f. Crime and Disorder Act 1998, Section 1(10) [13] Keogh, A., 'Anti Social Behaviour Orders? Practical notes', (2003): 'A most powerful piece of evidence can be a person's antecedent history, particularly if it shows frequent offending . . . There is no issue of double jeopardy . . .' 