The concepts underpinning Marx's labour theory of value and the theory itself continue to stimulate discussion. According to Mohun (1994) the theory is 'one of the most debated...in the history of economics'. The sustained debate is an indication, initially, that the theory has a degree of relevance under contemporary capitalism as authors struggle to modify, refine and reinterpret the theory to meet contemporary economic and employment conditions. The focus of this essay is to assess the extent of the labour theory if value's relevance in an analysis of the nature of employment under contemporary capitalism, whilst discussing in detail important aspects and interpretations of Marx's economic theory. In the labour theory of value Marx examines the foundations of employment and the nature of production and the employment relationship are placed at the centre of his analysis. This approach deviates from neo-classical analysis which places the process and inputs of production, including labour, in a 'black box' (Green 1988). Although, some authors have suggested that with the subsequent sophistication of neo-classical theory, 'Marxist critique (of neo-classical labour market analysis) is now misplaced' (Green 1988), others, for example Young (1992), indicate 'similarities' are 'limited' and that 'the reluctance by radical economists to accept recent developments in neo-classical theory as providing much new common ground may be understandable'. Two controversial debates surrounding the labour theory of value are the 'transformation problem' and the theory of productive and unproductive labour (Fine 1989). The latter issue is of particular interest as 'if the essential problem for Marx...was the explanation of surplus value under capitalism...the distinction between productive labour which creates surplus value, and unproductive labour much of which is supported out of surplus value...is a critical one' (Gough 1972). A discussion of the creation of surplus value and the preceding distinction are therefore important particularly considering recent 'trends in capitalism' (Gough 1972). Investigating the 'transformation problem' debate provides interesting insights into the development of the labour theory of value. 'The transformation problem...continues to fascinate economists even as they debate its relevance' (Desai 1990) and has lead to disagreements in the Marxist camp 'about the specific nature of the labour theory of value' (Hunt and Glick 1990). This essay will argue that, under the consideration of certain interpretations of the theory itself and of the productive, unproductive distinction of labour, the labour theory of value is relevant under contemporary capitalism as it incorporates 'a full understanding of the complexities of the dynamics of the capitalist economy and its constituent labour markets' (Fine 1998). The labour theory of value as described by Marx throughout his writings on political economy is complex and has been the subject of much criticism stemming, perhaps, from the varying interpretations of the theory and an ambiguity of meaning and content thus fuelling the debate of its relevance in modern economic analysis. For instance, Marx's labour theory of value has been utilised as a proof of exploitation (Roemer 1990), in terms of the surplus value created by labour, and as an explanation of prices (Dobb 1973). As an indication of differing interpretations, Roemer (1990) indicates that the 'labour theory of value was not a theory of price, but a method for measuring the exploitation of labour' and seeks to separate the exploitation theory from the labour theory of value. On the other hand, however, Elson (1979) and Dobb (1971) play down the exploitation interpretation and Dobb (1973) interprets the labour theory of value as 'an explanation of equilibrium...prices in a capitalist economy' (Elson 1979). This interpretation will be looked at in more detail below through an analysis of the 'transformation problem'. Meek (1973) does suggest that 'one of the main tasks which the labour theory was asked to perform was that of accounting for the origin and persistence of...surplus value and measuring its extent'. Marx stated that this surplus value was 'created by the excess of labour-time over the value of labour-power' (Fine 1989), hence the inference of exploitation, as workers are, in theory, working part of their day for themselves and part for the capitalist, without payment. The ambiguity of surplus value creation and a discussion of productive and unproductive labour will be the subject of the next section. Firstly, however, a caveat should be attached to the preceding discussion in that it is too simplistic to place each of the authors mentioned above as supporting any distinct interpretation of the labour theory of value. For example, Elson (1979) gives merit to the labour theory of value as a 'political intervention' but rejects both the interpretations mentioned above and indicates that the object of Marx's theory of value was labour and the importance was to seek 'an understanding of why labour takes the form it does, and what the political consequences are'. The labour theory of value is thus complex and before proceeding to a more general analysis, the focus will be on specific concepts, which may provide more insight into the theory's relevance to the nature of employment under contemporary capitalism. The 'explanation of exploitation under capitalism' (Gough 1972) involves discussion and clarification of the source of surplus value, namely surplus labour. This is essential as Marx's labour theory of value focuses on production relations and the view 'that the economic process should be analysed in terms of the social relations between men and men in the production of commodities' (Meek 1973). If we are to discuss the nature of surplus value, it is not sufficient to make assumptions that the source of surplus value involves the simple definition of productive labour categories. In Theories of Surplus Value (1969) Marx indicates that 'labour which is to produce commodities must be useful labour; it must produce a use-value... And consequently only labour which manifests itself in commodities...is labour for which capital is exchanged'. Furthermore, 'only labour which is directly transformed into capital is productive', thus labour exchanged against revenue, service sector labour, is unproductive and does not create surplus value. However, Gough (1972) notes that a careful interpretation of productive labour is required as 'in contemporary analysis, the problem is to decide how direct is 'directly''. He utilises Marx's example of transportation workers as productive; 'transport alters the use-value of the commodity', despite the fact that they are not directly involved in producing commodities. It is apparent that, as Marx refers to productive and unproductive labour 'broadly', various distinctions and (re) interpretations are manifest and thus total surplus value and the labour considered as unproductive are subject to these interpretations. Marginson (1998) suggests that 'the boundaries of productive labour are expanding' and that a discussion of value creation in the service sector is possible, if not necessary due to 'the centrality of services in contemporary economies'. The author develops Marx's analysis of commercial capital as dual capital, which extends the definition of productive labour into the financial services, for example, creating value 'as producers of service commodities'. There is a dual nature of surplus value in the financial services, therefore, where, on the one hand they add no surplus value to money capital but on the other, 'the capitalist services they themselves provide do create new surplus value'. Thus, Marginson's (1998) analysis has sought to explain the growth of the service sector in terms of the creation of surplus value. The hypothesis he proclaims has a certain appeal in that the growth of financial services, and the service sector in general, has been a factor of their ability to create surplus value as value creating entities in their own right. Nevertheless, the application of Marx's concept of surplus value creation to the service sector does not eradicate the category of unproductive labour, but mars the boundaries and further complicates the theory. Gough (1972) indicates that productive labour is that which produces or modifies a commodity, a use-value. Yet, this distinction is obscured when analysing necessary and luxury goods, workers in the state sector and, as indicated above, the impact of service sector workers in, for example advertising, sales and finance. Gough (1972) infers that Marx would analyse the latter range of workers as unproductive based on 'his analysis of the determination of needs under capitalism'. Nevertheless, Marx would consider the expansion in number of workers producing luxury, unnecessary goods as productive as they produce use-values. This would be consistent with Marx's original definition of productive labour but it loses a certain qualitative appeal as goods which some would deem unnecessary, including, for example, arms production, would be included. Relating this discussion back to the labour theory of value is problematic as Marx's definitions are open to interpretation and it is therefore impossible to provide definite categories of productive and unproductive labour. It could be argued, however, that certain service sector labour warrants the definition of productive labour as discussed in Marginson (1998). Yet, it is important to note that within modern day enterprises there are a significant numbers of workers involved in unnecessary and unproductive labour (e.g. advertising) that are supported by surplus value created in the production process. The existence of surplus value is, therefore, a definite reality as 'surplus value or profit, in the words of Marx, is the unpaid labour of the working class' (Sewell and Woods 1983). Examples of the extraction of surplus value from workers can be found in an analysis of Japanese working practices where 'Japanese car makers obtained a big advantage over their foreign rivals partly on the basis of investing in modern technology, partly by a more ruthless and "scientific" squeezing of relative surplus value from their workers' (Woods and Grant 1994). Japanese working practices have been adopted by companies throughout the Western world as evidence that employers are continuously looking towards maximizing productivity, profit and therefore surplus value. Whilst workers wages may increase absolutely in times of increased productivity 'the profits of the bosses are increasing relatively even more' (Sewell and Woods 1983). Hence, the 'development of capitalism brings the production of relative surplus value as the dominant method of increasing e (the rate of exploitation)...through technological change, whereby the value of labour-power (v) is reduced by reducing the labour-time of production of the wage bundle' (Fine 1989). It could be argued, however, that profit under monopoly capitalism is not solely made up of the surplus value created by labour (Meek 1973:286). The assumption that labour is the only source of profit appears inadequate when considering the existence of monopoly power - the ability to manipulate prices and make super-profits - and a consideration of a variety of factors, other than embodied labour, in determining prices. This will be dealt with in the next section looking at Marx's theory of the relationship between prices and values. In the above discussion it is apparent that a simple analysis of the concepts underpinning Marx's labour theory of value are subject to numerous interpretations and application is ambiguous. Nevertheless, being aware of these issues indicates the reasons why labour cannot and should not be treated as a mere factor of production. The theory's relevance today should be based on this premise. The 'transformation problem' stems from Marx's 'apparent solution to the problem of the relationship between values and prices' (Fine 1989:76) and his assertion 'that prices are merely transformed values and profit is redistributed surplus value' Hunt and Glick (1990). The latter authors suggest that this problem may be solved if the assumptions 'that total prices should be equal to total values and total surplus value should be equal to total profits' are modified. These modifications, however bring down Marx's labour theory of value to a determination of prices which is purely quantitative, when, in essence, it could be argued that Marx was advocating a more qualitative explanation of the nature of production and price and value determination under capitalism. Many authors argue that the labour theory of value was not an attempt by Marx to determine prices from values (Meek (1973); Roemer (1990); Baumol (1991)) and algebraic solutions were utilised by Marx to provide support for his argument, not as proof (Meek 1973). It is apparent, however, that the applicability of the theory in a neo-classical age will involve the use of quantitative solutions as an attempt to prove that the theory is relevant to modern economics. The relevance of the theory should not solely be based on whether values can be transformed into prices as Marx was aware that 'under capitalism value does not correspond with price in the majority of cases' (Meek 1973: 223). The fact that prices are determined on the basis of supply and demand does not take anything away from the theory as an exposition of how prices should be derived. Further, as an approximation the theory seems sound as commodities will tend to fluctuate around a certain price level, perhaps as an indication of the value of embodied labour. Furthermore Baumol (1991:53) suggests that 'a subsidiary purpose of the transformation calculation was to determine the nature of...deviations' and that the importance of the labour theory of value was to explain 'the typical deviations of prices from values at each stage...in terms of the particular set of relations of subordination or co-operation specific to that stage' (Meek 1973:290). This interpretation has great appeal as the labour theory of value can be utilised as an explanatory device indicating the extent to which prices deviate from formulations of value and why and how these deviations occur. Relations of production and how they correspond to relations of exchange is the focus of this interpretation. Thus once again a Marxian concept, namely the relationship between prices and values, with varying interpretations and a complex level of analysis reaching beyond the scope of this essay. The 'transformation problem' is important in any discussion of the labour theory of value due to the amount of research it has provoked. Yet, an exact solution is not fundamental to a commentary on the relevance of the underlying theory Marx espoused. Meek (1973:297) indicates that the most serious difficulty concerning the labour theory of value was the 'adaptation of the theory to monopoly capitalism'. To overcome this Marx's theory needs to be 'disentangled' from the stage of capitalism that Marx sought to analyse and 'reapplied to present-day conditions'. From the analysis above it is evident that an important condition of the present-day, which relates to the labour theory of value, is the expansion of the service sector. Marx viewed services as inconsequential (Gough 1972) and on the whole unproductive. Yet, Marginson (1998), in his idea of the production of 'service commodities', develops Marx's theory incorporating parts of the service sector as productive. Rather than assuming, as Mandel does, that 'an increasing number of capitalists (are) competing for the surplus generated by a shrinking productive' (Marginson 1998) it seems more appropriate to bring service sector workers into an analysis of surplus value and it is evident that this can be accomplished without undermining Marx's original precept of productive labour. The labour theory of value has been rejected by many orthodox economists as irrelevant under contemporary capitalism as it does not provide the necessary tools for economic analysis (Fine 1998). It could be argued, however, that this lays bare the fundamental idea underlying Marx's labour theory; that labour markets under any stage of capitalism cannot be analysed alongside other markets. Marx's theory is relevant because it does not 'abstract' from the production process (Meek 1973:225). The quantitative aspects alongside the qualitative aspects of the theory expose, for example, the idea of exploitation, through an historical analysis that is non-existent within orthodox economics. It is acknowledged, however, that orthodox theories are 'superior' in their ability to analyse many aspects of the economy for example 'money, credit, taxation' (Meek 1973: 228). Yet, in an analysis of the nature of employment, the inadequacy of orthodox theory paves the way for a Marxian inquiry. The argument that Marx's labour theory of value is relevant can been supported, particularly in light of recent reinterpretations making it more accessible to present economic conditions and re-workings of quantitative aspects of the theory. The weaknesses of the argument stem, firstly, from the complex concepts within the labour theory of value, and how these should be interpreted, and secondly, from the ambiguous notion of relevance. The former weakness has been discussed implicitly throughout with the exposition of numerous interpretations and the complexity of concepts acknowledged. The extent of relevance, however, requires a fuller discussion of the theory and to what extent it relates to more specific elements of the nature of employment. Furthermore, it is argued that the extent of relevance is markedly subjective and, with the labour theory of value, it can be argued as wholly irrelevant but at the same time wholly relevant. The conclusion reached in this instance is that, as discussed above, the theory is relevant to a contemporary analysis of the nature of employment. The implications of this therefore are that contemporary economists should place greater emphasis on analysing the labour market as a distinct, complex set of production relations effecting exchange relations. It is recognised that with theories of labour market segmentation, for example, and an attempt at incorporating 'the social relations of exchange' (Green 1988) into neo-classical analysis, progress is being made. Yet, as Young (1992) notes there has been no 'real attempt to embody social relations within economic analysis'. Thus, the relevance of Marx's labour theory of value is exposed. 