The East Asian Tigers are generally referring to the economies of Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and South Korea. Between 1965 and 1993, real GDP growth in the East Asian Tigers annually averaged nearly 9 percent. In this essay I will further investigate the immense growth these countries have experienced in the last decades. Moreover, I will examine how the specific economic policies chosen by the governments affected the economies, and particularly consider whether free trade or a more interventionist trade policy was the key to success for these economies. <fnote>Glickal. 1997, p2 </fnote>Although referring to these four economies as a single group, the economies are actually remarkably diverse. Some are amongst the most populous, some of the least, some have natural resources and some have virtually none. Furthermore, these economies have pursued a diverse mix of policies throughout the last decades. Consequently, to determine what really accounts for the economic growth of the East Asian Tigers becomes relatively challenging. A set of cross-country studies have been undertaken by teams from the World Bank to further investigate the East Asian economies, and this project is called The East Asian Miracle. The diversity of experience in these economies suggests that one could not find a universal formula to cover the strong economic growth of the East Asian Tigers. Nevertheless, 'perhaps the factor most consistently present in the East Asian Economies was a sound and disciplined macroeconomic policy framework, characterized by fiscal discipline, strong investment performance - especially in the area of human capital - and aggressive export development.'  <fnote>Leipzigeral. 1994, p6 </fnote><fnote>Leipzigeral. 1994, p6 </fnote>Before describing the economic policies and other economic factors contributing to the rapid growth in East Asia, it is worth mentioning the demographic advantages the region has. Firstly, according to Williamson, changes in the age structure of population could alone stand for as much as 1.5 % growth in GDP per capita per year. A large part of the population in the East Asian economies is between 25 and 59; hence they have a low 'dependency rate'. Furthermore, both Williamson and Mason argue that demography, and especially low dependency rates, affects investment and saving rates positively. Consequently, the beneficial age structure of the population is contributing to higher investment and saving rates in the East Asian Tigers. Additionally, the fertility rates have declined considerably, and the life expectancy has increased significantly. This helps the economies avoiding the Malthusian trap, and they are instead experiencing intensive growth with soaring living standards and simultaneously bounding population growth. <fnote>Asian's population advantage, economist.com </fnote><fnote>Asian's population advantage, economist.com </fnote><fnote>Asian's population advantage, economist.com </fnote><fnote>Lewis. 1992, p5 </fnote>The East Asian Tigers are, as mentioned earlier, characterised by high saving rates and investment. These economies increased savings by ensuring generally positive interest rates on deposits, and by securing banks and financial systems through strong prudential regulation, good supervision, and institutional reforms. This made substantial resources available for the governments and concurrently increasing saving rates. Saving rates in 1992 ranged from 28.9 % in Taiwan to 45.5 % in Singapore, and are exceptionally high compared to other economies. This is one of the main attributes of the East Asian Tigers, and made it possible to combine massive capital investment, between 24-42 % of GDP, with a low rate of inflation. In an IS-LM model, equilibrium in the goods market is characterised by investment equals saving. Subsequently, when saving rates went sky-high, so could investment rates, and it would still represent equilibrium. The sound economic policies of the East Asian Tigers embodied stable economies with low inflation, positive real interest rates, propitious infrastructure, low tariffs on imported capital goods, and hence favourable rates of return for investment. This naturally contributed to the massive growth in this region. <fnote>Lewis. 1992, p6 </fnote><fnote>Lewis. 1992, p6 </fnote>Another factor significant for the region's growth is the fiscal discipline. The fiscal and current account deficits in the East Asian Tigers have been less than half the average for other developing countries. Some of the countries have also applied strict regulation of the size of public deficits and anti-inflation biases of the political leadership have served to keep macroeconomic control as one of the main goals. At least as important as the certain policies that have been implemented, are the ability and the willingness the governments have shown to reverse the policies when failing to reach the goals they anticipated. Moreover, both inflation rates and tax rates have been kept low in the region. Tax rates have been stable and low around 13 %. Low tax rates are said to favour the rich, but in the East Asian countries it have contributed to a relative equal distribution of income and highly motivated workers. <fnote>Lewis. 1992, p6 </fnote>The latter factor brings us on to the next issue. The total factor productivity growth has been extensively high in these areas, from 3 to 6 times higher than the average in other developing countries. The East Asian Tigers has spent considerably amounts of money on education and work force training; The Republic of Korea spent 80 % of their education budget on basic education in the mid 1980's. This has provided the region with a large highly-qualified labour force, and consequently, this has aided industrial flexibility, increased economic efficiency and factor productivity, and promoted greater equality. Governments in the East Asian Tigers have in general been less influenced and responsive than other developing countries to lobbying and organised labour pressure for minimum wage legislation. Therefore, wages have been more downward flexible, causing the economies to much quicker and less painfully adjust to macroeconomic shocks. <fnote>Page. 1994, p3 </fnote>The East Asian Tigers' outward oriented trade policy has led the region to expand trade and attract foreign direct investment. However, outward trade should absolutely not be equated with openness, which is often measured by the ratio of exports and imports to GDP. During the first two decades of high growth, these economies exhibited import protection and restrictions. Korea's nominal tariff rates averaged nearly 60 percent in the 60's, declined to 21 percent at the beginning of the 1980's and was down to 12 percent in the early 90's. Additionally, substantial non-tariff barriers were also maintained in these countries. For example, 40 % of import goods were either restricted or prohibited in Korea in 1973. However, the non-tariff barriers were also gradually removed within the East Asian Tigers. <fnote>Glickal. 1997, p3 </fnote>The East Asian Tigers eradicated trade barriers and moved towards greater openness and international trade. They acknowledged the fact that international trade can contribute to growth through several channels. Firstly, trading with other countries is promoting productivity by absorbing technology and managerial know-how. The countries in the East Asian Tigers did this in different ways. Hong Kong and Singapore opened up to FDI and acquired technology to a great extent. Korea and Taiwan had more restrictions on FDI, but offset this disadvantage by importing knowledge and technology through licences, overseas education, and capital goods import. Secondly, outward oriented economies create an incentive for domestic firms to innovate and become more efficient to be competitive on the world market. Finally, international trade provides access to larger markets. In economies with imperfectly competitive markets and economies of scale, the country's ability to grow can totally depend on access to a larger market. All these arguments, which are extensively supported by empirical literature, suggest that openness is associated with faster growth than a closed and autarkic economy. Nevertheless, in models with imperfect competition, 'a protectionist or strategic trade policy may benefit a country if such a policy can shift profits from foreign to domestic producers." And this was the approach of the East Asian Tigers. Seeing the developing countries in Latin America experience adverse growth consequences of their incentives to produce for the domestic market, the East Asian Tigers avoided this by promoting exports. One of the instruments used to increase exports was to promote specific industries, namely picking 'winners'. This is also known as industrial targeting, and could consist of duty-free inputs, preferential loans, reduced taxes, and in some cases protection from foreign competition. This government support to chosen sectors of the economy was carefully picked, and was only given to firms succeeding in markets, particularly on world basis. The East Asian Tigers have much better than others avoided giving subsidies to loss-making firms or well-connected rent-seekers. Moreover, imports for inputs to the export sector have proven to open the import sector extensively in spite of the trade barriers. As the export sector boomed, this subsequently caused an escalation of the import volumes as well, and increasing the imports to GDP ratio. Additionally, the economies of the East Asian Tigers were attentive to exchange rate overvaluation, and frequently devaluated the currency to support export growth. <fnote>Glickal. 1997, p3 </fnote><fnote>Glickal. 1997, p3 </fnote>The governments of the East Asian Tigers recognised 'that the national bond is still the most powerful mass-unifying force in existence." Consequently, to win the support of the society at large, the governments were promising that all groups would benefit from an expanding economy. This, together with an effective bureaucracy and well-functioning institutions, and in spite of various forms of political structure, has through a uniform economic vision provided the institutional framework needed for intensive growth. <fnote>Lewis. 1992, p5 </fnote>There are three important problems associated with the interventionist policies the East Asian Tigers have pursued. Firstly, East Asia's experience shows that picking winners is too difficult and mistakes are also very costly. Reliance on market forces reduces the risk of inappropriate resource allocation. Another problem with a protectionist policy is that it creates large trade surpluses, which may not be permitted or tolerated by trade partners or members of trade agreements. Finally, 'it is apparent that the development of some of the most innovative industries in the world today (e.g., electronics, biotechnology) require the type of flexibility and intense competition that only the freest markets can provide." Additionally, the decision by ASEAN to introduce a free trade area from 2003 may suggest that the awareness of the benefits of a free trade policy and the willingness to eliminate the interventionist elements that have been apparent in the East Asian Tigers' economies is present. <fnote>Glickal. 1997, p6 </fnote>