The Heckscher-Ohlin (H-O) model is a general equilibrium mathematical model of the macroeconomics of international trade, and was developed by Swedish economist Bertil Ohlin in his celebrated book from 1933. The H-O model emphasises resource differences as the only source of trade. It contrasts from the Ricardian model of comparative advantage in that it introduces a second factor of production, namely capital, and that it assumes identical production technologies in both countries. There are two goods, two countries and two factors of production; hence the model is sometimes called the 2x2x2 model. The countries have different factor endowments and one good is intensive in the use of one factor while the other good uses the other factor intensively. Consequently, a country would have a comparative advantage in producing the good which uses intensively the factor in which the country is well endowed. For example, clothes are relatively labour intensive in production, and if a country were relatively well endowed in labour (say, India), they would have a comparative advantage in producing clothes. <fnote>Ohlin B (1933). </fnote>The assumptions in the H-O model can be summarised by: <list>Two countries, India (I) and Japan (J).Two goods, clothes (C) and electronics (E)Two factors of production, capital (K) and labour (L).Fixed supply of each factor of production in each country.Perfect factor mobility between the domestic industries, but international factor immobility.Constant return to scale in producing both goods.Identical production technologiesIdentical and homogeneous preferencesClothes is relatively labour intensive while electronics is relatively capital intensive, that is  FORMULA .Markets are perfectly competitive - no distortions. Both countries produce both goods, i.e. we do not have complete specialisation.No transportation costs, tariffs or other barriers to free trade.Each country has different relative factor endowments, that is  FORMULA .</list>It is the last assumption that identifies the H-O model, and the other rigorous assumptions are put forward to eliminate the possibility that the comparative advantages can be based on other differences between the countries. Thus, the model can appropriately scrutinise comparative advantages and trade by focusing on international differences in relative factor endowments. We have assumed that India is relative labour-abundant and Japan is relatively capital-abundant (or labour-scarce). Moreover, we have assumed that electronics is relatively capital intensive in production and that clothes are relatively labour intensive. With different factor endowments and identical demand, relative factor prices in autarky should reflect the countries' factor endowments. This would imply that Japan has relatively inexpensive capital (i.e. low interest rates) and India should have relatively cheap labour (i.e low wages). Intuitively, in perfect competition the relative price of the goods must equal their relative costs. As the price of capital increases, the cost of producing electronics must increase proportionally more than the price of clothes. This implies that there is an inverse relationship between the relative price of electronics (the capital intensive good) and the wage-rental ratio (the relative factor price ratio). Additionally, the autarky price ratio is higher in Japan than in India. The relationship between the autarky price ratios is: <fnote>When the countries do not trade with each other. </fnote><fnote>If the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem holds. I will not describe the theorem in detail here. </fnote><fnote>Defined as price of clothes over price of electronics, i.e. P C/P E </fnote> FORMULA  Because of the homogeneity of production frontiers and community indifference curves (remember identical tastes between the countries), the relative autarky prices would be the same regardless of country sizes. Thus, as stressed earlier, what determine comparative advantage in the H-O model are merely relative endowments and factor intensities. <figure/>The fact that the two countries have different endowments also affects their production possibility frontiers (PPFs). The PPFs are concave because of the implicit assumption of marginal diminishing return of both labour and capital. However, the shapes of the PPFs are also determined by the relative factor endowments as we can see from Graph 1 above. As Japan is relatively capital abundant, their production possibilities are skewed towards the good that is capital intensive in production, namely electronics, and vice versa for India. The autarky equilibria are A I and A J for India and Japan, respectively. Before explaining the FPE theorem, it is worth explaining what happens if the countries open up to trade. The H-O theorem states that, given the assumptions of the model, a country will export the good that intensively uses its relatively abundant factor. Thus, in our case, Japan would export electronics and India would export clothes. This is shown in the diagram below (Graph 2). Initially we have that the autarky price ratio is higher in Japan than in India. Since clothes are relatively cheaper in India than in Japan, people in Japan will demand clothes from India and the producers of clothes in India will respond by increasing their supply of clothes. This causes the price ratio in India to fall, and vice versa in Japan. Therefore, the new equilibrium free trade price ratio must lie between the two autarky price ratios, where trade is balanced and where the marginal rate of transformation and the marginal rate of substitution in the two countries are equal to the free trade price ratio p*.  FORMULA   FORMULA  <figure/><figure/>As we can see from Graph 3, an increase in the price of clothes will lead to an increase in the production of clothes, and a decrease in the output of electronics. Along a ray from the origin, all isoquants have constant slope, so that the slope at point B is equal to the slope at point C. Since the demand for clothes increase, and clothes being labour intensive, the demand for labour increases proportionately more than the demand for capital. Thus it follows that the wage-rental ratio in B (k 2) is higher than in A (k 1), as a response of the excess demand for labour and excess supply of capital. Hence, an increase in the relative price of clothes will increase the relative return to the factor that is used intensively in the production of clothes (labour), i.e. increase wages. This exemplifies the unique relationship between relative factor prices and commodity prices, which may be written as:  FORMULA  Since, as implied by the H-O theorem,  FORMULA  in autarky, it must be true that  FORMULA . Consequently, if, as we have argued, free trade equalises the commodity prices ratio between Japan and India, it will also equalise the wage-rental ratio between the countries, brought forward by an increase in the relative wage in India and a decrease in Japan. This is known as the Factor Price Equalisation (FPE) theorem, and it states that, under the given assumptions and in particular with no complete specialisation, free trade in commodities will equalise relative and absolute factor prices through the equalisation of relative commodity prices, and thus ensure world Pareto efficiency (illustrated in graph 4 below). <fnote>Markusen et al (1995), pp 110. </fnote>The FPE theorem is a rather potent result, which implies that workers and capital owners would have identical living standards in all countries. Consequently, there are no economic incentives for people or factors to migrate. Thus, we have that free trade in commodities act as a substitute for trade in factors. Graph 5 below depicts the case of Factor Intensity Reversals (FIR), which will cause the FPE theorem to fail. Here C 0 and E 0 are representative isoquants for the two goods. For  FORMULA  we have that  FORMULA , but at  FORMULA  we have that  FORMULA . The wage-rental ratio at which both industries have the same  FORMULA  is called the factor-intensity-reversal ray, denoted by  FORMULA . In a Edgeworth box the contract curve would be the diagonal if one of the countries' endowment point coincided with  FORMULA , implying a linear PPF. However, as this depicts the <figure/>extreme cases,  FORMULA  close to the  FORMULA  would imply an almost linear PPF, whereas  FORMULA  far from the  FORMULA  would result in the normal concave-shaped PPF. Consequently, a situation like the one in Graph 6 below could emerge. Here Japan has an almost linear PPF while India has a more concave PPF, thus resulting in two intersections between the PPFs. We then have a situation where the nature of demand conditions is essential in determining trade patterns, since differences in relative factor endowments no longer will have an impact on the trade patterns. If preferences are skewed towards clothes, we can end up in a situation where India exports electronics and Japan exports clothes, as illustrated in the fourth quadrant of Graph 6 below. Thus, the relatively labour-abundant country exports the capital intensive good, and the relatively capital-abundant country exports the labour intensive good, so that trade patterns are reversed. <fnote>We still keep the H-O assumption of identical preferences, however the demand is biased toward clothes for both countries, represented by the indifference curve U 1. </fnote><figure/><figure/>On the other hand, if preferences are biased towards electronics (U 0), we can see from the second quadrant of the diagram above that we end up with Japan exporting electronics and India exporting clothes, a situation predicted by the H-O theorem. For a given relative commodity price ratio faced by both countries, this will therefore generate the same relative factor price ratio for both countries. Thus, when FIR is present demand conditions are crucial. As we have shown, factor prices may or may not be equalised depending on demand conditions in the event of factor intensity reversals. Consequently, a complete proof of the FPE theorem should exclude the possibility of factor intensity reversals. 