The world's first car plant opened in Dearborn, Michigan in 1913. Henry T. Ford astonished his workers by letting them know that from 14 January 1914 they would not only work fewer hours, but also earn more. The joint effects of these changes made the hourly wage increase by 138%. Even though this often is seen as the first proper attempt to realise efficiency wage theory, Ford failed to see a big raise in productivity in subsequent years. Despite the fact that productivity only increased by around 30-50 %, Ford did in fact enjoy a substantial boost in profits. In the following I will give a brief introduction to general efficiency wage theories, before more specifically explaining the relationship between real wages and unemployment using the Shapiro-Stiglitz model. The relation between unemployment and monitoring costs will also be investigated using the same model. Efficiency wage theories first appeared in economics in the 1970s and the 1980s, and make the concept of involuntary unemployment meaningful. These models posit that, in short, firms have the incentive to pay a higher wage than the prevailing market wage rate in order to lower cost per unit of output by increasing labour productivity. Cost per unit of output is defined as real wage cost per unit of output produced. Various arguments are advocated as to explain why work efficiency, or labour productivity, may be positively correlated with the real wage. The nutrition argument might be more relevant for developing countries, as the idea is that workers become stronger, healthier and consequently more productive when wages increase. Others focus on the adverse selection idea, which basically says that the higher the wage, the more skilled and productive the firm's workforce must be expected to be. For obvious reasons high turnover rates is costly to a firm, and if one rather reasonably assumes that a worker's probability to quit are negatively associated with the real wage, it may pay off to have a higher real wage. Nobel Prize Winner George A. Akerlof believes that psychological and sociological factors are empirically the most convincing arguments, although these often prove to be the hardest to test. He points out reciprocity, fairness and adherence to group norms as three significant considerations. Reciprocity hypothesizes the simple idea of gift exchange, that workers are willing to exert an effort when given wages above the market clearing rate, while fairness plainly states the idea that people are more loyal and efficient when they receive a wage that is considered fair and equal. The adherence to group norms theory, on the other hand, determine the conceptions workers form about how to reciprocate and what comprises a fair wage. Another aspect of the sociological arguments for paying efficiency wages is the insider-outsider model, which essentially conveys that insiders collude against outsiders to prevent them from being hired at a market clearing wage lower than the wage the insiders are currently receiving. <fnote>Akerlof GA. 2001. P 371. </fnote>The argument that above market-clearing wages is acting as a disciplinary device is fundamental in the Shapiro-Stiglitz model. The intuitive explanation behind the model is relatively straightforward, however, it is convenient to begin with the assumptions Shapiro and Stiglitz make. They assume that firms have a moral hazard problem, in explicit that workers dislike work effort and that firms cannot monitor effort perfectly or costlessly. Furthermore, both firms and workers are risk neutral, which implies that utility is linear in income. Price is equal to unity, which entails that nominal wage w is the same as real wage ( FORMULA ). Workers have perfect information about all job offers and both firms and workers are assumed to be identical. That all workers are identical is a crucial assumption, because this entails that being fired carries no dishonour, meaning that the firm does not conclude that the fired worker is worse than others, only that the previous firm must have paid a too low wage to prevent the worker from shirking. This takes us further on to the main intuition behind the model, which is that paying a wage above the market clearing wage acts as a disciplinary device to prevent workers from shirking and to incur a loss for them by being caught exerting too little effort. This can be explained by looking at a Walrasian market equilibrium, where all workers receive the market clearing wage and there exists no unemployment. If a worker is caught shirking in such a setting, he will automatically be rehired and consequently he pays no penalty for his misconduct. However, to prevent its workers from shirking, firms will pay a higher wage and in this manner incur a penalty for the worker if he is caught shirking. Nevertheless, if it is profitable for one firm to pay higher wages, assuming all firms are identical, it will be beneficial for all firms to do so. Obviously, this will decrease the aggregate demand for labour, and accordingly involuntary unemployment will follow in general equilibrium. By involuntary unemployment I mean "a situation where an unemployed worker is willing to work for less than the wage received by an equally skilled employed worker, yet no job offers are forthcoming". Because we now have unemployment this slightly alters the penalty for the worker. With unemployment the worker cannot automatically obtain another job if caught shirking, and this becomes part of the rational decision. I assume that the equilibrium unemployment rate is sufficiently large that it pays to work rather than risking being caught shirking. <fnote>Shapiro C, Stiglitz JE. 1984. p 433. </fnote>Having presented the basic assumptions and intuition behind the model, I now go on to formally derive Shapiro and Stiglitz's shirking model. I will present the model given in their paper in American Economic Review, but due to space limitations I will omit some of the most tedious algebra and most logical statements. Workers' utility is normalised to <fnote>Shapiro C, Stiglitz JE. 1984. </fnote>(1)  FORMULA  where for simplicity we assume that workers can either exert no effort (e=0) or some positive effort (e>0). While being unemployed the worker receives unemployment benefits of  FORMULA  (and e=0). Furthermore we define  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  as the expected lifetime utility of an employed shirker, an employed nonshirker and an unemployed individual, respectively. These expected utilities are given by: <fnote>Where w is real wage, q is the probability of being caught shirking, r is the discount rate, e is the effort level discussed above and b is the quit rate. </fnote><list>(2)  FORMULA (3)  FORMULA </list>As workers are assumed to be rational, they will choose the outcome with the highest utility. Consequently, they will choose not to shirk if and only if  FORMULA . This is called the No-Shirking Condition (NSC), where the workers are indifferent between shirking and working and can be rewritten using (2) and (3): (4)  FORMULA  We could alternatively express the NSC by  FORMULA , which clearly shows that if an individual could attain a new job immediately after being fired,  FORMULA  and the NSC could never be satisfied. Consequently, unless there is a penalty related to being unemployed through the risk of not instantly acquiring a new job, everyone will shirk. From the NSC we can see that the critical wage  FORMULA  a firm must pay to prevent shirking is higher the higher the required effort. Moreover, it tells us that the higher the expected utility with being unemployed or the lower the penalty from being caught shirking, the higher the critical wage. Similarly, the lower the probability of being detected shirking, the higher the rate of interest (that is, the short run gains from shirking is relatively more important), and the higher the exogenous quit rate, the higher the critical wage needs to be to avoid shirking. The identical firms in the model generate an aggregate production function of  FORMULA . The firm's labour demand is as usual found by equating the marginal product of labour to the cost of hiring an additional employee. The firms are offering as low unemployment benefits ( FORMULA ) as possible, because a higher  FORMULA  increases  FORMULA  and consequently requires a higher wage to meet the NSC. It is reasonable to assume that each individual firm will set  FORMULA  to the minimum required by law, and a wage sufficient to encourage worker exertion, that is,  FORMULA  to meet the NSC. If we for simplicity assume that  FORMULA , then aggregate labour demand simply is given by  FORMULA . If we now turn to market equilibrium, we proceed with the same method to solve for the equilibrium value for  FORMULA  and  FORMULA , which is the expected utility of an employed worker. We substitute the value for  FORMULA  into the NSC and this yield the aggregate NSC: <fnote>Where a is the job acquisition rate. </fnote>(5)  FORMULA  We can easily see from the aggregate NSC that the higher the job acquisition rate or the higher the unemployment benefits, the higher the critical wage. If an individual gets high unemployment benefits, the punishment of being unemployed is not that severe. Similarly, if he can obtain a new job quickly after dismissal, this reduces the gravity of the penalty. The flow into the unemployment pool is  FORMULA , and the flow out is  FORMULA . Clearly these must equal, so when we solve for a we generate this relationship: <fnote>Where L is aggregate employment and N is total labour supply. </fnote>(6)  FORMULA  We substitute this expression into the aggregate NSC (5) and generate: <fnote>Where b/fo is the rate of unemployment. </fnote>(7)  FORMULA  This constraint is illustrated in Graph 1 below, and from this constraint we can easily solve for equilibrium wage and employment level. Equilibrium occurs where the aggregate demand for labour intersects the aggregate NSC. For unemployment benefits equal to zero we obtain: (8)  FORMULA  <figure/>In equilibrium the firms have no incentive of increasing the wages, because they pay just enough for the workers to exert effort and they can get all the labour they need. There exist no motivation to pay lower wages either since this would just encourage shirking. However, from the workers standpoint unemployment is involuntary; many workers are willing to work at the prevailing wage or even lower, but fail to make a credible pledge not to shirk at such wages. The equilibrium is depicted in Graph 2 below. <figure/>The relationship between real wages and unemployment in the Shapiro-Stiglitz model is best illustrated by drawing the NSC in real wage-unemployment rate space, as done in Graph 3. The graph perfectly demonstrates the negative relation between the two, and this is also intuitively uncomplicated. As described earlier, when the rate of unemployment increases, the cost of losing the job is amplified and firms can pay a lower wage and still be confident that workers put forth an effort. If we, for some exogenous reason, have an inwards shift in the labour demand schedule that increases unemployment, we can observe an interesting feature of this model. Since the NSC prevents the wages from falling enough to balance the reduced labour demand, this will increase unemployment sluggishly during recessions. Individual firms will not be tempted to decrease wages before they are positive that this does not incur an incentive to shirk, and will therefore only do so as the unemployment pool gradually grows. Consequently, the Shapiro-Stiglitz shirking model presents a justification for wage sluggishness. Furthermore, when wages are high, this brings about low employment and consequently long-lasting unemployment. High wages simultaneously imply a high utility and cause workers to value working and exerting an effort. Similarly, when wages are low, this means that workers only marginally prefer working to shirking. Low wages also lead to shorter unemployment spells, and as a result these two reasons raise the probability that workers shirk. The intensity of firms' monitoring of the workers' behaviour is measured by q. I now assume that monitoring is endogenous. Each firm believes that the only way to reduce shirking is to increase monitoring of workers' effort. However, there is a second mechanism that comes into play: as seen above, by reducing employment, equivalently increasing unemployment, firms can prevent shirking. When unemployment rises, the loss of being caught shirking and dismissed increases. When firms reduce employment, wages increase <figure/>proportionally. This implies that workers value their jobs for two reasons, both high wages and the long-lasting unemployment period. Consequently, they will choose to work and not to shirk. In this way society as a whole can save monitoring costs by reducing employment. According to Shapiro and Stiglitz this gain more than offsets the loss from increased unemployment.  <fnote>Shapiro C, Stiglitz JE. 1984. P 441. </fnote>A paper by Huang et al. empirically tests a 10 % increase in unemployment holding all inputs constant and this yields a 1 % increase in output. This supports the Shapiro-Stiglitz model, however, empirical evidence do not tend to support the model. According to a number of surveys of wage-setting throughout the 1990's, one should "generally dismiss the importance of the shirking model in favour of other explanations of efficiency wages." Manning et al. performs a test of the shirking model, and their overall conclusion do not support the shirking model. However, this does not indicate that there are no problems with motivating workers rather that firms deal with these problems without necessary paying efficiency wages and dismissing workers caught shirking. <fnote>Huangal. 1998. P 137. </fnote><fnote>Smith J. Lecture notes on Efficiency wages - Shapiro-Stiglitz shirking model. 2004. P 30. </fnote><fnote>Manning A, Thomas J. 1997. P 24. </fnote>