<heading>Introduction</heading>Leader, which can be found in every group and organization, large or small, is commonly regarded as a basic but important position. As defined by Fiedler (1995, cited in Arnold et al., 2005: 482), a leader is a 'person who is appointed, elected, or informally chosen to direct and co-ordinate the work of others in a group'. So much for the leader, leadership can be considered to be 'the personal qualities, behaviours, styles and decisions adopted by the leader' (Arnold et al., 2005: 482), or 'the ability to influence a group toward the achievement of goals' (Robbins, 2005:156). It has been accepted as a truism that effective leadership is essential to business. Part of the reason it has become so important in recent decades is that leadership can be understood as one dimension of management, which is change-oriented. The business world has become more competitive and more volatile as a result of the faster changes in international market, science and technology, regulations, demography of work force, and so on. As Kotter (1990: 104) indicated, 'more change always demands more leadership'. Thus, in order to survive and compete advantageously in this continuously changing environment, organisations have been trying to seek and develop effective leadership, and leaders who can challenge the present conditions, adapt to the changes, and even create a better future are highly demanded. Currently the most influential approach to leadership is transformational leadership, which implies that leaders of this type can transform 'the status quo and drive change within their organizations' (Newcomb, 2005). This concept was raised early by Burns in 1978 (cited in Bass at el, 1987a:8), regarding transformational leader as 'one who motivates followers to work for transcendental goals and for higher-level self-actualizing needs', rather than just 'working through simple exchange relationships with his/her followers' as transactional leader. To be more detailed, as Howell and Avolio (1993: 891) put it, 'leaders described as transformational concentrate their efforts on longer term goals; place value and emphasis on developing a vision and inspiring followers to pursue the vision; change or align systems to accommodate their vision rather than work within existing systems; and coach followers to take on greater responsibility for their own development, as well as the development of others'. According to Bass at el. (1987b) transformational leadership has three key components: (1) charisma, or idealized influence, (2) individualized consideration, and (3) intellectual stimulation. Charisma: the leaders identify and articulate a vision and sense of mission, set personal model, communicate high expectations, inspire extra efforts, instill pride and share glory, show great determination, gain respect and trust. Individualized Consideration: the leaders treat each follower on his or her own merits, coach, and help followers to grow and develop through delegation of projects. <quote>Intellectual Stimulation: the leaders promote intelligence, encourage free thinking, and emphasize rationality and careful problem solving. (Arnold et al., 2005; Bass, 1990; Podsakoff et al., 1990)</quote>What have been introduced above are mainly theories developed by scholars. Then what are the effects of transformational leadership in practice? Is it really so beneficial as 'indispensable' for organizational effectiveness? Or to what extent can it be viewed as 'unnecessary' and even potentially 'a dangerous curse'? These are the questions to be discussed in this essay. The first part will analyse the positive aspects of transformational leadership in terms of motivation, job satisfaction and job performance. The second section will look into the negative impacts from the three components of transformational leadership while introducing a concept of 'pseudo-transformational leader' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999). In the last part, conclusion will be reached by balancing these two opposite sides of the argument. <heading>Transformational Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness</heading>Organizational effectiveness is a very broad concept, which refers to anything that can conduce to the achievement or transcendence of organizational goals. One of the most influential stimulatives of organizational effectiveness is human resource competitiveness, which can be weighed by many indicators, such as motivation, job satisfaction, and job performance. According to Bass (1990), most studies using the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ), which is designed to evaluate the leaders' effectiveness through the responses from their colleagues, supervisors, and followers, have found that 'transformational leadership is positively related to indicators of leadership effectiveness such as subordinate satisfaction, motivation, and performance' (Bass, 1998, cited in Yukl, 1999). Therefore, transformational leadership can be seen as an effective leadership, which, in Bresnen's (1995: 497) words, 'is regarded as being crucial to overall organizational success'. <heading>Motivation</heading>The positive relationship between transformational leadership and motivation can be explained by the factor of charisma. First of all, transformational leaders, or charismatic leaders have great power and influence on their followers. They make personal sacrifices, take responsibility for their actions, 'demonstrate extraordinary competence or other qualities subordinates admire' (Zaleznik, 1990, cited in Gemmill and Oakley, 1992: 118), which gain followers' high degree of commitment, trust and confidence in them. Yukl (1989, Podsakoff et al., 1990:108) wrote that 'followers feel trust and respect toward the leader and they are motivated to do more than they are expected to do'. In addition, according to the social learning theory developed by Bandura (1977, cited in Bass at el., 1987a), followers would be eager to emulate their charismatic leaders. As Bass at el. (1987a: 8) noted, self-reinforcement is 'the primary motivator of follower behavior with a transformational leader, as opposed to external pay-offs'. Except for this model effect, charismatic leaders motivate followers in a variety of ways. They raise an awareness of the importance of designated outcomes to the organization as well as to the staff, and stress 'the values of the audience they are addressing' (Kotter, 1990: 107). Transformational leaders broaden and elevate the interests of their followers, and stir them to transcend their own self-interest for the good of the team. Then they inspire and excite their followers with the idea that they may be able to accomplish greater things with extra effort. (Bass, 1990) Transformational leaders give followers a sense of control by regularly involving them in decision making. They also support followers' actions by providing coaching and feedback, thererby help them grow professionally and enhance their self-esteem. <quote>'When all this is done, the work itself becomes intrinsically motivating'. (Kotter, 1990: 108)</quote><heading>Job Satisfaction</heading>Job satisfaction refers to 'a collection of feelings that an individual holds toward his or her job'. The most important factors that determine job satisfaction are 'mentally challenging work, equitable rewards, supportive working conditions, and supportive colleagues'. (Robbins, 2005: 24) Podsakoffal. (1990:108) reviewed that 'virtually all models of transformational leadership postulate that transformational leaders enhance followers' work attitudes and satisfaction'. For one thing, employees' job satisfaction could be closely related to their leaders' individualized consideration. Transformational leasers pay close attention to differences among their employees, such as traits, characteristics, qualities, merits, and weakness. In order to meet the particular development needs of each employee, the transformational leaders apply different communication styles, assign different jobs, and provide corresponding training programs and coaching directions. As Bass (1990: 30) remarked, 'delegation with guidance and follow-up can become an individualizing and developmental way of life in a firm'. Therefore, under transformational leadership, jobs can be designed to provide greater challenges to meet employees' satisfaction. For another, transformational leaders also increase employees' job satisfaction by 'altering or expanding followers' needs on Maslow's hierarchy of needs' (Hater and Bass, 1988: 695). Transformational leaders develop, inspire and challenge followers 'not by pushing them in the right direction as control mechanisms do but by satisfying basic human needs for achievement, a sense of belonging, recognition, self-esteem, a feeling of control over one's life, and the ability to live up to one's ideals' (Kotter, 1990: 107). In this way, followers feel satisfied and emotionally attached to the leader. Additionally, transformational leaders satisfy employees by identifying the rewards they desire, recognizing and rewarding their achievement. This 'not only gives people a sense of accomplishment but also makes them feel like they belong to an organization that cares about them' (Kotter, 1990: 108). <heading>Job Performance</heading>Transformational leadership is postulated to be responsible for performance beyond expectations in corporations. Bass (1985, cited in Podsakoff et al., 1990) cited a variety of field studies demonstrating that transformational leader behaviors are positively related to employees' self-reported effort and job performance. A research carried out by Howell and Avolio (1993) also found that more positive contribution to performance came from the behaviors associated with transformational leadership, that is, more individualized consideration, intellectual stimulation, and charisma. On the one hand, transformational leaders are not only able to generate awareness and acceptance of the purposes and mission, but also willing and capable to promote intelligence. They like to show their followers 'new ways of looking at old problems, to teach them to see difficulties as problems to be solved, and to emphasize rational solutions' (Bass, 1990: 21). On the other hand, transformational leaders 'transform or change the basic values, beliefs, and attitudes of followers so that they are willing to perform beyond the minimum level specified by the organization' (Podsakoff et al., 1990:108). Transformational leadership can 'make a big difference in the firm's performance at all levels' (Bass, 1990: 25). As Podsakoffal. (1990: 109) put it, 'the real essence of transformational leadership is that these leaders "lift ordinary people to extraordinary heights" (Boal & Bryson, 1988), and cause followers to "do more than they are expected to do" (Yukl, 1989)'. <heading>Organization Image and Culture</heading>Apart from the substantial positive effects on human resource competitiveness as discussed above, transformational leadership also bring some potential and intangible benefits for organization: image and culture. As Bass (1990: 25) suggested, 'a firm that is permeated with transformational leadership from top to bottom conveys to its own personnel as well as to customers, suppliers, financial backers, and the community at large that it has its eyes on the future; is confident; has personnel who are pulling together for the common good; and places a premium on its intellectual resources and flexibility and on the development of its people'. Holding such a healthy public image, an organization will definitely have a bright prospect and attract more high quality human resources, which contribute to the well-off business in the long run. In respect of culture, as consistent with the social learning theory, leaders 'tend to model their own leadership style after that of their immediate supervisors' (Bass 1990: 26), while their followers incline to emulate their behaviors. Thus a comparatively stable style of leadership will be fostered and cascaded within an organization. If more higher-ups are transformational, more lower-level employees will be likely to act as transformational leaders as they rise in the organization, which will also be good for the organization's long-term development. To sum up, transformational leaders can 'identify the core values and unifying purposes of the organization and its members' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999: 271), inspire employees to enthusiastically achieve organizational goals, liberate human potential, and foster effective, satisfied followers. Charisma, individualized consideration, and intellectual stimulation are critical to organizational effectiveness, especially when the organization is faced with rapid changes, problems, and uncertainties (Bass, 1990). <heading>The Dark Side of Transformational Leadership </heading>Nevertheless, some people argue that transformational leadership is unnecessary as transactional leadership can be effective enough to deal with problems. This may be true to some firms functioning only in a market with stable technology, workforce, and environment. Under such circumstances, the need for leadership may be cut down or eliminated, as it may 'move along quite well with managers who simply promise and deliver rewards to employees for carrying out assignments' (Bass, 1990: 30). More seriously, transformational leadership is even deemed as 'a dangerous curse'. In the following part, the potential disadvantages of transformational leadership will be presented with regard to charisma, individualized consideration, and intellectual stimulation respectively. <heading>Charisma</heading>In the late 1990s, the public and the media's fascination with charismatic leadership reached its peak. Almost every company wanted a charismatic CEO like GE's Jack Welch, Disney's Michael Eisner. However, on a negative note, there is a growing body of evidence indicating that the effectiveness of charisma may be situational. Moreover, recent frustrations in some companies which applied charismatic leadership suggest that 'there is a dark side to charisma that can potentially undermine organizations' (Robbins, 2005:167). In the first place, some charismatic leaders are 'pseudo-transformational leaders' who may cause destructive effects on organization. Pseudo-transformational leaders refer to leaders who 'create the impression that they are doing the right things' as transformational leaders do, but 'secretly fail to do so when doing the right things conflict with their own narcissistic interests' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999: 189). Pseudo-transformational leaders don't necessarily act in the best interests of their organizations, but 'indulge in fantasies of power and success' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999: 187). They seek power and position at the expense of their followers' achievements. They 'recklessly used organizational resources for their personal benefit', and at its worst, 'allow their self interest and personal goals to override the goals of the organization' (Robbins, 2005: 168). Many of these leaders even use their power and image to establish companies of their own. In the second place, charismatic leadership not always conduces to high levels of performance, but may create opportunity or excuse for followers to 'escape responsibility for their own actions and inactions' (Gemmill and Oakley, 1992: 119). The charismatic leader is so powerful that he or she is worshiped as an evangelist who 'almost single-handedly has the vision to steer (as a captain would) the organization through turbulent change and crisis' (Fulop et al., 2004: 340). In addition to the growth of trust and confidence in the leader, followers may engender dependency for nourishment and protection. They 'perceive themselves as freed from the anxiety and responsibility of taking initiative, seeking autonomy, taking risks' (Gemmill and Oakley, 1992: 119). Thus, the over-idealized charismatic leader could actually deskill followers 'from their own critical thinking, visions, inspirations, and emotions' (Gemmill and Oakley, 1992: 120). <heading>Individualized Consideration</heading>Individual-fit developing, which includes coaching and mentoring, is reasonable to be treated as the core of individualized consideration, as it enhances individual's skills and self-efficacy. While the authentic individually considerate leaders are concerned about helping followers to become more competent, and developing them into leaders themselves, 'pseudo-transformational leaders are more concerned about maintaining the dependence of their followers' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999: 189). Besides, pseudo-transformational leaders welcome and expect blind obedience. As Bass and Steidlmeier (1999: 188) put it, they 'feed on the ignorance of their followers so that their followers will accept more ambiguities and inconsistencies opening the opportunities for the self-enhancement of charlatans'. Last but not least, pseudo-transformational leaders preach about empowerment but actually continue to seek control. They set agenda, manipulate the values of their followers, and are less likely to consider and accept conflicting views between their followers and themselves. All of these behaviors will destroy employees' enthusiasm, decrease satisfaction, and even cause harm to them, which will block an organization's healthy development. <heading>Intellectual Stimulation</heading>Contrary to the arguments of Bass, Howell and Avolio, et al., intellectual stimulation was found to have negative impacts on both trust and satisfaction. For one thing, intellectual stimulation puts more stress on employees. 'Intellectual stimulation is operationally defined as causing a subordinate to question traditional beliefs, to look at problems in a different way, and to find innovative solutions for problems (Yulk, 1999: 4)'. This may produce desirable effects in the long run. However, being continually urged or exhorted to search for better methods of doing things, which probably leads to overtime work, followers are more likely to experience stress both mentally and physically, and be 'burnt out by the prolonged stress' (Yulk, 1999: 7). Some researches suggested that 'stress induced by increased task demands decreases interpersonal sensitivity and helping behavior' (Podsakoff et al., 1990: 136). For another, intellectual stimulation reduces employees' trust in their leaders. With a nature of questioning the old and perhaps comfortable assumptions, intellectual stimulation would cause a 'cognitive reappraisal of current circumstances' (Bass 1988, cited in Podsakoff et al., 1990: 136). This process may be dissatisfying as an individual's 'figure-ground' is reversed now and again. Consequently, employees may perceive their leaders as 'less predictable and/or dependable' (Podsakoff et al., 1990: 136), thus show less trust in and respect for them. Even worse, pseudo-transformational leaders may play tricks on their followers by using the technique of intellectual stimulation. They inspire innovative thinking, but steal followers' ideas which they take credit for, while make others 'scapegoats for failure' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999: 188). In short, pseudo-transformational leaders are 'deceptive, domineering, egotistical demagogues' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999: 189). They abuse charisma, individualized consideration, and intellectual stimulation, resulting in a decline of organizational effectiveness. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Leadership is 'a shared process of enhancing the collective and individual capacity of people to accomplish their work roles effectively' (Yukl, 1999: 7), and transformational leadership has been viewed as a key determinant of organizational effectiveness. It has been proven by an increasing body of research that there are impressive correlations between transformational leadership and motivation, high performance and satisfaction among followers. Simply put, people working for charismatic leaders are motivated to exert extra work effort and, as they admire and trust their leader, express greater satisfaction. (Robbins, 2005) On the other hand, true as it is, transformational leadership can have some detrimental consequences for organization, though most of which are made by pseudo-transformational leaders. With consideration to all of the aspects argued above, it is rational to acknowledge transformational leadership's positive impacts on organizational effectiveness, while also keep open-eyed on the latent danger from transformational leadership. 