<abstract>Overview: Does helping of strangers vary across different cities around the world? Robert Levine, a psychologist at California State University (Fresno), set out to answer this question. He found that people are much more likely to help a stranger in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) than in New York (EUA). A closer look, however, reveals a much subtler reality: Cariocas may not be so nice after all; and New Yorkers, not so blunt. </abstract><heading>Measuring kindness</heading>People in large cities tend to be bleak towards strangers. Life is fast, streets are packed, and strangers in need may not want help altogether. Despite the commonalities, some cities may be friendlier than others. Robert Levine, professor of Psychology at California State University (Fresno), carried out a multinational experiment to try to find out whether such differences exist. The study, the largest cross-national comparison of helping ever conducted, was run in 23 countries during the summer months between 1992 and 1997 by students and social psychologists. To measure helpfulness, Levine and his team used three tests - pen-drop, hurt-leg and fake-blind. In the first, the experimenter dropped a pen by accident in the street and waited for somebody to point it out; 424 people where approached in all. In the second experiment, a limping man wearing a leg brace dropped magazines and waited for help; 493 people were tested. In the third experiment, a fake blind man stood in a traffic light waiting for aid just as it turned green; 281 trials were run. The results showed that Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) was the most helpful city, with an average of 93.3% of overall positive responses and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) the least helpful, with only 40.3%. New York ranked second to last, with 44.6% of helpful responses across trials. The findings were published in the Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology in 2001, and an article written by Levine appeared on the popular science magazine American Scientist last year. Although apparently clear-cut and controlled, the experiment nonetheless presents several loose ends, which may cast doubts on the results, if not render them uninterpretable. Three main issues arise from the design used by Levine and his group: sampling limitations, experimenter biases and cross-cultural differences. In the following, we discuss each of these issues in turn. <heading>Sampling limitations</heading>"Places, like individuals, have their own personalities", says Levine. Accordingly, he decided to treat each city as a single entity. Like individuals, cities differ in their tendency to reach out. And like individuals' personalities, cities' personalities can only be assessed by running a series of tests at different times and settings. The analogy, however, stops here, since Levine's results were obtained at a single time of the year (summer) at a single setting (downtown). Different areas of the same city can vary widely in dimensions such as productivity, income and life style. If any of these variables affects helping behavior, then the degrees of helpfulness can also vary widely depending on the region where the experiment is conducted. For this type of study, in particular, the choice of a sampling area is crucial. Indeed, previous studies confirm that minor changes in the surroundings can drastically affect helping. Levine's himself describes the importance of "pockets of village cohesiveness in the most urban places". Thus, it is surprising that the sampling method used in this study (i.e. sampling from downtown areas) was so crude. Not only the area in the city may affect the results but also the time of the year. Cities play different roles in each region, state and country. Some are business centres, others are touristic destinations. While Rio is famous for its beaches and beautiful women; Shanghai is famous for its skyscrapers and dynamic economy. The relevance of these differences is the following: in the summer, Rio is flooded with tourists, whereas Shanghai is not necessarily. So, it may be the case that the experimenter in Rio received a great deal of help from visitors, and not Cariocas. As a consequence, the helping behaviour in Rio would not be a property of the city, but a property of the type of tourists it attracts. Likewise, the behaviour in Shanghai could reflect the rush of the travelling business men in a strange environment, not the behaviour of locals. Comparing Sao Paulo (Brazil) with Shanghai would be a better choice. It is surprising that the study was carried out on a "convenience sample" without further regard as to the origin of the helpers. An easy solution would be to ask participants after each test where he/she came from. <heading>Experimenter biases</heading>It would be very expensive for Levine himself to visit all those cities and carry out the trials alone. So, he took advantage of the international student community in his department to run the tests. For each country, a different experimenter of the corresponding nationality was allocated. By doing so, however, Levine ended up introducing a potential confounding factor in the design, namely, experimenter biases. In short, because each surveyed city had a different experimenter running the tests, the results may be due not to the city's personality, but rather due to the experimenter's personality (i.e., due to his ability to attract help). Rater improvement may also account for differences in the results. Over trials, some experimenters may have learned how to feign blindness better than other experimenters. Similarly, experimenters may have been influenced by the city's atmosphere. In fact, Levine pointed out the case of Tokyo, where the rater was so embarrassed with the surrounding norms of civility that he could not feign blindness. Tokyo was dropped from the final comparison, but the effect may well have been present to a lesser extent in other cities. One possible solution is allocating two or more experimenters in each location and average their scores in order to balance out confounds. Another possible criticism to the experimental design implemented by Levine et al. is the criterion used to classify a response as positive: it is simply too loose. A positive helping response for the pen-drop condition, for example, ranged from pointing to the pen to catching it and returning personally to the experimenter. And a positive response for the fake-blind condition varied from tersely announcing the experimenter that the light has turned green to walking him across the street and offering even further assistance. By using this measure, experimenters allowed a great deal of variation across trials. Given the coarseness of the measure, some cities may have their scores either upgraded or downgraded, since being rough-and-barely helpful or nice-and-extremely helpful have all received equal scores. If the data were broken down according to the degrees of helpfulness and analysed separately, a different picture might have emerged. The statistical analysis could be improved as well. One of the aims of the experiment was to correlate helpfulness with variables such as population density, productivity and purchase-parity-power. Several univariate regression analyses were used to pinpoint which correlations were significant. It was found that the best predictor of helpfulness behavior is population density. The remaining variables, although individually not significant, could nonetheless interact with density and predict behavior. This kind of relation could be tested by running multiple regression analyses. Yet, Levine did not report any such results. <heading>Cross-cultural differences</heading>One of the main issues of running experiments across the globe is cross-cultural differences. Because attitudes towards stimuli vary, one is not sure if the response is due to the variable under manipulation or else due to response bias. Participants may not understand the stimuli in the first place or may not respond to the particular tests designed by the experimenter. In countries where privacy is highly valued, for example, people might be afraid of offering help if not asked. Levine mentions the case of an old man in New York who shouted at a woman who tried to help him; the woman reported becoming scared of helping strangers if not asked. As the joke goes, a desperate, drowning man would be ignored in England, whereas he would stand a much better chance if he politely asked for assistance. Thus, the results in Levine's study may have favoured cities where people do not expect verbal signs of need, as opposed to cities where people would happily help if only the experimenter had asked for it. Cross-cultural differences may also result in floor effects: people may not realise that the experimenter is in need for help. In Jakarta (Indonesia), for example, a stronger stimulus might be needed to elicit a positive response for the hurt-leg test (e.g. only crippled or maimed men would receive help, according to the local experimenter's interpretation). Similarly, people might not help because the surroundings already provide cues for the stranger. This is the case of New York and Tokyo, where blind people can cross streets alone, since traffic lights beep when they turn green. In addition, gender differences may play a role in the response patterns. Different cultures have different attitudes towards helping men or women. By fixing the conditions across cultures and having only men as experimenters, Levine allowed subject biased selection to creep in. This is especially true in Muslim countries. A women offering help to a man in Kuala Lumpur is not as socially acceptable as it is in New York. <heading>Not so helpful</heading>Taken together, those criticisms cast doubts on the external validity of the experiment. Moreover, issues of reliability were not properly addressed. Finally, the helping behavior was specific for nonemergency situations; it cannot be generalized to other types of helpful behaviours, such as helpfulness cases of serious threats (e.g. earthquakes, snow storm, hurricane). So, can we learn anything at all from this study? Yes, we do. We can say that, by visiting downtown Rio in the summer, one has a better chance of receiving nonemergency help than if he were in downtown New York in the following or previous summer. And we also learned that packed areas tend to be less friendly than less populated ones. But one cannot say that Cariocas are the nicest people in the world, nor can one claim that New Yorkers are all blunt. 