"An economy is in a liquidity trap if aggregate demand consistently falls short of productive capacity despite essentially zero short-term nominal interest rates." The possibility of a liquidity trap arises when the IS-LM model is being investigated. At the time when the model was created, the possibility of the liquidity trap was more of an intellectual invention rather than anything relating to reality. However it has been noted by scholars recently, especially Paul Krugman, that Japan has been facing such situation during and after the recession of early 1990´s. This essay will first provide an explanation of the liquidity trap, using the IS-LM and AS-AD models, and then suggest a macroeconomic solution for such a problem. Japan will be used as an example in this essay, since her economy has displayed features of a liquidity trap. However the conclusion will take into account the theoretical implications of the solution for any country facing such problems, not only Japan. <fnote>Paul Krugman, "Synopsis, modelling Japan, assuming a liquidity trap" P.6 </fnote>The IS-LM model assumes sticky/exogenously given prices, constant inflation expectations and also it assumes that we are operating in a closed economy. Liquidity trap arises when interest rates are very close to zero. As a result the LM curve cannot be shifted down by increasing money supply, as shown: <figure/><figure/>The IS-LM relation (for a closed economy) is as follows: IS: Y = C(Y-T) + I(y, r) +G LM: M/P = Y*L(i) As a result of a flat LM curve the aggregate demand will be downwards sloping, but vertical from the point where the flat LM curve intersects with the IS curve. In such a case, with the assumptions stated so far, there are two possible solutions for the economy to recover, either monetary or fiscal policy. If the central bank decides to increase money supply by printing more money and put it to circulation through open-market operations buying the earlier issued government bonds, the LM curve should shift down. But as can be seen from the graph above, when the nominal interest rate is too close to its possible minimum, zero, an increase in the money supply cannot shift the LM curve further down. So the problem facing the economy is that, as money supply is increased, people view consumption and bonds as equal assets and as a result consumption does not increase. People are indifferent between holding bonds and cash, and even though the proportion of bonds in relation to cash in people's portfolios would increase, it would not be able to reduce interest rates any further. Other way to express this is that, the interest sensitivity of money demand tends to infinity, i.e. as interest rates cannot fall any further, there can be no boost to investment from monetary expansion and hence no increase in consumption either.  <fnote>Paul Krugman: "Synopsis: Examines Modern context of Liquidity Trap, made more immediate by Japan's falling into same. Recommends policy of inflation targeting". P.2 </fnote>The problem facing the economy is from the Aggregate Demand side, when in a normal case increase in the money supply would shift the AD curve to the right, when the LM curve is flat no shift occurs and the economy remains in a slump. As can be seen from the graph below, when AD curve is vertical, shift in the Aggregate Supply curve does not change the equilibrium outcome.  <fnote>Paul Krugman:Ibid. P.12 </fnote><figure/>Therefore it is the demand side policies that can affect and bring the economy out of the slowdown. Money supply as such, however, is not sufficient to move the AD curve, when the economy is in a liquidity trap, as was the case in Japan from 1996 to 2000. During this time Japan's central bank increased money supply by 40%, but this resulted in only 3% increase in the Gross Domestic Product, and it has been argued that after this monetary expansion Japan was still not at her natural level of unemployment or output. One possible way to help the economy out of the slump, when the economy is closed and the people are assumed to display adaptive expectations is to use fiscal policy. A sufficient increase in government spending would be able to get the economy to equilibrium at a point, where the LM curve is steep. The massive deficit-financed boost would be able to restore the full employment output. Consider the graph: <fnote>University of Warwick, Macroeconomics 2, Term 1 Lecture notes AS-AD 1. P.31 </fnote><figure/>However, as noted before, this massive expansion can only be achieved by a massive loan by the government. So if the government's budget is in a healthy state, it might be able to run such deficits for a while. This would require a healthy and growing economy. However, if the economy is already running large budget deficits and has troubles with her economy, this task would be difficult to achieve. This is the case in Japan, the government is already indebted with a larger debt than its annual GDP, and therefore this option has risks that would be dangerous to ignore. If we relax the assumption of the economy being closed, we can have another solution for the problem. If the economy is open, a simple analysis would suggest that monetary policy can be made effective again. If the central bank increases money supply, this should in principle decrease the demand for the domestic currency and as a result it would depreciate. This depreciation would make the domestic goods cheaper abroad thus increasing the demand for domestic goods. This effect would take place through the J-curve as shown below: <figure/>The initial effect of the currency depreciation would make the people poorer, since the purchasing power of people has decreased, but as time passes, the price of domestic goods abroad falls and the net exports increase. As a result of this the economy should improve. Hence the monetary policy would be effective again. However, as noted in Blanchard, the depreciation of the currency happens through the interest parity relation, increase in money supply shifts the LM curve down and as a result the domestic interest rate falls resulting in currency depreciation. In the case where interest rates are already close to zero, depreciation could therefore be difficult, even impossible, to achieve and the effect on relative prices would not take place. Therefore the analysis of an open economy will not be paid much attention to, and the emphasis of the solution will be on the closed economy. <fnote>Blanchard Olivier, "Macroeconomics". P.423 </fnote>Let's now relax the assumption of adaptive expectations, and let people think rationally. There are two possible conditions under which the liquidity trap occurs. The first one is that people expect deflation, P is high compared with P*, the present price level is high compared to the expected future price level. This results in low consumption, and even with a low nominal interest rate the real interest rate remains positive. The other possibility arises when peoples' expected future income is low compared with the present productive capacity. This results in excess savings and low consumption. Let's now assume that the inflation in the country is indeed negative, i.e. the country is facing deflation. This means that the real interest rate in the country is positive, consider the following relation: <fnote>Paul Krugman: "Synopsis: Modelling Japan, assuming a Liquidity Trap". P.5 </fnote>The real interest rate equals to nominal interest rate minus the expected inflation. If the economy is actually facing deflation and is in a liquidity trap, output below the natural level leads to more deflation over time, which leads to a further increase in the real interest rate and leads to a further shift of the IS curve to the left. This shift leads to a further decrease in output, which leads to more deflation, as shown below. This shift in the IS curve results in shrinking AD. <fnote>Blanchard Olivier, "Macroeconomics" P. 471 </fnote><fnote>Gordon, Robert, "Macroeconomics." P. 216-217. </fnote><figure/>In this case, when the economy is in a liquidity trap and prices are falling, one could consider the Keynes' effect on falling prices: A reduction in the price level causes an indirect increase in AD, provided that the interest rate falls as a consequence of the price reduction. However, the necessary condition for this, falling interest rate (nominal in this case) fails, and even though decreasing price level increases real money balances, interest rates fail to decrease thus failing to boost investment and consumption. In a liquidity trap the Pigou effect on falling prices does not take place either. Pigou argued that "A reduction in the price level causes a direct increase in AD, provided it increases consumption spending (without necessarily a reduction in the interest rate)." The intuition being that the reduction in the price level increases consumers' net real wealth thus reducing saving. In a liquidity trap however savings do not decrease. <fnote>University of Warwick, Macroeconomics 2, Term 1 Lecture notes AS-AD 2. P.46 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. P.51 </fnote>As a result of the Keynes' effect AD would be downwards sloping and Pigou effect it would be "flatter", but as their effects do not play a significant role in a liquidity trap, it is indeed the Tobin-Fischer effect that can be considered in such a situation. "An unexpected reduction in the price level can cause a direct decrease in AD, if it changes the distribution of wealth from high-spending borrowers to low-spending lenders". Borrowers are normally set in long term contracts and price reduction increases the real value of their debt, decreasing their net wealth. Simultaneously the lenders' wealth increases, but as their marginal propensity to consume is less than the borrowers' one, the AD curve gets the shape described in page 1. Even though in the case of a liquidity trap the price-reduction might not actually be unexpected, it still does not increase consumption. <fnote>Ibid. P.56 </fnote>As discussed earlier, the problem facing a country in a liquidity trap is a "flat" LM curve, low interest rates, usually accompanied with deflation or expected deflation, and shrinking Aggregate Demand. The government seems to be in a very difficult situation, monetary policy is ineffective and fiscal expansion very expensive concerning the budget deficit. However, there is a solution to the problem that has not yet been discussed. When the assumption of expectations in the IS-LM model is rational, even a closed economy can be improved, using monetary policy. Even though it was mentioned impotent in this case, it can actually be effective. The central bank can make the monetary policy function again, if it "credibly commits to an irresponsible behaviour." If the central bank manages to create inflation expectations, by announcing a long-term inflation target, say 4-5% annually for the next 10-15 years by increasing money supply and does not change its behaviour to fight the actual inflation when it occurs, it would be able to decrease the LM curve, as shown below: <fnote>Paul Krugman: "Synopsis: Modelling Japan, assuming a Liquidity Trap". P.8 </fnote><fnote>University of Warwick, Macroeconomics 2, Term 1 Lecture notes AS-AD 1. P.39 </fnote><figure/>When the real interest rate manages to fall below zero, and people expect the inflation to continue, they will no longer be indifferent between holding bonds and high-powered money. As cash becomes the preferred asset people will consume more. Also as borrowing becomes "cheap", investors will be encouraged to take loans and invest more. This increase in investment increases income, and as the prices still keep increasing people will be consuming a larger part of the additional income rather than saving it. As a result of this the economy will be able to get out of the liquidity trap to equilibrium, where the LM curve is no longer flat and nominal interest rates are above zero. As the nominal interest rates increase above zero, the central bank will be able to use that as a tool to increase economic activity, if the economy starts to slow down later on. Even this policy is not without dangers, the central bank has a great responsibility when managing the inflation, so that it will actually stay under control and not reach hyperinflation, which is highly undesirable. As shown above the problem facing an economy in a liquidity trap is not to be taken lightly, flat LM curve and stagnating economy are difficult issues to deal with. The central bank can tackle this issue by credibly committing to a long-term inflation target encouraging investment and consumption. Fiscal policy and increase in government spending can be used as a tool to get out of such a situation as well, but can be very risky, if the country is facing large budget deficits already. 