<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Activity of immobilised enzymes was investigated in this experiment. Sodium alginate and calcium chloride was used to produce immobilised alkaline phosphatase trapped in beads of alginate. The amount of product can be measured using a spectrophotometer since one of the products; p-nitrophenol is yellow at high pHs. The enzyme activities of the native and immoblilsed enzyme are measured and compared; their specific activities are 259mg -1/15min assay and 49.7 mg -1/15min assay respectively. The amount of substrate was found when immobilized enzymes were incubated with substrate over a period of time to observe the change in the rate of reaction. The amount of enzyme leaked out into the surroundings was also found by submerging immobilised enzymes in buffer and incubating the buffer alone with p-nitrophenyl phosphate. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Enzymes are also known as biological catalysts. They speed up reactions and are reusable. Their specificity for substrate makes them very useful in food industry and laboratory work. Most enzymes come in solution form; therefore it is not possible to reuse them without complex extracting procedures. By immobilising enzymes, trapping them to a solid, enzymes are reusable and are more resistant to denaturation (both by extreme pHs or temperature). This is more economical when applied to industry. Since it is bound to a solid support, it is more difficult to alter its shape. Alginate consists of a long sugar chain with carboxyl groups projecting out. Calcium ions cross link the carboxyl groups to solidify alginate. Apart from trapping enzymes in alginate beads, other materials such as gelatine, polyacrylamide, carragenan and alginate can be used. Alkaline phosphatase was used in this experiment, it converts colourless p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) into phosphate and p-nitrophenol (pNP which is yellow at high pHs). The yellow colour allows the extent of the reaction to be measured by a spectrophotometer at 420nm. The reaction is done in 15mins assays; it is stopped by adding 1M sodium hydroxide to denature the enzyme. At extreme pHs, the hydrogen bonds within the enzyme break and denatures the enzyme. <heading>Materials and Methods</heading>The procedures in described in the laboratory report were carried out with a few modifications. No enzymes were added in the control when the activity of native enzyme was measured. When determining the enzyme activity of the immobilised enzyme, water was added instead of enzymes in the control. The reusability of beads was determined by repeating 15mins assays. The liquid from the previous assay was removed using a pipette and the absorbance was measured. The beads were washed using 3ml washing buffer. The washing buffer was then removed and fresh assay buffer was added. The tube was placed in a 30° water bath for 5 mins and then substrate was added. After 15mins, 1ml 1M sodium hydroxide was added to stop the reaction. The absorbance at 420nm was measured and recorded. This was repeated for six times. The assay of total protein was not carried out due to the poor results produced in previous years. The amount of enzyme leaked out was investigated by incubating 4 beads in 2.7ml of assay buffer for an hour. The bathing liquid was removed and was incubated with 0.3ml of pNPP for 15mins. The reaction was stopped by adding 1ml 1M sodium hydroxide. A 420 was measured. <heading>Results</heading>The rate of reaction of native enzymes is around 1.7 times faster than that of immobilised enzymes. The absorbance decreases as the number of assays increases. The decrease is more rapid in the first three assays and then levels off after the third assay. The positive A 420 of the bathing liquid of the 4 beads shows that enzymes have leaked out of the beads. However it is not possible to calculate the specific activity since the amount of enzymes leaked out is unknown. <table/><table/><figure/><heading>Conclusions and Discussion</heading>The specific activity is higher for native enzymes than in immobilised enzymes. Substrate has to diffuse into the alginate beads to react with the enzyme, the products then have to diffuse out into the liquid to be detected by a spectrophotometer. Time is needed for the diffusion of substrate and product therefore the rate is lower. Some products may be trapped in the enzyme beads when the bathing liquid is removed; therefore it gives a lower A 420. The specific activity decreases as the number of assays increases because some of the enzymes leak out of the beads. Therefore fewer enzymes are present for the next assay. However, the amount of enzymes inside and outside of the bead maintains a dynamic equilibrium; therefore there will always be some enzymes in the beads. This also explains the leveling off of the graph. The beads are easier to break just after they have formed because only the outer coating is solid. It takes time for the calcium ions to diffuse towards the centre of the beads and form cross links between alginate molecules. EDTA breaks the gel structure. pH of the EDTA solution must be over pH8.0 because it is the pH in which EDTA dissolves. Other chelating agents such as ethylenediamine, porphine and dimercaprol have the same effect as EDTA. The beads remain yellow because yellow pNP was trapped inside the beads right after being produced by the enzymes inside the beads. The results may be lower than the real value. Binding enzymes to a solid support restricts the movement an enzyme can have. Since it has to change its shape (induced fit model) to form the enzyme-substrate complex, restricting its movement reduces the number of enzyme-substrate complexes that could be formed. 