<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>There are two types of nucleic acid in cells, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which carries the genetic information, and ribonucleic acid (RNA), which is involved in protein synthesis. They could be distinguished by the different bases they possess. Uracil is only present in RNA whereas Thymine is present DNA. In this experiment, samples A and B were acid hydrolysed and were run in a chromatograph together with samples of adenine, thymine, guanine, cytosine and uracil. It is shown that A is DNA and B is RNA since uracil is present in B. Two other samples, C and D, were hydrolysed using deoxyribonuclease I and ribonuclease. 10 tubes were set up with various amounts of MgCl 2, nucleic acids and nucleic acid. The tubes were centrifuged after incubating for 15mins. The reaction of enzyme and the nucleic acid could be shown by measuring A 260 of the supernatant. A higher A 260 value implies that the nucleic acid is digested. It was shown that C is DNA and D is RNA. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>DNA and RNA have very similar structures, they both consists of a ribose sugar, phosphate group and a nitrogenous base. However, they carry out very different roles in cells. DNA carries genetic information whereas RNA is involved in protein synthesis. One major difference is that DNA possesses thymine whereas RNA has uracil. The bases can be identified using chromatography. The nucleic acids could be hydrolysed by strong acids, such as perchloric acid and heat to give free nucleotides. Since nucleotides with different bases have different masses, they could be separated using chromatography. When standards of the five bases are run in the same chromatogram the bases in the samples could then be compared with and identified. Another way of identifying is to mix the unknown samples with DNases and RNases. EDTA and magnesium choloride activates the nucleases. The nucleases work in highest efficiency at around 37°. The nucleases break nucleic acids down into strands of a few nucleotides. 10 tubes of various compositions were incubated and the reaction was stopped by cooling in ice and the addition of albumin solution and perchloric acid precipitates the undigested nucleic acid. When centrifuged, complete nucleic acid strands accumulate in the pellet and broken down nucleic acid molecules dissolve in the supernatant. Therefore a higher A 260 value of the supernatant shows that the digestion of nucleic acid. <heading>Materials and Methods</heading>The materials and methods were similar as described in the manual with no major amendments. A precision pipette was used to load 10μl samples onto the TLC plate. The TLC plate was left in the chromatography tank until the solvent is 2/3 up the plate. <table/><heading>Results</heading>On the TLC plate, bases travel up the plate in the order of thymine, uracil, cytosine, adenine and guanine, where thymine travel the furthest to the top of the plate and guanine is near the bottom. Sample A gives a region between the cytosine and guanine marks. Sample B has clear absorbing areas around adenine, guanine, cytosine and uracil. Therefore it could be deduced that sample A is DNA and B is RNA. Tubes 3 and 9 act at controls for the experiment since RNase contamination is common, it is necessary to set up controls to monitor the amount of contamination. Tubes 1 and 10 has no enzyme added, therefore should have the lowest absorbance. Tube 1 has an A 260 value close to that of tube 3, which is normal. The high absorbance of tube 10 is due to contamination of RNase in the environment. Tube 3 has the lowest absorption. Since it acts as a control and the reaction was stopped immediately after the reactants were added, there should be least amount of digested nucleic acid in tube 3 thus the lowest A 260. Amongst the tubes containing C (i.e. tubes 1-5), tube 2 has the highest absorbance, which shows that most nucleic acid was digested. Tube 2 contains DNase, therefore it could be deduced that C is DNA. Tubes 2 and 4 have similar compositions except that magnesium chloride was added to tube 2 and it is absent in tube 4. Compared to tube 2, tube 4 has a very low A 260 this shows that magnesium chloride is essential for the action of DNase. There is no reaction in tube 5 since only RNase is present therefore it gives a relatively low absorbance. Tubes 6-10 contain D, tube 7 gives the highest A 260 whereas 10 gives the lowest. This is because RNase is present in tube 7 and breaks down D, which is RNA. There was no enzyme in tube 10 therefore no nucleic acid was broken down. Tube 9, which is the control, has an A 260 a lot higher than that of tube 10, this is because there was a time gap between the mixing of the RNase and D and the addition of albumin solution and perchlorate acid. Therefore a bit of RNA was digested, and that gives a relatively high A 260. DNase was added to tube 6 and there should not be any reaction, however, there might be RNase contamination and some RNA was digested to give a high A 260 reading. Tube 8 has similar composition as tube 7 but lacking magnesium chloride. The lower absorbance of tube 8 shows that magnesium chloride encourages the reaction. <table/><heading>Discussion and Conclusions</heading>Chromatography of the five bases give very clear absorbing regions although the absorbing region of sample A is a bit merged together and region showing thymine did not show. There might have been errors when mounting the plate with sample A. A dot with a larger concentration gives clearer absorbing regions. The absorbance of tube 6 and 10, where no reaction was expected, are a lot higher than expected since there was RNase contamination and RNA was digested. Tube 9 has a higher absorbance than tube 10 because there was a time gap between the addition of albumin and perchlorate acid and the reaction. The absorbance of tube 1 is a bit higher than the control, there might be a bit of DNase contamination and DNA was digested. There are also other methods to differentiate between DNA and RNA. For example, RNA can be hydrolysed by alkali whereas DNA cannot. RNase contamination has a great role in producing anomalies. To have more accurate results, methods to get rid of RNase should be included. 