<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading>Self-referral to A+E for bruising 2 to accident at home. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, and current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading>Miss  stated she was at home on the morning of 20 th Sept. this year preparing both her six-week old daughter (), and her 3-year old boy () to go shopping.  was playing with a skateboard in the hallway, and  was strapped into a pushchair. She left both children temporarily as she went to the toilet. When she returned she found  sprawled across the hallway floor, in some distress with the skateboard nearby.  was still strapped into the pushchair, which had fallen backwards onto the vinyl-covered floor of the hall. She was screaming, and had a minor graze over her right eye.  was sprawled over the floor, and the skateboard was nearby. Later,  explained that he had skateboarded along the hallway, lost balance and grabbed onto the handles of 's pushchair. The pushchair fell backwards and  fell with it, hitting her head on the floor. Miss  said there was no loss of consciousness, and  was not bleeding from the graze. She phoned her partner's mother, who suggested she phone the Health visitor. The Health visitor was called, and recommended that  attend A+E.  arrived at A+E four hours later.  was seen by the A+E SHO, who referred  to the paediatricians. 's past medical history is unremarkable, excepting an oral Candida infection post-natally. Miss  said she had suffered from Candida infections throughout her pregnancy.  lives at home with her mother, half brother , and his father who is a paint sprayer. She has not had all her relevant immunisations due to difficulties attending the surgery. She is not on any medications, or has any allergies. Miss  described a normal pregnancy, and had a normal vaginal delivery at term. Neonatal period was unremarkable. Developmentally, all appropriate milestones have been achieved. Systems review was unremarkable. <heading>Social Background</heading>'s mother is a 19year-old partly trained hairdresser. She has had three children. They live in cramped, rented accommodation on the outskirts of .  is the eldest, aged three years. He is currently on the Child Protection Register after being physically abused by his father. 's father is now in prison for unrelated assault charges, and Miss  has a strained relationship with him. It was unclear when he is eligible to be released. Miss  had a second child with this partner, as she "felt it'd bring us closer together".  was born a year after .  had an uneventful pregnancy and labour, and was delivered vaginally at term. Miss  added  was always a small child, and never seemed to "catch his breath easily". Unexpectedly,  was found dead in his cot one morning. He was 10 months old. Briefly describing the events around this difficult period, Miss  said she was perennially confused and unable to concentrate, and just felt "my head was spinning" all the time. 's unexpected death did little for Miss 's relationship. Elaborating further, Miss  said "That when he started drinking, and began hitting me." Miss  eventually left him, and he was imprisoned on unrelated assault charges. Miss  found a new partner, and quickly fell pregnant with . 's father works full-time as a trainee paint-sprayer at a local car factory. He feels he doesn't spend as much time with  as he would like, but has to work all available overtime. <heading>Physical examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>Unremarkable. There was a minor graze over 's right eye that was not evident by the time of discharge.  was on the 75 th centile for weight and length, and on the 50 th centile for head circumference. Otherwise,  is a happy, active young baby making appropriate social contact with her mother, and fully interacting with the environment. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>'s presentation is eminently suitable for examination using a biopsychosocial approach. Biologically, there is actually very little wrong with . She is at least average compared to her peers; she has not 'fallen off' any of her centiles regarding physical progress, and appears to be a happy and contented 6-week-old girl. However, This apparent biomedical well-being disguises the considerable psychological stressors and social depravation the family is living in. The salient points are outlined below: <list>Domestic violence. Personal grief and depression.Social isolation.Interpersonal difficulties with family members.Financial poverty.Difficult relationship with authority.</list><heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading>None performed. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention</heading>No prescription. Miss  was given advice regarding appropriate transport for infants, and put in contact with a social worker regarding relevant benefits for lone parents, and possible funding for more appropriate ambulatory equipment. . <heading>Observation </heading>Observed on ward for several hours. <heading>Referral and team working</heading>Acutely, 's care involved the A+E team at  Hospital, and the on-call paediatricians at  Hospital. The on-call social worker was also consulted. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading>After being observed on the ward,  was discharged uneventfully the same evening. <heading>Evidence based care (EBC) and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>There was little evidence based care regarding Non-Accidental Injuries to infants on the internet. However, some relevant EBC on domestic violence was found: <quote>What are the effects of interventions initiated by healthcare professionals, aimed at female victims of domestic violence? Individual, couple, or group counselling Two controlled trials and one comparative cohort study found no effect of counselling compared with no treatment on medical care utilisation rates, reported exposure to violence and threats of violence, or depression, state anxiety, and self esteem. One controlled trial found that grief resolution orientated counselling improved self-esteem and self-efficacy from baseline, whereas feminist orientated counselling did not. However, the study did not directly compare effects of interventions. Similarly, one controlled trial found that cognitive behaviour orientated therapy improved women's assertiveness and reduced exposure to abuse from baseline, whereas non-specific support did not. One RCT and one non-randomised controlled trial reported that gender specific or couple therapy reduced subsequent exposure to violence among couples from baseline, but found no significant differences between these two types of counselling [1]. Advocacy One RCT and one non-randomised controlled trial found that advocacy reduced reabuse compared with no treatment. The RCT also found an improvement in women's quality of life with advocacy compared with no treatment. One controlled trial in pregnant Hispanic women found no significant difference in rates of reabuse between combined counselling plus mentoring (similar to advocacy) and a resource card, but found that counselling plus mentoring slightly reduced rates of reabuse compared with unlimited counselling [2]. Shelters We found no reliable controlled trials. One cohort study found a reduced incidence of violence in the weeks after shelter stay for women choosing to use the shelter when they were also engaged in other types of help seeking behaviour compared with women not choosing to stay at the shelter. Women choosing to stay at the shelter who had not sought help elsewhere experienced an increase in violence [3]. Peer support groups We found no systematic reviews, RCTs, non-randomised controlled trials, or cohort studies of peer support groups in women experiencing domestic violence [4].</quote><heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading>The varied presentations of a possible non-accidental injury; the complex psychosocial arrangements affecting families in 'pockets of depravation' , family and peer pressure in bringing up children. 1.  URL . 2.  URL  3.  URL . 4.  URL  