<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This essay intends to broadly describe how mutational events can give rise to molecular disease. The paper discusses briefly how genetics established allowing molecular disease to be defined. It describes the types of mutations, which may give rise to molecular disease; the five main categories of molecular disease which are examined using relevant examples of specific conditions. The paper concludes by summarising the main points and explains why more research is still required in this area. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>In 1865 Mendel published "Experiments with Plant Hybrids", a paper discussing how certain characteristics in the pea species Pisum sativum are inherited, see figure 1. He proposed two laws of inheritance which described the existence of a 'hereditary element'. It was not until 1902 that Sutton and Boveri's investigation confirmed the existence of hereditary elements, known as chromosomes. Their chromosomal theory of inheritance allowed Garrod to investigate the rare disease alkaptonuria. He observed that the disease was prevalent in certain families and concluded that affected people are homozygous for a gene which causes the disease. Garrod's investigation was one of the first to be undertaken for a single gene disorder. <figure/>In 1953, Watson and Crick determined the structure of the DNA molecule and provided an insight into how the molecule replicated. Genes are specific sequences of nucleotides which code for amino acids that are ultimately are translated into a functional protein. If a mutation occurs in the gene, the amino acid sequence could be altered, prematurely terminated or not terminated at all. This can lead to molecular disease. <heading>What is Molecular disease? </heading>Molecular disease is caused by a mutational event in the DNA, chromosome structure or a change in the chromosome number of an individual, preventing the correct protein from being synthesised. This generates a variety of molecular diseases which will be discussed in this essay. Molecular disease does not arise due to infection from a microorganism, although some viruses can induce a mutation leading to the molecular disease cancer. For example the notevirus causes a type of leukaemia. When the genetic code is altered from its original condition a mutation occurs. The two main types of mutations, point mutations and length mutations, cause different changes to occur in the DNA. Point mutations occur due to mutagens altering a single base in the genetic code leading to a spontaneous mutation. There are two types of point mutations, transversions where a purine is changed to a pyrimidine, and transitions where the same type of nucleotide is exchanged leading to same sense, missense and nonsense mutations. Same-sense mutations will not cause molecular disease. A single base pair change occurs causing the same amino acid to be coded for, in the polypeptide. Therefore the protein remains. Missense mutations occur when a single base pair change leads to the replacement of an amino acid. This can lead to molecular disease as the resultant protein will be different. An example of such a mutation is sickle cell anaemia. Sickle cell anaemia is an autosomal recessive disease which arises from a missense mutation at the sixth codon. The correct amino acid, glutamic acid, is changed to a valine residue at this position producing a mutant protein. The mutant β-globin causes erythrocytes to become distorted in situations where oxygen levels are low. The protein crystallises, becoming insoluble forcing the erythrocytes into a sickle shape, reducing survival time leading to severe anaemia. Affected individuals inherit two mutant HbS genes from both parents. Carriers of the disease are heterozygous for the HbS gene as the presence of the HbA gene allows sufficient HbA to be produced preventing the complications of sickle cell anaemia as shown in figure 2. These individuals suffer from the sickle cell trait. The frequency of sickle cell anaemia is higher in areas were malaria is endemic. In Africa, 1 in 500 (Cited from  URL  29/04/03) people are affected as the sickle shaped erythrocyte confers resistance to the parasite. <figure/>Nonsense mutations involve a point mutation producing a stop signal in the gene. The protein formed will be truncated due to its premature termination and is often inactive leading to molecular disease. Frameshift mutations cause molecular disease. If a single base pair is added or deleted, the triplet reading frame is altered. Such mutations tend to nearly always completely inactivate the protein, as the new codons are more likely to be stop signals. Length mutations are characterised by the loss or gain of genetic material and include deletions, trinucleotide repeat amplifications, insertions and duplications. Duplications and insertions normally cause single gene disorders. Deletion mutations involve a single base pair, kilobases of DNA or even whole chromosomes though most occur from the breakage of the chromosome due to parental rearrangement. Trinucleotide repeat amplification occurs within or between genes making them unstable if they are longer than the critical number of repeat elements. Providing they are within, or near a gene, a single gene disorder may occur. The instability of extended repeats causes the disease to vary in severity such as Huntington's disease. Huntington's disease is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by an unstable length mutation in the Huntington gene. The protein is a series of glutamine residues which is expressing in the brain. In the normal gene, 10 to 29 repeats of glutamine are found. Those with the disease have between 36 and 120 repeats. However, with each subsequent generation, the glutamine repeats increase symptom arrival time. The disease appears between 30 and 50 years and is characterised by the progressive selective death of the central nervous system. Intellectual function is greatly impaired and the patient suffers from psychiatric disturbances, dementia, unclear speech and involuntary movements. There are five types of molecular disease, the first of which is chromosomal abnormalities. <heading>Chromosome abnormalities</heading>Chromosome mutations involve numerical aberrations and structural aberrations (where somatic cells contain one or more abnormal chromosomes involving autosomes or the sex chromosomes). If a mutation can be visualised under a light microscope it is known as an aberration. Numerical aberrations occur when diploid cells exceed 46 chromosomes. Chromosome numbers exceeding diploid numbers that are exact multiples of the haploid number produce polyploidy conditions. Polyploidy occurs when a complete extra set of chromosomes increase the total chromosome number from 46 to 69 producing a condition known as triploidy. It can occur when an egg is fertilised with two sperms or where a gamete division does not occur correctly resulting in a diploid gamete. Normally these foetuses are miscarried. Chromosomes which are not exact multiples of haploid number produce aneuploidy conditions. Aneuploidy occurs from the failure of paired chromosomes to disjoin, producing non-disjunction or due to delayed chromosome movement, in the anaphase in meiosis as illustrated in figure 3. Upon fertilisation one cell will have an extra copy of a chromosome producing a trisomy condition, consequently one will have a missing copy of that chromosomes producing monosomy. <figure/>Structural aberrations occur due to chromosomal breakages. When a breakage occurs two sticky ends are produced. Repair mechanisms rejoin these two ends but they cannot distinguish between them so the wrong ends may be rejoined. Translocations, deletions and ring chromosomes, duplications, inversions, isochromosomes and centric fragments are all examples. Translocations occur when chromosomal material is transferred between different chromosomes due to their breakage. They are repaired abnormally or they may recombine with non-homologous chromosomes. Although the individual is normal as no DNA is lost, future offspring may be affected due to unbalanced chromosomes. There are three types of translocations, reciprocal, centric fusion and insertional. Deletions can arise from the loss of part or all of a chromosome. The deleted part will lack a centromere and so will be lost in mitosis. A ring chromosome forms from the broken chromosomes as the formed sticky ends join into a ring. Duplications occur when an extra copy of a part of a chromosome is present from unequal crossing over in meiosis resulting in a deletion. Inversions occur when two chromosomes break and the segment formed is inverted 180°. Although molecular disease is uncommon, unbalanced gametes may form causing molecular disease in the offspring. Isochromosomes are abnormal as one arm will have a deletion and the other a duplication arising during mitosis from transverse division of the centromere. The commonest molecular disease for the isochromosome of the long arm of the X chromosome is Turner syndrome. <figure/>Downs syndrome (Trisomy 21) is an example of a trisomy condition affecting an autosome which can also be induced by translocations. Non disjunction of chromosomes at the first mitotic division or a Robertsonian translocation in the long arms of chromosomes 21 and 14 will cause individuals to inherit three copies of chromosome 21. The individual has clear facial characteristics illustrated by figure 4 which allow easy diagnosis. Mental handicap is the main complication of this condition though congenital heart malformations (present in 40% of cases) and epilepsy are common. The risk of a child born with this condition is 1 in 600 but this increases dramatically with maternal age. Incidence at conception is greater but more than 60% are spontaneously aborted and 20% are still born. <heading>Mitochondria disorders</heading>Mitochondria contain their own genetic information which is passed mainly from the mother to the offspring. Although mitochondria DNA has a higher mutation rate the 59 identified diseases are rare. Leber hereditary optic atrophy is a form of blindness which strikes in middle life due to mutations in the NADH-Q oxidoreductase component of complex one, impairing either NADH utilisation or electron transfer to Q. In 50% of cases, a G to A point mutation occurs at position 11,778 in ND4 leads to visual loss. <heading>Somatic cell disorders</heading>A mutation in somatic cells can occur which is carried through to all subsequent daughter cells. Germ cells can also mutate and so the individual will not be affected by the mutation but any offspring are likely to be. An example of a somatic cell disorder is cancer. Although mutations which cause cancer are usually not inherited, some common cancers for example breast cancer; the initial mutated gene is inherited predisposing that family to the molecular disease. Cancer is caused by mutations in tumour suppressor genes, oncogenes and DNA repair genes due to exposure to environmental mutagens. Oncogenes are activated to cause cancer due to exposure to viruses or point mutations in the gene. The HRAS gene, a missense mutation at position 12 causes a valine residue to replace a glycine residue leading to bladder and lung cancer. Oncogenes can be activated by chromosome rearrangements as in the case of Burkitt's lymphoma, a cancer of the B cells. A translocation of the c-myc gene from chromosome 8 to 14 causes the gene to become over expressed leading to a tumour. This region on chromosome 14 encodes genes for the immunogloblin heavy chain and λ and κ light chains. Tumour suppressor genes were discovered by investigations into retinoblastoma. The protein coded for by this gene is absent in the tumour. For the tumour to occur, a nonsense or frameshift mutation in the gene gives rise to a truncated protein, non disjunction may occur in a second mutation leading to the loss of chromosome 13. DNA repair genes are involved in repairing DNA after exposure to environmental mutagens or base mis-incorporations. Such mutations increase the frequency of cancer. <heading>Autosomal inheritance</heading>Single gene disorders are caused by gene mutations in autosomal pairs, individual chromosomes or sex chromosomes. Dominant inheritance occurs when a trait which disadvantages the individual is present, for example familial hypercholesterolaemia. This condition causes cholesterol deposits to be laid down over extensor tendons for example in the hands and knees. Premature coronary artery disease is common and leads to an early death. The gene produces a protein which acts as a receptor for low density lipoproteins which bind to it and are taken into a wide variety of cells. Mutated forms tend to produce a defective receptor protein so low density lipoproteins and cholesterol levels are higher then normal in the blood. There are 200 different mutations of this gene which produce similar effects. 1 in 500 individuals are affected by familial hypercholesterolaemia. Those which are homozygous for the gene will die in early childhood from coronary heart disease. Other dominant molecular diseases include inherited cancers, Huntington's disease, myotonic dystrophy and adult polycystic kidney disease. 4458 dominant autosomal traits are known. Their effects tend to be less severe than recessive traits as mutations produce altered structural, carrier or receptor proteins instead of defective enzymes. Many dominant traits do not appear until much later in life Recessive inheritance may produce molecular disease. It occurs when two recessive alleles are present only in a homozygous state causing the trait to appear in the phenotype. Thalassaemia is an example. The condition prevents normal haemoglobin synthesis and regularly affects people in the Mediterranean (1 in 6 Cypriots carry the genes for the disease), south-east Asia, Middle East and India. In each form of the disease the α and β chains are not synthesised in the correct amounts producing shortened forms of these polypeptides. This imbalance leads to anaemia and hyperplasia of the bone marrow as red blood cells are destroyed prematurely. α-thalassaemia is characterised by the underproduction of α-globin chains. The severe form of this condition causes no α chains to be synthesised. Haemoglobin cannot form correctly leading to foetal death. The milder form (--/-α) allows some α chains to be synthesised but β chains are still present in excess. A β-globin tetramer is produced known as HbH. This haemoglobin molecular has an oxygen affinity similar to that of myoglobin so the patient will live. Both conditions are as a result of the deletion of α genes in chromosome 16. Individuals with (--/αα) or (-α/αα) are heterozygous for the condition and do not have the full symptoms of the disease. β-thalassaemia is characterised by the underproductions of the β-globin chains. The severe form of this disease causes no β chains to be synthesised due to a point mutation, an insertion or a deletion in the β-globin gene. Haemoglobin will not form properly producing severe anaemia. Sufferers require regular blood transfusions to combat their symptoms. The loss of function of the gene is through its transcription or its control. 1730 autosomal recessive traits are known including cystic fibrosis, micropolysaccharidoses, recessive blindness and phenylketonuria. <heading>Sex-linked inheritance </heading>Although females have two X chromosomes, only one is activated. Males have one X chromosome so all these genes will be activated. Any mutant genes on the maternal X chromosomes will present themselves in male offspring. X linked recessive inheritance occurs when two recessive alleles are present on both X chromosomes leading to molecular disease. 412 X-linked recessive traits are known for example colour blindness, fragile X syndrome, haemophilia A and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). <figure/>The disease causes individuals to become weaker with fatal muscle wastage and muscle enzymes increase as it progresses. The males in figure 5 will die from infections around twenty years. Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) is a milder form of DMD. Symptoms usually present themselves in later rather than early childhood and lifespan is normal. Both conditions are caused by point mutations in the gene which produces the dystrophin protein. Dystrophin links intracellular actin with extracellular laminin, an absence of this protein leads to muscle cell degradation. DMD is often caused by a nonsense mutation or a frameshift mutation preventing the dystrophin production. BMD produces small amounts of the protein so the disease takes a much milder form. X linked dominant inheritance occurs when only one allele coding for molecular disease is present on an X chromosome for example vitamin D resistant rickets where both males and females can be affected. It appears from an early age in the form of limb deformities and retarded growth. Incontinentia pigment and Rett syndrome are all passed on in this way however only affected females are only seen as males are so severely affected the foetuses are miscarried. <heading>Multifactorial Disorders</heading>Multifactorial diseases occur when an individual possesses gene(s) which predispose them to certain diseases. They can be discontinuous with distinct phenotypes such as diabetes mellitus or continuous with a lack of distinct phenotypes such as height. Each trait is determined by the interaction of a number of genes in different parts of the chromosome. For discontinuous multifactorial traits there is an increase risk within families above the general population but is much lower then Mendelian traits. Continuous multifactorial traits for example height, weight, IQ and skin colour do not produce molecular disease. Discontinuous multifactorial diseases can cause molecular diseases and include congenital malformations for example cleft lip and palate or congenital heart disease and common adult diseases such as diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis and epilepsy. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Incidences of human molecular diseases are rapidly increasing especially in Western civilisations. Medical, hygiene and nutritional improvements have generally lowered the frequency of deaths from infectious disease, yet mortality rates from 21 st century lifestyle and molecular diseases are increasing. WHO estimated that molecular diseases cause 40% of all deaths in LEDC's and 75% of all deaths in MEDC's (cited from  URL ). With 12% of adult hospital admissions (cited from Mueller et al 1998, Elements of Medical Genetics) and 20-30% of all infant deaths due to molecular disease (cited from Mueller et al 1998, Elements of Medical Genetics) it is clear that we must increase our understanding of how mutations in our DNA and chromosomes lead to molecular disease. Mutations involving single genes can lead to autosomal conditions, chromosomal abnormalities will prevent the expression of certain genes, somatic cell mutations may lead to cancer and mitochondrial disorders which cause serious problems with metabolism. Developments such as the human genome project will enable scientists to increase our understanding of the mechanisms involved in molecular disease. It will allow gene therapy to become a viable treatment for these conditions. Gene therapy involves the introduction of a gene through a vector into the recipient to replace the defective gene. Germ line therapy aims to introduce transgenic cells into somatic and germ cell line curing the individual and any offspring of the trait. Somatic gene therapy focuses only on the somatic cells. Both techniques use viruses to deliver the therapy. Unfortunately this technique is far from viable as several recipients have developed cancer or died from such treatment. Until more research is conducted, incidences of molecular disease are likely to continue to increase. 