Religion permeated all spheres of daily existence in early modern Europe, playing an indispensable role in society, culture, economics and politics. Thus sixteenth-century religion had a widespread affect on people's lives that cannot be underestimated. However, a pessimistic tone has often prevailed in the historiography of early modern religion from historians of the traditional school of thought, for instance Johan Huizinga and A. G. Dickens. They believe that the era was marked by a decline in the late medieval Church, in comparison to the flourishing religion of the high Middle Ages, which evoked widespread discontent. This outlook implies that religion did not have a resounding affect on people's lives, and when it did it was predominantly negative and may have resulted in people abandoning or reforming their faith. On the other hand, revisionist historians, such as Eamon Duffy and Christopher Haigh in their studies of England and A. J. Bijsterveld who has examined religion on the continent, have adopted a more optimistic approach. They believe late medieval religion exhibited signs of vitality, and discontent with the Church was not as extensive as had been previously suggested. <fnote>Johan Huizinga, The Waning of the Middle Ages: a Study of Forms of Life, Thought and Art in France and the Netherlands in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries (Harmondsworth, 1972) </fnote><fnote>Anthony Geoffrey Dickens, The English Reformation (London, 1964) </fnote><fnote>Eamon Duffy, The Stripping of the Altars: Traditional Religion in England c.1400-1580 (London, 1992) </fnote><fnote>Christopher Haigh, English Reformations: Religion, Politics and Society Under The Tudors (Oxford, 1993) </fnote><fnote>Aroud-Jan Bijsterveld, 'Reform in the Parishes of Fifteenth- and Sixteenth-Century North Brabant', in Beat Kümin (ed.), Reformations Old and New: Essays on the Socio-Economic Impact of Religious Change, c.1470-1630 (Aldershot, 1996), pp.21-38 </fnote>A range of religions existed in the early modern period, for example Greek Orthodoxy in the Balkans and Russia, following a schism in Rome in 1054. Christianity was considered to be the dominant religion across European territories, with the Pope at its spiritual head in Rome: 'European's were conditioned to see, as well as to think, in terms of Christianity." However, there existed international differences in the conduct of the laity; whereas religion existed in Ireland by <fnote>John Rigby Hale, Renaissance Europe 1480-1520 (London, 1971), p.217 </fnote><quote>'drawing its strength from popular ideas and a traditional strength of devotion rather than doctrinal knowledge, [this] was not shared by those educated in continental Europe.' </quote><fnote>Raymond Gillespie, Devoted People: Belief and Religion in Early Modern Ireland (Manchester, c1997), p.148 </fnote>Such variations are significant because people responded to religion in diverse ways, reflecting its affect on different cultures. It must also be taken into account that the early modern period was set in a context of instability and vulnerability, following a period of warfare, political strife and economic stagnation. The devastating Black Death pandemic of the preceding century, which devoured around a third of Europe's population, had a dramatic impact on the course of religion in the sixteenth-century. The affect of religion on people's lives in the aftermath of such turmoil, and the escalating momentum of uncertainties which inevitably ensued, was two-fold. Some experienced spiritual malaise and turned away from religion, having become cynical of the Church due to its inability to offer an explanation in times of hardship. However, in this age of precarious living many sought additional reassurance through heightened religious sensibilities, in the hope that they would be saved from future catastrophes by God's providence: 'while the present could only be viewed with pessimism, there might be hope for the future: the age of darkness would give way to the age of light.' <fnote>Helmut Georg Koenigsberger, and George L. Mosse, Europe in the Sixteenth Century (London, 1968), p.87 </fnote>Religion consequently had a powerful emotional grip over people's lives, especially as it governed the rhythm of life in terms of behaviour, sexuality and morality through the ethical framework defined by the Church. The institution of the Catholic Church was therefore responsible for shaping and imposing a disciplined system of belief on its adherents, whether devoutly or nominally religious, intended to cajole them into living pious lives. Robert Swanson has argued that although religion provided a context of normality in people's daily lives, it was unable to format a structure for life in its entirety. Nevertheless, 'for a minority Christianity offered a distinct mode of living, a more formulated code of action and experience to be followed as closely as humanly possible', indicating the intense affect of religion on the lives of highly devout people. 'There were other reminders too of the power of religion in the lives of people...their names held echoes of the bible or the lives of the saints' as revealed by Swanson in his study of Church of Ireland records, where biblical names predominated. <fnote>Robert Norman Swanson, Religion and Devotion in Europe, c.1215-1515 (Cambridge, 1995), p.102 </fnote><fnote>Gillespie, Devoted People, p.21 </fnote>Religion also had an undoubtedly significant affect on people by offering 'a forum and a structure for their social life." The Church calendar and religious festivals shaped the cycle of the year, highlighting the integration of religious and secular life in the regulation of time and space. In terms of time, Church bells punctuated people's daily routines. Furthermore, people were expected to observe the Sabbath and 'stop all manual labour on the feast-days of saints in order to devote themselves to worship." Examples of religion dictating space can be seen where market places were located in Church squares, like the market at San Marco in Venice. There were also processions focused around Church vicinities in celebration of patron saints, for instance St. John the Baptist in Florence. The waves of feverish religious activities in this sphere indicate that 'religion was deeply engrained as a social habit', and had an unavoidable impact upon people's lives. <fnote>Euan Cameron, The European Reformation (Oxford, 1991), p.15 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.10 </fnote><fnote>Hale, Renaissance Europe, p.231 </fnote>A myriad of religious symbols and the veneration of relics of saints, who were considered channels to God as well as specialist patrons in times of crisis, also affected people's lives. In early modern Europe 'the appetite to visualise the faith, and, in the case of relics and cult objects...to touch, was as strong as ever." Details of saints lives proliferated in a range of contemporary hagiographical literature and 'provided edification for the laity' and a role model for how they should live their lives. The Cult of the Virgin Mary flourished in this era, as people found her easier to conceptualise because of her human origins, and numerous prayers were directed to her. This zealous worship and faith in saints indicates the resounding affect of religious figures, as they provided a means by which people structured their lives. <fnote>Ibid, p.240 </fnote><fnote>Swanson, Religion and Devotion, p.161 </fnote>The Catholic Church as a tangible object alone had an overpowering affect on people's lives. The sheer dominance of Church spires on the landscape, and the multitudinous sounds of bell ringing and hymns diffusing from Churches, had an unavoidable impact on everyday life. As Raymond Gillespie asserts, everywhere there were 'visual reminders of the reality of God's presence, in the shape of funeral monuments in churches and wayside crosses on the roads', alongside the infusion of religion into early modern art and music, highlighting the material prevalence of religion in people's lives. Indeed, 'the physical appearance of city, town and village was dominated by Church's', implying that religion was neither wholly rural nor urban in its concentration but dispersed. Though it must be observed that the rural masses were remote from urban theological academia and thus the priests were 'born of the same stock as their congregations." This may have affected the way in which religious ideas were disseminated and consequently the ultimate impact of religion on people's lives, underscoring urban and rural variations. <fnote>Gillespie, Devoted People, p.20 </fnote><fnote>Hale, Renaissance Europe, p.218 </fnote><fnote>Cameron, The European Reformation, p.9 </fnote>However, all Catholics practiced the Seven Sacraments as they were considered to be channels to God's grace, through which they could secure divine intervention. The religious ceremony of Mass was therefore of pre-eminent importance in liturgical worship and the focal point for popular piety, because the Church was a sacred place in which God was present. In this atmosphere the clergy were able to transmit His word through their sermons. However, these were generally in Latin and so their influence on the laity is difficult to gauge, similarly with religious texts, due to illiteracy. Nevertheless, the affect of Mass on people's lives was still substantial as people were expected to reverently attend weekly services and receive annual Communion. As Gillespie emphasises, it is difficult to draw quantitative conclusions on numbers of people attending services and Communion, and it is impossible to measure lay motivation. 'For those who attended mass it was so much part of their world that they did not feel it worthwhile to record the nature of that experience', and this silence of sources makes it difficult for historians to accurately comment on the affect of Mass on people's lives. However, <fnote>Gillespie, Devoted People, p.90 </fnote><quote>'detailed Flemish evidence on consumption of hosts and payment of offerings has been used to argue for large-scale non-attendance and non-reception of communion; but it is hard to evaluate what this actually means in terms of spirituality, or how far that picture is applicable to the rest of Catholic Europe.'</quote><fnote>J. Toussaert, Le Sentiment religieux en Flandre a la fin du moyen-age (Paris, 1963), pp.128-41, 160-94, cited in Swanson, Religion and Devotion, p.99 </fnote>Furthermore, there is evidence suggesting that many attended Mass and Communion because of communal pressures, often being forced by their landlord or powerful neighbours, thus religious allegiance was sometimes involuntary. In early modern Ireland, many people were not inclined to attend Mass and 'the attractions of the ale house or remaining in bed were real alternatives to a Church service', from which it can be inferred that religious practice did not appeal to a minority of people. Others believed that God's omnipotence meant he was accessible beyond the prescribed ecclesiastical structure of the Church; hence it was not necessary to attend Mass. Nevertheless, it is undeniable that the practice of religion had a dramatic affect on people's lives, and the numbers voluntarily attending Mass and Communion was probably significantly high, especially in a time of heightened religious fervour. <fnote>Gillespie, Devoted People, p.21 </fnote>The key sacrament of penance was also of crucial importance, impinging on virtually every aspect of people's lives, particularly when concepts of heaven and hell preoccupied people's minds and there were anxious fears regarding the fate of the soul. Upon death, most people were considered to have the remenance of sin so had to be cleansed in the external flames of purgatory to purify their soul and make them fit for heaven. Merit had already been accumulated for man by Christ's sacrifice, yet one was obliged to individually justify that they were fit for heaven: 'Church teaching was clear: the justified went straight to heaven, the unjustified to hell." Only through confession could the parishioner be absolved and pay penance in spiritual or material form, the former being through prayer or pilgrimage to shrines and the latter through good works such as charitable donations for the poor. <fnote>Martin D. W. Jones, The Counter Reformation: Religion and Society in Early Modern Europe (Cambridge, 1995), p.24 </fnote>Scholars disagree over the motives for good works, speculating whether people were hoping to magically force god's hand or were acting through informed will. The questionable concept of via moderna optimistically stated that humans were capable of securing their own salvation though good works alone. However, as with Church attendance, a lack of sources makes it is difficult to analyse people's motivation and assess the popularity of going to confession. Yet, as Martin Jones surmises, 'come they did [to confession], whether out of fear of the exclusion from community and communion or, ultimately, out of fear of the final judgement day', implying the affect of religion on people's minds as their concern for the afterlife intensified during the sixteenth-century. Penance became an issue of quantity as 'the more penances performed, the more masses celebrated the greater the spiritual benefit." Therefore, the affect of religion on people's lives varied across the social hierarchy, as those higher up could perform greater works of penance. <fnote>Ibid, p.21 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.23 </fnote>During this era the prospect of achieving salvation, or helping the soul of a dead relative through purgatory, became inseparably associated with the purchase of Indulgences. These were letters of pardon dispensed by the Church, as a remission of penance, intended to reduce time in purgatory. The practice of Indulgences originally worked alongside sacramental penance, yet as time passed the idea surfaced that purchasing Indulgences alone led to salvation without the addition of genuine penitence. This progression of Indulgences into a commercial enterprise, which lined the coffers of the Pope and clergy, nurtured feelings of anticlericalism, especially in Germany where Martin Luther's revolutionary protest against the Catholic Church was triggered. Feelings of anticlericalism were amplified throughout the century. The Church was persistently criticised for its interest in economic and political spheres, for example the vast expanse of Church-owned land, and had long been associated with the wealth and corruption of a decadent Papacy. As a result of the secular and fiscal preoccupations of Church authorities, they were unable to fully concentrate on their pastoral role. The Church was particularly suspect in Germany and grew increasingly vulnerable on the eve of the Reformation, indicating that the affect of religion on people's lives, which had once been powerful, was beginning to diminish. In addition to religion, the supernatural also had a long-standing tradition in people's lives. Astrology, magic, folklore, mysticism and witchcraft flourished in Christian civilisation across early modern Europe. These forms of lay speculation underwrote the clergy's authority and often bypassed the institution of the Church completely. It can be inferred that religion was sometimes cast aside in favour of other traditions, and thus its affect was not substantial in the face of other systems of belief. In conclusion, in spite of the aforementioned factors limiting the impact of religion, it undoubtedly had a profound affect on people's lives in early modern Europe. Whether positive or negative, the influence of religion was inescapable because it permeated every aspect of society, thus having a significant and often consuming affect on people's lives that cannot be underrated. 