Emerging as prosperous after the adversity of the Depression and Second World War, 1950s America heralded sustained economic growth and a revitalised faith in capitalism. These developments were bolstered by a pervasive lauding of consumption, in marked contrast to the frugality and emphasis on production of the immediate past. Within a burgeoning consumerist culture, women were the focus of an advertising industry promoting a multitude of modern conveniences. Whilst female consumer prominence was potentially empowering, the mass media overwhelmingly advocated women's retreat to a private, domesticated sphere. Coinciding with the post-war rise in suburban housing and population growth, women came to suffer great pressure to aspire to a housewife ideal. Bolstered by the development of the highway system and availability of automobiles, the suburban exodus reaffirmed conventional gender roles upon a generation of young people. This racial paradigm left no room for those deviating from its stringent criteria, ostracising at once migrating African-American families excluded by segregation. Little space was afforded either to the career-driven white mother, leading many ambitious women to feel profoundly unfulfilled. In light of the post-war expansion of female employment however, it would be inaccurate to speak of women's complete containment, but rather that a heightened number felt confused by the tension between career ambition and domestic obligations. Equally, though women's activism would garner great support in succeeding years, there were those who achieved workable, happy marriages as housewives. While these varied feelings illustrate the diversity of reaction to new social changes, the 1950s featured conditions for future advance in women's status. The continuing expansion in female employment, albeit largely restricted to traditionally 'female' work, ensured women's active contribution to the family income. Though encompassing great confusion and conflicting messages, the 1950s would provoke a comprehensive reassessment of women's position, with an widespread undercurrent of dissatisfaction fostering new activism for sexual equality in future years. <fnote>Matthews, Glenna, "Just a Housewife." The Rise & Fall of Domesticity in America. (New York, 1987) P.212 </fnote><fnote>Mead, Margaret, Report of the President's Commission on the Status of Women. (Delivered October 11, 1963). In Firor Scott (ed.), Anne, Women in American Life. (Boston, 1970) P.172 </fnote><fnote>Breines, Wini, Young, White and Miserable. Growing Up Female in the Fifties. (Boston, 1992) P.11 </fnote><fnote>Meyerowitz, Joanne, 'Beyond the Feminine Mystique: A Reassessment of Postwar Mass Culture, 1946-1958', Journal of American History, 79, 4 (1993), pp. 1455-1482. P.1474 </fnote><fnote>Chafe, William H., The Paradox of Change. American Women in the 20th Century. (New York, 1991) P.193 </fnote>In the wake of its regeneration during the Second World War, America presided over a period of sustained prosperity that served to affirm its self-image as a world leader and beacon of democracy. Much of the population experienced an enhanced standard of living and personal wealth, development the government had been keen to stimulate with legislation such as the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944. After the austerity of the Depression, the contrasting prosperity of the 1950s fuelled society's sense of the "good life", leading many to feel deserving of consumerism's new opulence. Moreover, the government's concentration on war-related industry had created a lag in the supply of housing, an effect the rapid 'baby boom' population growth aggravated further. People were having more and more children at a younger age; the average age of marriage for women by the decade's end dropped to twenty. Supported by the construction of an extensive highway system and increased availability of passenger vehicles, the building of both government housing projects and private options developed by entrepreneurs such as Alfred Levitt provided a new suburban milieu for a mass of young, married couples. As the historian Glenna Matthews has observed, the combination of inexpensive homes and widespread car ownership meant some 37 million people were suburbanites by 1950, an amount that would nearly double by 1970.  <fnote>Breines, Wini, Young, White and Miserable. Growing Up Female in the Fifties. (Boston, 1992) P.2 </fnote><fnote>Mead, Margaret, Report of the President's Commission on the Status of Women. (Delivered October 11, 1963). In Firor Scott (ed.), Anne, Women in American Life. (Boston, 1970) P.172 </fnote><fnote>Friedan, Betty, Feminism Revived. In Firor Scott (ed.), Anne, Women in American Life. (Boston, 1970) P.172 </fnote><fnote>Breines, Wini, Young, White and Miserable. Growing Up Female in the Fifties. (Boston, 1992) P.3 </fnote><fnote>Matthews, Glenna, "Just a Housewife." The Rise & Fall of Domesticity in America. (New York, 1987) P.212 </fnote>Following the completion of the war, this vision of prosperity brought a renewed emphasis on the sanctity of marriage, rooted in the archetypal white family unit comprising an enterprising husband and motherly wife. In an often-uneasy climate mixing self-assurance and fear of insidious Communist infiltration, both consumerism and domesticity were regarded as patriotic in maintaining American values. The physical space provided by the suburban environment upheld this ideological framework, averting moral decay. Much of the late 1940s and 1950s social commentary focused on promoting legitimate marital sex and the championing of the family as society's bedrock, apportioning essentially conventional gender roles. At the same time, suburbia's idyllic appeal stimulated aspirations for upward mobility, with the new emphasis on consumption validating established distaste for female employment. As the suburban milieu brought with it an ever-expanding range of modern home appliances, glorification of the mother and subservient wife figure linked strongly with the media's image of a glamourous, recreationally-inclined housewife. In its simultaneous veneration of the pampered and beautiful, yet nurturing and aesthetically-unconcerned female, mass culture often appropriated a conflicting message, and pressurised both women and men into an overtly materialistic lifestyle that the practicalities of time and finances inhibited. <fnote>Baxandall, Rosalyn and Ewen, Elizabeth, Picture windows: how the suburbs happened. (New York, 2000) P.149 </fnote><fnote>Costello, John, Love, Sex and War. Changing Values, 1939-1945. (London, 1985) P.357 </fnote><fnote>Baxandall, Rosalyn and Ewen, Elizabeth, Picture windows: how the suburbs happened. (New York, 2000) P.143 </fnote><fnote>Matthews, Glenna, "Just a Housewife." The Rise & Fall of Domesticity in America. (New York, 1987) P.210 </fnote>In this way, domesticity and consumerism came to be very much entwined and mutually reinforcing. Innovative products such as the Bendix washing machine possessed an evident appeal, and made the kitchen the centrepiece of the home. While one of the main attractions lay in the provision for leisure time, many women found themselves overwhelmed by the plethora of tasks imposed upon them. If suburbia was liberating in promoting the woman as the principal consumer and granting greater time for activities outside of the home, these opportunities were very much set within a rigid, self-perpetuating mindset. Though she involved herself fully in Parent-Teacher Associations and volunteering at the local library, such activities served to reaffirm the suburban wife's proscribed role. That these responsibilities did not represent much in the way of participation in public life was a reality some college-educated and socially ambitious wives found difficult. This is not to claim however that women were simply subordinate to an omnipotent concept of their lifestyle, as the historian Rosalyn Baxandall highlights. Speaking with reference to the development of the mass-produced 'Levittown' communities, Baxandall describes a common experience of unity. Collective feelings of isolation from family and community catalysed a sense of solidarity, with women creating babysitting circles, nursery schools and teaching each other how to drive. Furthermore, many districts witnessed the creation of public services and amenities far in advance of what property developers provided for, as women sought to incorporate libraries and school districts into their local areas. Suburban dwellers derived much pleasure and fulfilment from developing what the planners left out, a response that alleviated much of the culture shock experienced by female inhabitants. <fnote>Baxandall, Rosalyn and Ewen, Elizabeth, Picture windows: how the suburbs happened. (New York, 2000) P.136 </fnote><fnote>Breines, Wini, Young, White and Miserable. Growing Up Female in the Fifties. (Boston, 1992) P.3 </fnote><fnote>Meyerowitz, Joanne, 'Beyond the Feminine Mystique: A Reassessment of Postwar Mass Culture, 1946-1958', Journal of American History, 79, 4 (1993), pp. 1455-1482. P.1467 </fnote><fnote>Baxandall, Rosalyn and Ewen, Elizabeth, Picture windows: how the suburbs happened. (New York, 2000) P.157 </fnote><fnote>Baxandall, Rosalyn and Ewen, Elizabeth, Picture windows: how the suburbs happened. (New York, 2000) P.157 </fnote>Despite this positive collective response to alienation, the potency and diffusion of a conformist, stringent mindset of white middle-class family life should not be underplayed. Those who did deviate - as a divorced mother or two-income family for example - did not necessarily encounter relentless hostility, but mass culture's lauding of the domesticated, home-rooted housewife left little room for variation. There existed an overriding sense of obligation to provide an "oasis of comfort" for the industrious husband, with the home's salubrious appearance as the primary concern. Though seemingly promoting greater freedom through their labour-saving capacity, modern conveniences and their accompanying domestic culture were paradoxically a powerful means of precipitating women's retreat to the home. <fnote>Baxandall, Rosalyn and Ewen, Elizabeth, Picture windows: how the suburbs happened. (New York, 2000) P.149 </fnote><fnote>Chafe, William H., The Paradox of Change. American Women in the 20th Century. (New York, 1991) P.186 </fnote>Perhaps no product displayed the prevalence of this ideological framework more fittingly than the car. The heightened availability of passenger automobiles in the post-war period made suburban housing a reality; the car remedied the isolation of housing areas built a considerable distance from urban employment centres. This sense of estrangement from one's original community contributed to the unhappiness of many residents, particularly women forced to stay at home. Within suburbia itself, the car had something of an ambivalent effect on women's position. Those able to drive were provided with a means to escape their domestic confinement, but concurrently reeled back in by what their lifestyle dictated. Many women were effectively reduced to a chauffeur role, pandering constantly to the needs of their children and husbands through trips to school, the local shops, and recreational events. For the considerable numbers unable to drive, reliance on the husband and feelings of isolation could be even higher. In further enhancing the responsibilities central to the domestic role, the car, along with other mass-produced products such as the washing machine, underpinned a modern environment's restraint of women. Though suburbia and its mass media promotion propagated a veneer of betterment and possibly even empowerment, domesticity ultimately entailed considerable pressure for a limiting conformity.  <fnote>Matthews, Glenna, "Just a Housewife." The Rise & Fall of Domesticity in America. (New York, 1987) P.212 </fnote><fnote>Matthews, Glenna, "Just a Housewife." The Rise & Fall of Domesticity in America. (New York, 1987) P.212 </fnote><fnote>Meyerowitz, Joanne, 'Beyond the Feminine Mystique: A Reassessment of Postwar Mass Culture, 1946-1958', Journal of American History, 79, 4 (1993), pp. 1455-1482. P.1470 </fnote>The 1950s were thus for many a period of great confusion at the social changes taking place. The mass media's advertising of new products and the move towards consumption overtly contested the instinct for parsimony many had developed during the Depression and Second World War. There was naturally no common experience for women at this time; the behaviour of many seemed to wholeheartedly endorse their new lifestyle where others would openly contest it. Many women, most saliently those from African-American families, were in any case immediately excluded from the dominant vision, with those migrating from the southern states frequently forced into declining urban areas. Many whites for their part remained in their original city or rural communities, highlighting that experience of suburbia was hardly universal at this time. Nonetheless, mass culture's influence was becoming progressively more far-reaching, overwhelmingly promoting the suburban ideal and its intrinsic gender roles. <fnote>Breines, Wini, Young, White and Miserable. Growing Up Female in the Fifties. (Boston, 1992) P.2 </fnote><fnote>Breines, Wini, Young, White and Miserable. Growing Up Female in the Fifties. (Boston, 1992) P.15 </fnote>Within suburbia itself, some women felt deserving of the comfortable life the housewife role offered, perhaps in particular those previously employed in unfamiliar war-time positions within the nation's industry and services. Many were happy with a rigidly defined existence and early marriage, though a significant proportion quickly felt a sense of emptiness and lack of fulfilment. Women of a college education were commonly the most susceptible to such feelings, and often the most able to articulate them. Betty Friedan's popular critique of suburbia's banality in the early 1960s would be testament to a common experience of disillusion, and she voiced the difficulties many women faced. Women were equally troubled by tension between their career ambitions and obligation to run a home. Even those who adopted a defiant stance against pressure to subordinate oneself to the husband's breadwinner status ultimately had to prioritise. Moreover, given the 1950s re-evaluation of patriotism to promote a domestic role, women were exposed to a concept in evident contradiction of the wartime propaganda that had emphasised their importance as employees. Though arguments to the war's special circumstances defended this about-face, heightened participation in the workforce left many women frustrated by the insistence on domestic retreat. <fnote>Meyerowitz, Joanne, 'Beyond the Feminine Mystique: A Reassessment of Postwar Mass Culture, 1946-1958', Journal of American History, 79, 4 (1993), pp. 1455-1482. P.1458 </fnote><fnote>Friedan, Betty, Feminism Revived. In Firor Scott (ed.), Anne, Women in American Life. (Boston, 1970) P.172 </fnote><fnote>Meyerowitz, Joanne, 'Beyond the Feminine Mystique: A Reassessment of Postwar Mass Culture, 1946-1958', Journal of American History, 79, 4 (1993), pp. 1455-1482. P.1467 </fnote><fnote>Chafe, William H., The Paradox of Change. American Women in the 20th Century. (New York, 1991) P.129 </fnote>In spite of the power of the dominant domesticity ideal, the 1950s did see an overall increase in the number of women employed. Though Friedan would at the beginning of the 1960s lament the diminishing numbers entering professional careers, the preceding decade witnessed an expansion in the female workforce, particularly within clerical, sales and cleaning positions. As William H. Chafe points out, this expansion essentially took place within jobs traditionally designated as 'female', but did at least ensure a continuing presence in the public sphere. In pursuing jobs outside of the domestic environment, women remained in paid employment and could personally contribute to the home's upkeep. They continued to enter the workforce in great numbers; the proportion of married women as a percentage of the female workforce doubled from fifteen percent in 1940 to thirty percent in 1960. Though mothers from a young age, many married women were able to return to employment or begin for the first time once children were sufficiently old. Remaining in paid work impeded women's complete retreat to the home, and in elucidating some of the tensions between domesticity and female equality, would underpin the activism of superseding years. In a period of immensely ambivalent cultural pressure and inflexible gender roles, women's continued involvement in the productive side of the economy would provoke an extensive reappraisal of their position. Though popular ideology was potent, reaction to its severity would ultimately foment revolt against the excesses of imposed cultural norms. <fnote>Friedan, Betty, Feminism Revived. In Firor Scott (ed.), Anne, Women in American Life. (Boston, 1970) P.172 </fnote><fnote>Chafe, William H., The Paradox of Change. American Women in the 20th Century. (New York, 1991) P.193 </fnote><fnote>Chafe, William H., The Paradox of Change. American Women in the 20th Century. (New York, 1991) P.188 </fnote>In conclusion, the 1950s saw women ushered into a constraining and homogenised version of domesticity, yet achieving a semblance of progress and platform for future protest. The overlap of contemporary ideological currents linking patriotism, moral purity and the sanctity of marriage fed into a consumerist drive for fulfilment of a revised housewife role, with the spread of modern appliances consolidating domesticity's appeal. Suburbia's rise, facilitated by highway expansion and automobile availability, made this new post-war lifestyle a reality for a mass of young married couples aspiring towards upward social mobility. For those families outside of the suburban experience, its governing ideals and impact on an emergent mass culture greatly influenced contemporary modes of behaviour. In its emphasis on women's importance as consumers, suburban domesticity propagated an updated model of conventional gender roles. Though emphasising her primary responsibility to the children and home, the mass media's simultaneous projection of glamorous, idealised images of femininity revealed a confusing discourse on where a wife's priorities lay. Those able to transcend cultural expectations faced problems in satisfying career ambitions and the necessity of running a home. Many felt unfulfilled by the draining conditions their lifestyle imposed and unable to entertain any greater yearning for a professional position. Despite the demands of this existence however, disdain for suburbia's perceived banality would contribute to the extensive activism for sexual equality made prominent in the following decade. Furthermore, married women's heightened involvement in the workforce maintained personal sources of income, challenging a dominant ideology's complete containment of women within the private sphere. With increasing numbers employed outside of the home, women would never be forced back. In exposing the tension and ambivalence of post-war society and its popular ideology, fifties society nurtured a forum of debate and subsequent pressure for change. 