Following Pachacuti's ascension to the Inca throne in 1438, after the defeat of the neighbouring Chanca forces, the Inca civilization enjoyed a period of progressive imperial expansion prior to the Spanish conquests of the 16 th century, cementing itself as the dominant force in the Andean region. Religion proved to be a key aspect for the Inca elite in motivating such expansion, and equally in its role as a tool of subjugation and conformity to a highly centralized and stratified state apparatus. Religious beliefs popularized by the state would facilitate a long-term design for cohesion within the empire, simultaneously legitimating the imperial ambitions of Cuzco. The state cult that evolved sought to appeal to and manipulate existing provincial spiritual beliefs to herald the Inca dynasty as divine descendants of a supreme sun-god deity. This attempted superimposing formed the principal part of the state's scheme of promoting a "dominant culture" aimed at universal conformity to a divinely appointed administration. In striving to obtain increased resources and subjugate non-Inca peoples, the Incas pursued a relatively patient approach to modifying local traditions and spiritual beliefs, tolerating customs and permitting them to continue to exist alongside those new beliefs they professed, with a view to subtle attrition over time. Religion proved to be then, the means by which Cuzco could concurrently engineer a project of long-term unification of its subject peoples, perpetuate the motivation for future expansionist efforts by its elite, and publicly legitimate its actions. <fnote>Thomas C. Patterson, The Inca Empire: the formation and disintegration of a pre-capitalist state. (New York, 1991) P.70 </fnote>The Inca actively popularized a state cult amongst his tributaries that was both effective in its self-promotion, and confined sovereignty to an empowered elite at which he was central. Newly conquered territories received and influx of state officials and priests aimed at incorporating established local spiritual beliefs within the state mould. The worship of Manco Capac, the son of the sun from whom all Inca emperors claimed their descent, was a pursuit encouraged as a condition to the tolerance of continued worship of local idols. This tolerance reflected the Inca's awareness of the unfeasibility of complete eradication of localized custom, and garnered a more receptive response to state-approved ideas. As part of the process, newly subjugated areas would witness the gradual establishment of buildings pertaining to the official religion, such as those created as sun temples. Non-Inca groups were required to adopt due veneration to natural forces, where they were not already doing so, the interpretations of which could only be performed by priests, who simultaneously belonged to the reigning Inca's kin and were state officials. In utilizing this approach, the state was able to direct civil power and its controlling designs through religious figures, on the pretense of offering imperative interpretation of the world's governing natural forces. This assimilation of local groups also facilitated the promotion of the Inca's divine status, owing to his direct descent from the sun, and hence the indisputable legitimacy of central authority. From the Hatunruna or commoners' perspective, any state action such as war was thus to be regarded as a manifestation of divine endeavour. The ultimate aim was to create and perpetuate a climate of complete deference and obedience to authority, achieved through the promotion of the law, natural and civil, and the Inca's will as being one and the same. <fnote>Thomas C. Patterson, The Inca Empire: the formation and disintegration of a pre-capitalist state. (New York, 1991) P.67 </fnote>The state proved to be patient with regard to its imposing its own model of religion at the expense of the various parochial versions, merely seeking to alter the aspects which overtly contested its mode for achieving cohesion within the empire. Louis Baudin cites that restraint and tolerance in this initial phase of expansion resulted directly from a tradition of prudence and caution in modifying the basic structures of conquered peoples. Religious tolerance necessitated the superimposing of Inca gods onto local ones, in place of outright eradication, the meaning of which could be gradually remodeled over time to erode past links and create uniformity to the state paradigm. Spiritual beliefs were permitted as part of the broader dialectical approach to assimilating new territories, which facilitated a subtle manipulation of areas into conforming entities orientated towards the centralized government. The hierarchical structure promoted by the official religion provided a template for the empire's social organization, the concentration of power within which was kept elusive. The state afforded a degree of power for the traditional leaders within subjugated groups, via educating the figures in the cultural and religious beliefs of Cuzco and concurrently providing incentive through restoration and advancement of their individual landholdings. As such, the Inca could take advantage of and further pre-existing class stratification, employing the cloak of divine law to impede any protest whilst providing for figures in local authority through material concessions. The planned use of religion did then enable the state to absorb and provide for the influential members of subject peoples through integration into the natural hierarchy. This approach simultaneously promoted subtle repression of the impotent Hatunruna class through enhancing the division between provincial social groups, enabling the state's material pursuits of labour tribute and increased resources to proceed with lesser opposition. <fnote>Louis Baudin, A Socialist Empire, The Incas of Peru. (New Jersey, 1961) P. 37 </fnote><fnote>Charles Gibson, The Inca concept of sovereignty and the Spanish administration in Peru. (New York, 1969) P.50 </fnote>The use of religion was at the forefront of the broader concerted scheme to impose a dominant culture, to combat the relative heterogeneity of the Andean peoples through coercing conformity to state rule through active promotion of the official cult. Religious beliefs, since they entailed the interpretation of the fundamental laws of the earth and existence for every Andean individual, were the principal component of the conquered peoples' culture that the Inca sought to manipulate in order to establish Cuzco as a centre of divine authority. The promotion of the state cult served concurrently as a legitimating force for subjugation and means to occlude the sheer enormity of the ruling class' designs on the transformation of each region's social and economic structures. State religious values were central to the broader effort to establish adherence to a centralized bureaucracy and universal acquiescence to a self-legitimating and over-awing power. In addition to the earlier discussed construction of state temples, officials under the Inca's jurisdiction also extracted provincial idols and objects from conquered peoples so as to enshrine them at Cuzco's sun temple, ostensibly to pay due reverence to their spiritual significance. This process enhanced the cooperation, through threat of destruction of the idols, of subject groups and contributed to the long-term aim of reducing the presence and worship of traditional beliefs that dissented with official interpretations of the world's forces. This practice was representative of the empire's attempts to create a government which extended beyond mere social organization, to fundamental coercion through terror and towards a climate of fear of the ruling faction that had developed during Pachacuti's reign. The indisputable legitimacy of state authority was consequently promoted by a deliberate and planned herding of subject peoples towards a culture in which they were subservient to the requisites of a theocracy. <fnote>Thomas C. Patterson, The Inca Empire: the formation and disintegration of a pre-capitalist state. (New York, 1991) P.78 </fnote><fnote>Burr Cartwright Brundage, Empire of the Inca. (Oklahoma, 1963) P.110 </fnote>The extent to which the Incas managed to fully integrate the conquered peoples into the dominant culture by encouraging the abandonment of parochial spiritual values was however actually fairly limited. María Rostworowski de Diez Canseco argues that local groups largely retained worship of their huacas and loyalty to the decrees of their chiefs, with state endeavour to suppress cultural traditions and homogenize regions proving largely ineffectual by the time of the Francisco Pizarro led Spanish conquest of the 1530s. By continuing to pursue worship of their gods and interpretations of natural forces, local groups resisted complete subjugation into a unified whole, with the length of time required to fully erode cultural links to the past in excess of that elapsed by the time of the conquests. Thus the success of the superimposing of a dominant culture, rooted in official religion, was not especially far-reaching, a reality confirmed by the immediacy with which non-Inca groups discarded the Manco Capac cult following the Spanish success. With the Conquistadors exposing the fragility of the state apparatus in the speed with which they instigated the empire's decline, the centrality of religious beliefs to the consolidation of the state's tenure of imperial possessions was made palpable. The reality displayed that the religion-based policy of superimposition had simply yet to take full effect, and was merely limited by the relatively short period of time. Competition between traditional values held by provincial peoples and those professed by the state, proved to be the significant focus in the empire's constant effort to eradicate the culturally dissenting links of its tributaries and construct a repressed, conforming mass. <fnote>María Rostworowski de Diez Canseco, History of the Inca Realm. (Cambridge, 1999) P.66 </fnote><fnote>Terence N. D'Altroy, The Incas. (Oxford, 2002) P.176 </fnote>The religious evolution of state worship to incorporate former rulers as revered figures created a pressure on the new Inca to conquer and expand the empire he inherited from his predecessors. The panaqa system, in perpetuating the existence of a deceased ruler through a cult around his figure, meant that the new chosen ruler from the deceased's kin had to acquire his own possessions. The tradition of "split inheritance" held that the remaining sons of the past sovereign had tenure over his lands for the purpose of establishing his cult, at the expense of the new Inca. This ancestral custom reinforced the notion that a ruler should justify his position through gaining tangible assets in the form of new tributaries and resources that could be directly attributable to his personal exploits. The practical consequence of the creation of individual cults which were absorbed into the overall state mould, thus intertwined, through mummification and posthumous ownership, ideals of expansion with an ever-adapting religion based on ancestor worship. Hence, the spiritual beliefs of Inca nobility perpetuated an expectation of the ruler's pursuit of expansion so that they could achieve tangible confirmation of divine status. <fnote>Terence N. D'Altroy, The Incas. (Oxford, 2002) P.89 </fnote>In conclusion, the Inca Empire utilized religion as its principal means of creating an homogenized and conforming mass of its subject peoples. The state adopted an approach which would bolster the unification of its conquered territories through superimposing a belief system which would inspire obedience through its legitimacy as divine, and promote the erosion of the traditional parochial tenets which conflicted with the state model. The Incas exercised a degree of pragmatism in their long-term outlook, providing adequate material concessions to local lords by way of eliciting compliance, and permitting the continuation of traditional spiritual beliefs that did not overtly dissent with those professed by the state. Religion's natural hierarchy provided a workable prototype for the social organization of the subject groups, legitimating Inca status and actions as divine will. The practical implications of the evolving quality of the state religion equally enshrined in tradition an obligation of the rulers to conquer and subdue new territory that could be apportioned exclusively to them. As such, Religion facilitated the dual pursuits of internal unification of conquered peoples and external impetus for new expansion, in a process that became ultimately unfulfilled due to the relatively small period of time afforded to its implementation following the Spanish intervention. 