As Michael Doyle points out: "There is no canonical description of Liberalism". The lack of a single voice is a trait common to all theories of International Relations. Despite this, there are 'major conceptual ideas' which allow Liberalism to distinguish itself as a separate theory of International Relations. The two major conceptual ideas which form the normative basis and ultimate goal of all strands of Liberalism, (the identification of which can be supported by John Gray, Kant and Keohane - see footnotes), can be summarised as follows: 1. The melioric principle that human beings and the life of humans can be subject to improvability. 2. The emphasis on individual rights and freedoms as a means by which improvability can progress. However, as with all theories of International Relations, normative goals require a method of implementation. For Liberals, this implementation is based on the major conceptual idea of working within the present contextual and structural framework of International Relations in order to promote reform. <fnote>Doyle, M. W. (1986) 'Liberalism in World Politics' American Political Science Review Vol. 80, No. 4 p.1152 </fnote><fnote>"There are two constitutive elements of Liberalism: 1. The commitment to the unique rational authority of liberal principles. 2. The Meliorist philosophy of history where liberal institutions are claimed to be the only ones within which human improvement can be assured." Gray, J (1995) Liberalism Oxford University Press: Buckingham, p.87 </fnote><fnote>"...since the human race is constantly progressing in cultural matters (in keeping with its natural purpose), it is also engaged in progressive improvement in relation to the moral end of its existence". Kant, I. as quoted in (ed.) Reiss, H. S. (1991) Kant - Political Writings CUP p. 88 </fnote><fnote>"... I return to the emphasis of liberalism on human action and choice. Liberalism incorporates a belief in the possibility of ameliorative change facilitated by multilateral arrangements." Keohane, R. O. (2002) The Globalisation of Liberalism Palgrave p. 32 </fnote>This distinction within the major conceptual ideas of Liberals, between the normative basis and its implementation, is key to the argument of this essay. Through an analysis of the issues listed below, it will be argued that the goals of Liberalism are incompatible with the methods by which it aims to attain them. The institutionalisation of individual rights and freedoms as a 'culturally specific' western, Liberal doctrine as evident in institutions such as the UN. The limits of Liberalism as a result of its inherent contradictions and the constraints imposed on it by its relationship with capitalism. A common criticism of Liberalism hinges on the view that Liberalism's emphasis on individual rights and freedoms is a conceptual idea which cannot be universally applied to all cultures and corners of the world. For example, the incompatibility of Confucianism and Liberalism has been highlighted by political leaders in East Asia who believe that "confrontation, individualism and moral decay...characterises Western Liberalism". Tim Dunne describes the main challenge of Liberalism: to "preserve the traditional liberal value of human solidarity without undermining cultural diversity." However, there is a vast quantity of evidence to suggest that respect for the individual and a will to improve the lives of human beings is not an alien goal to non-western cultures. Here, a defence of the applicability of these principles proves useful in order to identify the true cause of controversy surrounding this conceptual idea. <fnote>Burchill, S. (2005) Theories of International Relations Palgrave Macmillan p. 69 </fnote><fnote>Dunne, T (eds. Baylis and Smith) (2001) The Globalisation of World Politics OUP p.179 </fnote>Amartya Sen argues that respect for and emphasis on individual rights is not specific to 'western culture'. "The language of freedom is very important, for example, in Buddhism, which originated and first flourished in South Asia and then spread to Southeast Asia and East Asia..." Similarly, even Confucius, it is argued, valued the importance of independent thought and opposition: "he did not recommend blind allegiance to the state". Furthermore, evidence of the universal respect for the individual can be found everyday across the globe. For example, families, individuals and locally based NGOs, operating in states which do not formally recognise the rights of individuals, work to ensure that the members of their community are provided with the education, healthcare and support they require in order to live. This respect for individuals is arguably due to what might be described as a common feeling of humanity. For when one individual is faced with another who is suffering, outside of the context of conflict, a feeling of compassion can be seen to lead to a desire to help. Hegel describes this phenomenon as an acquired unity of the collective subject: "...the I that is a We and the We that is an I". <fnote>Sen, A. (1998) "Universal Truths: Human Rights and the Westernising Illusion," Harvard International Review, Vol. 20, no.3 pp.40-43 </fnote><fnote>Sen, A. (1998) "Universal Truths: Human Rights and the Westernising Illusion," Harvard International Review, Vol. 20, no.3 pp.40-43 </fnote><fnote>Hegel, G. W. F Philosophy of Mind as quoted in Smith, S. B. (ed. Williams, H.) (1992) Essays on Kant's Political Philosophy University of Wales Press: Cardiff p. 297 </fnote>What then distinguishes the Liberal approach to individual rights and freedoms from those described above is the use of institutionalisation and legal definition which stems from Liberalism's major conceptual idea on implementation. For Liberals, the importance of institution and law is key to the realisation of harmony through respect of the individual: "...our actions qualify us for membership in a 'kingdom of ends' by which he (Kant) means 'the systematic union of different rational beings through common laws". Keohane, writing two hundred years after Kant, reiterates the role of institution on an international scale: "...liberalism helps us to see the importance of international cooperation and institution building..." The cultural specificity of these institutions (such as the UN) and legal definitions (such as the Declaration for Human Rights) can be exposed by three main factors. <fnote>Smith, S. B. (ed. Williams, H.) (1992) Essays on Kant's Political Philosophy University of Wales Press: Cardiff p. 292 </fnote><fnote>Keohane, R. O. (2002) The Globalisation of Liberalism Palgrave p. 32 </fnote>Firstly, the very fact that Liberals theorise the realisation of their goals within the boundaries of the existing structures and conceptual frameworks of International Relations, means that the progress they make will always be historically contextual. For example, the construction of the UN was born out of the desire to prevent another world war: "The United Nations was established...as a result of initiatives taken by the governments of the states which had led the war against Germany and Japan.... Its main purpose was to maintain peace and security". The historical context of the UN is therefore specific to those countries between which World War Two was fought and because the grip of colonisation on the developing world had only begun to weaken, most developing states which are now members of the UN had little or no input into the workings or aims of the institution. Furthermore, the aim of the UN to prevent international conflict through the cooperation of nation-states is arguably becoming increasingly more redundant as the majority of ongoing conflicts in the world today are civil wars - for which the UN, based as it is on a structure comprising of nation-states, can provide little help in reconciliation or settlement. <fnote>Taylor, P. (eds. Baylis and Smith) (2001) The Globalisation of World Politics OUP p. 332 </fnote>Secondly, the political structures of international institutions like the UN are based on those of the Liberal democracies of the states which founded them. The result is that the hierarchical structure and the over-riding discourse can leave such institutions less open to the political procedures of non-liberal democracies. Balakrishnan Rajagopal provides an example of this in relation to the underestimated importance of social movements of the developing world: "lawyers tend to have a juro-centric approach... In this approach, there is no space for 'texts of resistance': that is, either informal or explicitly illegal interpretive acts by individuals or groups that do not share the interpretations of the law by institutions". <fnote>Rajagopal, B. (eds. Anghie, Chimni, Mickelson, Okafor) (2003) The Third World and International Order: Law, Politics and Globalisation Martinus Nijhoff Publishers p. 148 </fnote>Lastly, from a wider perspective, the need for institution and law can be seen to result from the constraints of capitalism as the dominant force of our time. Due to an insistence on operating within the existent boundaries of International Relations, where those with the means and ownership of production are constantly seeking to sustain their position, Liberals are forced to use the accepted methods of progress and change, whereby it is at risk of becoming a "doctrine of the status quo". These methods of institution and law fail to identify and challenge the true causes of the arguably, worsening conditions of human life around the world and lack of meliorism, which can be directly linked to the inequality and injustice inherent in capitalism. The following half of this essay will assess the limiting role of capitalism on the realisation of Liberal conceptual ideas of improvability. <fnote>Keohane, R. O. (2002) The Globalisation of Liberalism Palgrave p. 30 </fnote>There is no doubt that the effects of capitalism in its present form and the pursuit of profit do little to help or promote the ultimate goals of Liberals. As Gamble puts it, capitalism "is characterised by profound frictions and conflicts...which threaten not just its own survival but the survival of the human species itself." Yet Liberals are unable to address capitalism as a cause of conflict, inequality and injustice in the world because of two related factors which will be examined below. <fnote>Gamble, A (1999) Marxism and Social Science (Gamble, A. ed.) London: MacMillan Press Ltd p.103 </fnote>Firstly, it can be argued that capitalism at present relies on institutions and powers which are in fact supported or were created by Liberals. This poses significant restraints on the abilities of Liberals to tackle the evils of capitalism without in fact contradicting their own achievements and methods. For example, the relationship between the democratic state and the success and influence of multinational corporations has been highlighted as an essential element of capitalism in our time. Most democratic states consist of party systems where the political parties have moved ever-increasingly towards each other. In terms of policy, they differ only in minor details resulting in a constraint, not only on what is discussed but on what even occurs to people to discuss. This can be seen to facilitate the progress of capitalism in a number of ways: from the maintenance of a docile and unquestioning public to the prevention of issues such as 'the right not to work' from finding a place on the political agenda. Another example is the hospitable environment of low taxation and low labour costs which states provide for multinational corporations as highlighted by Joseph Stiglitz. As responsible to and representative of their citizens, democratic governments feel obliged to attract corporations in order to promote overall economic growth and higher employment at the cost of workers' wages and in many cases, the environment. While this relationship between capitalism and democratic states clearly contributes to the prevention of the realisation of Liberal goals, it is impossible for Liberals to attack the relationship without attacking the Liberal achievements of representative democracy. <fnote>Stiglitz, J (2002) Globalization and its Discontents W. W. Norton & Company </fnote>A second, related limit of Liberalism in relation to capitalism hinges on the weakness of Liberals in recognising the ever-changing and dynamic nature of capitalism. There is evidence to suggest that in the past Liberals have been successful in diluting or even preventing some of the damaging effects of capitalism on human life. For example, monopoly capitalism was held back by the Monopoly Commission or Anti-Trust Laws. However, the implications of global capitalism suggest that companies have found ways of creating monopolies through the use of Liberal institutions and laws such as the Patent Office and also by circumventing the nation-state and the principle of free trade. Again the problem here is related to Liberal boundaries of analysis which recognise non-state actors in the international system, but insist that the emphasis should be placed on states as actors. This is partly due to the reason highlighted above, that democratic, federal states have representative legitimacy due to Liberal historical success, (see footnote), but also because, as described in the first half of this essay: for Liberals the most effective means by which improvement in the lives of humans can be achieved is through the use of institution and law. The result of this approach is that other non-state actors, non-democratic states, as well as the potential power of unstructured human compassion and resistance, does not form part of the Liberal method of implementation. Yet due to the limiting effects of the relationship between capitalism and the nation-state, these alternative actors may provide the most progressive way of attaining Liberal goals. <fnote>"...liberals see the establishment of the state as a necessary part of preserving liberty...; the state must always be the servant of the collective will,...and democratic institutions are the means of guaranteeing this." Taylor, P. (eds. Baylis and Smith) (2001) The Globalisation of World Politics OUP p. 163 </fnote>To conclude, through an analysis of the limits created by the boundaries imposed by Liberals on their possible methods of progress, this essay has argued that there is a conflicting relationship between the two aspects of Liberal major conceptual ideas about international relations. Many Liberals are aware of the constraints of the theory: "For all its faults and weaknesses, liberalism helps us to see the importance of international cooperation and institution building, even within the fundamental constraints set by world capitalism..." However, through a consideration of the historical implications of the methods of liberalism, this essay has highlighted the contradictions which result from an approach to progress which fails to question or attack the structural framework in which it operates. Arguably, the need for the Liberal goals of improvability is in fact structural to the whole system, and by working within the system, improvements are limited and perhaps, ultimately, impossible. While there is limited space to offer an alternative to Liberal method, a return to the first argument of the essay may prove useful. It was shown that respect for individual freedoms and rights is possible and indeed exists without the use of institution and law. The implication of this is the possibility that under the right conditions, humans can achieve emancipation and mutual respect without a governing force from above to guide them. <fnote>Keohane, R. O. (2002) The Globalisation of Liberalism Palgrave p. 32 </fnote>