Avril Taylor's book, like many participant observation studies, is an interesting and informative read. Participant observation methods lend themselves to the study of 'deviant' groups of society and therefore through the study's very nature often result in more captivating and readable content than other research might. However, all research has flaws and limits. In this critique I will assess Taylor's research methods by considering how successful the book is in allowing for or avoiding the common limits of and problems associated with participant observation under the following headings, as identified by Layton-Henry: <fnote>Layton Henry (2005) Participant Observation A lecture given at the University of Warwick 12 January 2005 </fnote>Observations may be limited by problems of access The problems of ethical dilemmas The risk that an investigator may be captured by part of the community The problems of collecting systematic and accurate data, and more importantly in this case, the presentation of data, (not identified by Layton-Henry). The risk that an investigator may influence her subjects The group or association may be atypical leading to unrepresentativeness My main criticism will focus on the deductive approach adopted by Taylor. Quite uncharacteristic to participant observation studies, this approach can be seen to have detrimental effects on Taylor's research strategies and results. Secondly, the processed and pre-interpreted nature of her results. Again, contrary to many other ethnographies, this could be seen to undermine the point of adopting participant observational methods. Both these points revolve around the problem in participant observation, that as the following definition highlights, scientific understanding is considered highly important and desirable in social research. In Taylor's attempts to produce scientific results, the impact of her study is arguably weakened. Participant observation is perhaps most usefully defined as: "a process in which an investigator establishes a many-sided and relatively long-term relationship with a human association in its natural setting for the purpose of developing a scientific understanding of that association." Taylor saw that the benefits of participant observation would allow her to provide a picture of women drug users through their own perspectives: "Much of the text allows the women to speak for themselves, describing from their point of view the lifestyles which have evolved around their use of illicit drugs." Her other main reason is that "...no ethnographic study of female drug users alone has been undertaken anywhere". This feminist perspective is clearly one which is essential to an understanding of drug users. However, due to its qualitative nature, participant observation has many methodological risks and limits. <fnote>Loftland and Loftand (1984), Analysing Social Settings: A Guide to Qualitative Observation and Analysis, Belmont, CA, Wadsworth as referenced in Burnham et al (2004) Research Methods in Politics Palgrave Macmillan </fnote><fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p. 7 </fnote><fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.1 </fnote>Firstly, access to the chosen group of study often proves difficult, and even after obtained, will affect the nature and success of one's study. Successful ethnographies, such as that of Whyte's 'Street Corner Society' can often depend on finding a sponsor or 'gate-keeper' who not only can introduce the observer to the subjects he/she wishes to study but is also seen in a favourable light by those subjects. Taylor was fortunate enough to find a contact, similar to that of Whyte's. Like Doc, the local drug-worker was known and respected by many of the women drug users in Taylor's study: "He was accepted and trusted by the women..." Limitations of access also proved of little methodological concern due to the fact that being a woman worked in Taylor's favour: "The fact that I am a woman...made me more easily accepted and gave me more freedom to explore aspects of the women's lives which a man would have found difficult." This is supported by the detailed descriptions of the women as mothers; the role of partners and husbands in their lives and even issues of violence and rape which may not have been discovered by a male observer. However, it could also be argued that a man, by developing a long-term and close relationship with the women could have achieved similar results. Secondly, problems of language were minimalised by the fact that Taylor is a Glaswegian working in a Glaswegian community. However, as James Patrick also found in his study of a Glasgow gang, dialect and slang can differ enormously and must therefore be learned through observation: "Born and bred in Glasgow, I thought myself au fait with the local dialect... - another serious mistake as it turned out." Taylor therefore successfully adapted her own accent and dialect in order to be more readily accepted by the group. She employed an effective snow-balling technique in order to increase the number of women with whom she 'participated'. Taylor's access gaining methods, while to a certain extent out of her control, proved to be successful in terms of appropriateness to the aims of her study. <fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.12 </fnote><fnote>Patrick, J (1973), A Glasgow Gang Observed, Eyre Methuen London, p.15 </fnote>Studying criminals can often result in ethical problems for a researcher. Taylor swore to confidentiality with the people she interviewed and spent time with. This was essential as distrust on the part of the drug users would have resulted in an unreliable study. Apart from two incidents which Taylor was unaware of at the time, she managed to conduct her research ethically and unlike Whyte refrained from becoming so involved with the group that 'participation' became illegal: "I had to learn that, in order to be accepted by the people in a district, you do not have to do everything just as they do it." <fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, pp.17-18 </fnote><fnote>Whyte, W. F. (1993), Street Corner Society, The Social Structure of an Italian Slum, 4th ed University of Chicago Press, p. 317 </fnote>The task of balancing acceptance with observational detachment is a very difficult one. Clearly, Taylor was not captured by any member or section of the community. However, it could be argued that she was to a certain extent emotionally captured. Taylor uses Gold's four classifications of participant observation and describes her role as "participant-as-observer". Yet as Whyte rightly points out: "Most teaching resources on participant observation fail to note that the researcher, like his informants, is a social animal". Taylor clearly sympathises with the women in her study. Before even conducting her study she sought to disprove some of the derogatory stereotypes of women drug users, including their inability to be 'good' mothers. Through spending fifteen months with fifty different women, eight of whom became "key informants", these feelings of sympathy and even respect and fondness clearly strengthened. "In our society, the most fulfilling role for women is still regarded as that of motherhood...only the most articulate and confident of women are able successfully to challenge this interpretation. Other less fortunate, including the women of this study, labour under feelings of inadequacy, and hence of guilt." Whilst it is very difficult to say if and to what extent these feelings could have affected the ethnography, possible areas of influence could have been in the 'agenda-setting' process of the study. Whether aware of it or not, the desire to show women drug users in a more favourable light than normal could have affected her decisions regarding whom to participate with and observe, and the questions she asked, (particularly in the 26 in-depth interviews). <fnote>Gold, R. L. (1958), "Roles in Sociological Field Observations." Social Forces 36:217-23 as referenced in Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press </fnote><fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.13 </fnote><fnote>Patrick, J (1973), A Glasgow Gang Observed, Eyre Methuen London, p.279 </fnote><fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.111 </fnote>Collecting accurate and systematic data is always more difficult in participant observation where the researcher cannot record data in the normal and accepted ways. I would argue that Taylor's methods were effective and non-obtrusive: "...unless I felt it was appropriate and not obstructive, I would not take notes in the presence of anyone". For the interviews which were conducted at the end of the study she used a tape recorder. The use of tape recorders is debated by researchers: the main risk being that the interviewee may hold back information and detail when conscious of being recorded. However, it is likely that after a year of spending time with the women in her study, the subjects would have felt comfortable with disclosing personal information. <fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.13 </fnote>Where I can identify possible flaws is in the presentation of data. Perhaps in an effort to produce a more scientific analysis of the subjects' lives, she organises the book into stages and aspects of a woman drug user's 'career'. Whilst these divisions may prove useful to the reader in understanding more clearly the life of a female drug user, it must be recognised that the information in the book has been highly processed by Taylor. The organisation of chapters, for example, "Starting off", "Scoring and Grafting" and "Social networks", and the quotations from the women used in these chapters are Taylor's interpretations of separate aspects of her subjects' lives. Other ethnographies such as Patrick's "A Glasgow Gang Observed", have adopted a more chronological structure which can help in allowing the subjects and incidents speak for themselves. However, no matter how data is presented it will always have been interpreted and processed by the researcher, highlighting the constant need for a researcher, particularly a participant observer to attempt to view his/her results objectively. <fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.31, p.51, p.77 </fnote>Above I have mentioned that Taylor entered the study with aims to disprove some of the conclusions and stereotypes which have developed through other academics' research and through the social stigma attached to drug users: "Against the stereotypical view of pathetic, inadequate individuals, women drug users in this study are shown to be rational, active people..." As already argued, the interpretative stage of research may have been affected by this factor, but it could also be argued that this deductive approach may have led to the possibility of influence on the subjects of the study. This quotation from Whyte's study most clearly illustrates this point: "Now when I do something I have to think what Bill Whyte would want to know about it and how I can explain it. Before I used to do things by instinct." This type of influence was evident in a study where it took "...eighteen months in the field before I knew where my research was going." By entering the study with perceived ideas of its direction, while often helpful in social research, Taylor may have affected the ethnography in a way she had not intended. She states that access to the group was made easier by "my topic, as explained to every woman that I met, namely that I was interested in finding out about the issues that are pertinent to women as opposed to men." A desire on the part of the subjects to provide the researcher with the information she would like and hold back the information she would not can often affect the results of ethnographies. After spending fifteen months together, the subjects may have been aware of the conclusions Taylor was beginning to form and this could have affected the interviews she conducted at the end of the study. The argument against deductive research methods in participant observation is illustrated by this description: "...participant observation is intentionally unstructured in its research design, so as to maximise discovery and description rather than systematic theory testing." <fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.8 </fnote><fnote>Whyte, W. F. (1993), Street Corner Society, The Social Structure of an Italian Slum, 4th ed University of Chicago Press, p.291 </fnote><fnote>Whyte, W. F. (1993), Street Corner Society, The Social Structure of an Italian Slum, 4th ed University of Chicago Press p.321 </fnote><fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.15 </fnote><fnote>McCall, G. J. and Simmons, J. L. (eds) (1969) 'Preface' in Issues in Participant observation: A Text and Reader Addison-Wesley Publishing Company </fnote>Lastly, the problem of unrepresentativeness appears to be less of a problem in "Women Drug Users" because the lives of women who use and become addicted to drugs, in particular to heroin, are likely to be similar. This is because of the power that the drug has on the subject's body. Whilst Taylor describes and analyses the group she is studying solely, her conclusions aim to be representative of other women drug users, particularly those who live in poor or underdeveloped areas. Conclusions relating to empirical evidence are likely to apply to other communities of drug users, for example, the descriptions of the different ways the women obtained money, (see chapter 3: Scoring and Grafting). However, analyses of the nature of a woman drug user's life must be seen as interpretative. For example, Taylor argues that the life of a woman intravenous drug user is organised and structured due to the fact that everyday, addiction makes her follow a routine involving obtaining money, obtaining drugs and taking drugs. However, one might readily argue that this in fact describes a lifestyle over which the subject has no control and is therefore chaotic and driven by the needs of the body as opposed to the mind. It could be argued that Taylor's ethnography attempts to be too representative in some respects. Again this could be attributed to the way she decided to structure the book. A structure which was based on particular incidents in detail rather than themes or stages would have perhaps provided the reader with a more in-depth knowledge of the women she was observing. By providing description or a transcript of events or even 'non-events', (i.e. episodes where no major incident occurred but which could be considered typical of the woman drug user's everyday life), the reader would perhaps have benefited more from the qualitative style of research that participant observation studies often produce. The strength of participant observation lies in the detailed qualitative data which is obtained: "resulting data are typically qualitative rather than quantified scores readily amenable to standard statistical analysis". <fnote>McCall, G. J. and Simmons, J. L. (eds) (1969) 'Preface' in Issues in Participant observation: A Text and Reader Addison-Wesley Publishing Company </fnote>To conclude, a lot of the critical aspects to this analysis have been based on speculation. Firstly, the extent to which Taylor sought to prove her hypotheses from the beginning is unknown, perhaps even by her. Yet I have highlighted the associated risks of adopting such an approach in participant observation. Secondly, the presentation of Taylor's results has been criticised for being too processed and distant from the original, raw material. Again, to what extent the presented data differs from the original is also unknown. However, it seems that in choosing to present her results in such a fashion undermines the advantages of participant observation research. Aside from these two main criticisms, the research methods employed by Avril Taylor, especially in the collection of data, were appropriate and seemingly successful. While she may have interpreted quite a lot of the data herself, the use of the women's own perspectives and descriptions, written in their own style of dialect, allows the reader relatively large amounts of space in which to form his/her own opinion. Finally, it must be recognised that while Taylor may have been driven by a desire to prove her hypotheses, these hypotheses aimed to disprove many of the myths which can be seen to worsen the lives of the subjects of her study. She argues that the women in her study continued using illicit drugs and even were drawn to them from the beginning due to "the inability of society either to recognise or to cater for such women's needs." The importance of research to be not only as objective and honest as possible, but also to be worthwhile and potentially beneficial must be remembered. For as Doc is quoted to say in 'Street Corner Society': "Mostly that is the way things are changed, by writing about them." <fnote>Taylor, A (1993), Women Drug Users: An ethnography of a female Injecting Community, Clarendon Press, p.158 </fnote><fnote>Whyte, W. F. (1993), Street Corner Society, The Social Structure of an Italian Slum, 4th ed University of Chicago Press, p.293 </fnote>