Effectiveness is usually measured by the ability to produce a desired or intended result. It is therefore necessary to understand and identify the intentions and aims of the UN. However, this task is perhaps impossible. Firstly, because the aims of the UN as set out in its charter can be and have been interpreted in different ways. Secondly, because the role of the UN changes. As Paul Taylor argues: "the work of these institutions and their role in international society have altered since the late 1980s", and even now, talk of reform suggests a change in role. This essay will therefore, identify a number of events or issues which have drawn criticism towards the UN, and will attempt to analyse whether these prove ineffectiveness and if so, why? The following aspects of the UN will be analysed: <fnote>Taylor, P (2001) "The United Nations and international order", The Globalisation of World Politics (eds Baylis, J and Smith, S), p.331 </fnote><list>The structure of the security council.The failure to stop an invasion of Iraq by the USA and its allies.The UN's lack of influence in the world economy, with particular emphasis on Kofi Annan's decision to form partnerships with transnational corporations.</list>I will argue that the very fact that its effectiveness is so difficult to gauge indicates inherent problems of ineffectiveness and that the cause of this debate can be seen to stem from a conflict of fundamental theories which the UN is torn between. When different states and people expect different things from an institution, its effectiveness must surely be limited. Whilst this essay will concentrate on the ideological differences which can be said to lead to ineffectiveness within the UN, the practical difficulties which it faces must be highlighted: the United Nations "...is charged with responsibilities for virtually every facet of the human and planetary condition. To do all this it is provided with less funds per year than Western children spend at Christmas, and fewer staff than the civil service of a medium-size European city." These kinds of difficulties clearly pose enormous problems to the UN. However, I would argue that more fundamentally problematic is the conflict of purpose and expectation which the UN struggles to fulfil. The following two quotations from the UN Charter demonstrate how the role of the UN is often interpreted differently: <fnote>Urquhart, B and Childers, E "Towards a more effective United Nations", Development Dialogue 1991Vol 1-2, p.5 </fnote><quote>"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women..."  and </quote><fnote> URL  The Charter of the United Nations, preamble, Accessed 20 February 2005 </fnote><quote>"The Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members." </quote><fnote> URL  The Charter of the United Nations, chapter 1, article 2:1, Accessed 20 February 2005 </fnote>Clearly a charter will always be open to interpretation. However, it could be argued that there is a more significant conflict which runs through the UN and its members. These two statements could be said to have their origins in two different theories or ideologies of world politics. The first originating in a liberal-socialistic view of the world, where the aims among others are for people to unite across (or despite of) state borders, to defend human rights and to promote justice. The latter is more representative of a realist view of the world based on state sovereignty (as applied during and immediately after the second world war, when the UN was founded) and the pursuit of power by all states. These underlying theories are evident in many debates which the UN faces and arguably, in the following examples of supposed failure of effectiveness. <quote>"It might well be better if Brazil, India, Japan, South Africa or even the European Union were on the Security Council, and if more countries, or no countries at all, had a veto."  Many critics have called for reform within the security council which, due to the power of veto, allows the five permanent members control over most decisions in the UN. To adopt the theoretical view mentioned above, the argument of whether this leads to ineffectiveness in the UN would differ according to one's expectations of its aims. Clearly, to a liberal-socialist, the unequal power that the five permanent members can exercise is undemocratic and un-representative. It could be argued that the five permanent members no longer reflect the most important or significant world powers, that large geographical parts of the world are unrepresented and that the whole concept of allowing certain members more power than others undermines the principles of the UN as identified by Chris Brown: "International relations would become a realm of law and not a realm of power".</quote><fnote>Ransom, D Upside Down: The United Nations at 60, New Internationalist Vol. 375: p.9-12 </fnote><fnote>Brown, C (2001) Understanding International Relations Palgrave p.141 </fnote>While, this inherent problem may produce ineffectiveness, for example in the use of abstention over Israeli occupation of the West Bank, there are more significant problems which the UN faces, which I will address later in the essay. The invasion of Iraq led to criticism of the UN throughout the world: "The UN's credibility was down in the US because it did not support the US Administration on the war, and in 19 other countries because it did not prevent the war." Whilst it has been argued that some of these 19 countries pursued their own self-interests in refusing to back America, here I will argue that this event must be put into the context of an ideological struggle. Madeleine Albright (former US ambassador to the United Nations), describes the approach the Bush Administration has adopted towards the UN: "they started acting as if the UN were a burden and denigrated it". It must be asked, why is the UN a burden to the US? Ideologically, they can be seen to differ enormously. America's reasons or rather justifications for invading Iraq are arguably based on realist principles: the threat of weapons of mass destruction seemingly provoked America to attack Iraq before Iraq could attack America and the argument for humanitarian intervention was not based on liberal principles but again related to self-interest: it can be said that the US utilised the UN-accepted principle of humanitarian intervention in order to increase its chances of winning a resolution. However, it is clear that despite the will of the UN to promote and defend human rights, its ideology does not stretch to intervention without just cause (i.e. threat to another state), or without evaluating the relative advantages of intervention to citizens in comparison to non-intervention. Again, this has its foundation in the socialist idea that the welfare of people should supersede that of the state. This ideological conflict was also evident in the Kosovo crisis and can be seen to cause ineffectiveness in the UN: "US domination has led to a true crisis in the UN and within the world community. I refer to Kosovo". It is accepted that we live at present in a uni-lateral world, but the implications for the UN do not and should not mean subordination to the power of America. For as Yevgeny Primakov asks: "Should we accept that the US administration has found a realistic approach to establishing peace and maintaining security in the world? Hardly, if only for the reason that it eschews collective efforts and strengthens the cult of individual, solitary action by the US." To return to the question of effectiveness then, it could be argued that over the invasion of Iraq, the UN according to liberal-socialist principles and in the context of a uni-lateral world, worked as effectively as it could: "...the refusal by a majority of members of the Security Council to support the attack was in its own way an important victory."  <fnote>Tharoor, S "Saving Humanity from Hell" New Internationalist Vol. 375 pp. 14 - 16 </fnote><fnote>Albright, M "The United Nations: The Indispensable Institution New Perspectives Quarterly Vol. 21: 3 pp.19-23 </fnote><fnote>Fraser, as quoted by Primakov, Y, M. "Rather the United Nations Than US Unilateralism" New Perspectives Quarterly, Vol.21: 2 pp.49-59 </fnote><fnote>Primakov, Y, M. "Rather the United Nations Than US Unilateralism" New Perspectives Quarterly, Vol.21: 2 pp.49-59 </fnote><fnote>Williams, I "Grimm rewards" New Internationalist Vol. 375 pp.22-23 </fnote>The effectiveness of the UN to counter the power of the US is therefore arguably greater than commonly thought and since the war in Iraq, potentially increasing. However, where the UN seems to lack effectiveness, is among the most powerful institutions in the world (arguably more powerful than America): transnational corporations. Perhaps Kofi Annan was following socialist principles of cooperation and discussion when he proposed the 'Global Compact': a corporate partnership programme, aiming to encourage companies to promote and facilitate development in the countries in which they operate. Boutros-Boutros Ghali argues that the role of the UN is global management: "The UN will be compelled sooner or later to manage globalisation..." However, this partnership arguably had the opposite effect to its intent: "The world's most damaging companies signed up to the cause of sustainable development... Since then their consistent message has been that they understand the issues and will provide solutions - as long as they are left alone to do so." Again, conflict of ideology can be identified at the heart of this ineffectiveness. The UN fails due to two main fundamental problems. Firstly, despite its success in evolution towards more liberal policies, (see Baylis and Smith and Roberts and Kingsbury for an appraisal of the success of UN agencies and NGOs in humanitarian intervention), its structure is still based on nation-states. Clearly, this organisational method fails to represent other bodies of importance in world politics. Secondly, the ideology which transnational corporations operate according to, that of neo-liberalist economics, discords with those in the UN who believe in the aim: to better the lives of people. Once ideologies are practised, and become norms, they can be used to justify the actions of the organisations which follow them, which is why "the philosophy of the ICC (International Chamber of Commerce) - that open markets are the key to sustainable development - was not to be challenged, and became the philosophy of the UN." Where the real problem of ineffectiveness lies, is in the lack of opposition from the UN's members to such a philosophy. For as realist based bodies, nation-states need and rely on transnational corporations. So while, the realist versus liberal-socialist ideology conflict is again demonstrated, the triumphant and reigning ideology is neo-liberalism, as implemented by the most powerful institutions in the world. <fnote>Ghali, B. B. "UN Role is Not Security, But Global Management" New Perspectives Quarterly, Vol.21: 2 pp. 24-25 </fnote><fnote>Bruno, K "Bluewash" New Internationalist Vol. 375 pp.26-27 </fnote><fnote>Taylor, P Taylor, P (2001) "The United Nations and international order", The Globalisation of World Politics (eds Baylis, J and Smith, S), p.343 </fnote><fnote>Roberts, A. and Kingsbury, B. (1993) United Nations, Divided World p.2 </fnote><fnote>Bruno, K "Bluewash" New Internationalist Vol. 375 pp.26-27 </fnote>In conclusion, it has often be said that the UN is the sum of its parts. This would indicate that the conflict of theories and ideologies described throughout this essay are representative of the differing aims of its members. The example of America's more realist view of the world as evident in its defiance of the UN over the invasion of Iraq demonstrates this. However, as many who believe in the UN's effectiveness have argued, it is much more than the sum of its parts. Roberts and Kingsbury compare the UN to a "theatre for standard-setting and myth-making - for appealing to higher standards than those which commonly prevail in international relations, and for holding out the promise of a better-ordered world." Perhaps, this is where the true effectiveness of the UN lies. It must hold on to its members: for they are its parts, and to do this it must reflect its members differing needs. However, its existence does not simply depend on membership of all the countries in the world: the point of its existence must surely be to better the world according to the needs of its people. It is in this sense indispensable and I would argue that it is as effective as it can be within the constraints of this balance. The decision not to pass a resolution to allow the invasion of Iraq is perhaps indicative of an increase in effectiveness in the future. Where the real challenge lies for the UN, is in its struggle to become the sum of what increasingly matters in world politics: those institutions which guide the world economy. In order to better the world, it must first be representative of the world and without this vital influence in the economy which is prevented by the neo-liberalist principle of free markets, it will forever be reacting to human and environmental problems in the world, not preventing them. <fnote>Roberts, A. and Kingsbury, B. (1993) United Nations, Divided World Clarendon Press: Oxford p.21 </fnote>