"Of Property": Chapter 5 of Locke's Second Treatise of government can be separated into two stages. Firstly, his view concerning the origins of property and natural property rights, and secondly, the development of property rights and relations following the introduction of money. The deductive nature of Locke's argument leads to disputes over Locke's justification of unlimited accumulation as a result of the contradictions evident in these two stages of his argument. These apparent contradictions in relation to the natural property rights of men will be discussed as follows: An analysis of the contradiction created between the effects of scarcity of goods, and the original right of man to make use of the world "to the best advantage of Life, and convenience". The argument that this presents a limitation in Locke's writings on accumulation will be assessed with particular reference to the example of scarcity of land. <fnote>Locke, J. (ed. Laslett, P.) (2004) Two Treatises of Government CUP, p. 286 </fnote>The related implications of scarcity of goods on Locke's assumption that "every man has a property in his own person". This has been seen to be undermined by the existence of the property-less worker in a world of unlimited accumulation who simply earns a subsistence. <fnote>Locke, J. (ed. Laslett, P.) (2004) Two Treatises of Government CUP, p. 287 </fnote>Lastly, the reasons for Locke's evidential justification of unlimited accumulation will be examined. Fundamental assumptions of capitalist wage-labour relations in the state of nature and a belief in the greater benefits of accumulation for society will be highlighted as possible reasons for his justification of unlimited accumulation and his rejection of the idea that the above contradictions pose any problem to his justification. A common argument suggesting that Locke did not fully justify unlimited accumulation is that it would impede on the original rights of men to equal access and opportunity to appropriate the common fruits of the world. The example often used is that of **landed property and land scarcity. It is assumed that Locke believed that unlimited accumulation did not transcend or significantly alter the two main conditions which he placed on the appropriation of property in the first stage of his argument. The first limitation to "make use of to any advantage of life before it (the property) spoils" becomes irrelevant with the introduction of money which cannot spoil, (except through deflation). However, the "sufficiency" condition - to leave "enough, and as good...and more than the yet unprovided could use", is impossible to apply in its pure sense to a monetary state of nature or society, for the nature of accumulation inevitably leads to property-less individuals. To expand upon the example of land; accumulation will result in landowners, who through the use of money, have accumulated too much land to make use of without spoilage or waste and therefore must, by the law of nature, employ workers to make use of the land on their behalf. These workers seemingly have no choice but to work for the land-owner for "whenever money has been introduced there ceases to be unappropriated land" and therefore "enough, and as good" is no longer available to landless individuals to appropriate. As Sreenivasan argues, unlimited accumulation "fails to preserve the access to the materials necessary to produce the means of comfort and support to which each commoner was originally entitled". There are two factors which indicate that Locke justifies unlimited accumulation despite this contradiction. Firstly, Locke argues that the prior, moral right to self-preservation and subsistence is still sustained through employment. And secondly, the only possible source of limitation on accumulation, i.e. the purpose assigned to government to 'determine' and 'regulate' property..." is not specifically prescribed or elaborated upon. For as Macpherson points out, the consent to hand all powers to the majority, thereby forming civil society, "helps to sustain the property accumulated in the state of nature". <fnote>Locke, J. (ed. Laslett, P.) (2004) Two Treatises of Government CUP, p. 290 </fnote><fnote>Sreenivasan, G. (1995) The limits of Lockean rights in property OUP, p. 48 </fnote><fnote>Locke, J. (ed. Laslett, P.) (2004) Two Treatises of Government CUP, p. 291 </fnote><fnote>Macpherson, C. B. (1962) The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. 203 </fnote><fnote>Sreenivasan, G. (1995) The limits of Lockean rights in property OUP, p. 115 </fnote><fnote>"Everyone as he is bound to preserve himself..." Locke, J. (ed. Laslett, P.) (2004) Two Treatises of Government CUP, p. 271 </fnote><fnote>"Property in land is not a necessary condition of this naturally lawful minimum access, for this is equally provided by a right of employment". Sreenivasan, G. (1995) The limits of Lockean rights in property OUP, p. 114 </fnote><fnote>Tully, J. (1993) An approach to political philosophy: Locke in contexts CUP, p. 130 </fnote><fnote>Macpherson, C. B. (1962) The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. 210 </fnote>Locke's conception of property is often viewed as very broad and quite different to more common definitions. As Barbeyrac described: "Mr Locke means by the word 'property'...the right which one has...to his actions, liberty, his life, his body; and in a word, all sorts of right". This broad conception of property also poses a problem to his justification of unlimited accumulation. This problem presents itself through an analysis of the consequences of accumulation where "labour for a bare subsistence wage is in effect an alienation of life and liberty". If a man's liberty is his property, then in a monetary state of nature where he must work to sustain his subsistence, this liberty has been sold. For Marxists this sums up the essence of exploitation in a world of unlimited accumulation and is objected to on moral grounds. This observation appears to contradict the right Locke describes: that "every Man has a Property in his own person", and therefore contradicts his justification of unlimited accumulation. However, Macpherson talks of an "absence of moral qualms" in Locke's work on property which seemingly allows the alienation of labour without contradicting man's "property in himself". For Locke it is the very fact that man's labour is his property and thereby his own to alienate, which justifies accumulation. Man has consented to the consequences of accumulation by consenting to the use of money in the first place. It can therefore be said that Locke sees no distinction between the "property in himself" of a man who owns vast quantities of land and the man who works on the land, but does not own any. In order to understand this fully, the assumptions of the wage-labour construct which supports this justification must be identified in Locke's work. <fnote>Barbeyrac as quoted in Tully, J. (1993) An approach to political philosophy: Locke in contexts CUP, p. 115 </fnote><fnote>Macpherson, C. B. (1962) The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. 220 </fnote>Despite the contradictions evident in Locke's argument, it has been shown that unlimited accumulation is still justified in his work. Here, assumptions inherent in his work on property will be identified as explanations for his overriding justification of unlimited accumulation. The key to understanding the effects of these root assumptions is to recognise the distinguishing features of Locke's state of nature and those of his civil society. Unlike Hobbes, Locke believed that many of the 'material' rights (meaning those related to property relations), of humans already existed in the state of nature and that civil societies would form "one at a time as local land scarcity problems arise". This means that accumulation exists in his state of nature, which by consequence means that the above points of contradiction also existed. As Macpherson convincingly argues: "Locke, in his use of the master-servant relation was already working with capitalist categories and so, unwittingly, laid the ideological foundations for the emergence and legitimation of industrial capitalism". This argument is supported by the fact that: "Locke does not condemn the Jewish concept of selling oneself into drudgery, therefore...legitimating wage-labour under capitalism". The significance of this is that Locke's view of government post-state of nature is not to enforce new rights, but to enforce and govern those which already exist in the state of nature. Therefore, by including wage-labour relations in the state of nature, he provides "a moral basis for capitalist society" - thereby escaping the moral objections which might lead to a questioning of his justification of unlimited accumulation. <fnote>Tully, J. (1993) An approach to political philosophy: Locke in contexts CUP, p.122 </fnote><fnote>Macpherson, C. B. as quoted in Tully, J. (1993) An approach to political philosophy: Locke in contexts CUP, p.122 </fnote><fnote>Tully, J. (1993) An approach to political philosophy: Locke in contexts CUP, p.124 </fnote><fnote>Macpherson, C. B. (1962) The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. 221 </fnote>Perhaps more significant than this is the evidence in Locke's writing of a utilitarian view of unlimited accumulation which is related to his mercantilist stance on economy. While it has been suggested that "in Locke's argument all that matters is that morally prior rights are respected, regardless of the consequences", it is also true to say that the consequences of unlimited accumulation were in fact assumed, in his work, to be beneficial. As Locke states: "he who appropriates land to himself by his labour, does not lessen but increase the common stock of mankind". This statement is clearly based on assumptions that this increase in stock will be distributed without harming those without enough or any land. Whether or not the weaknesses of an argument based on such assumptions affects the persuasion of Locke's justification of unlimited accumulation is a matter to be determined through interpretation. Hampsher-Monk demonstrates this point with the proviso he puts on Locke's justification: "property rights in the modern economy are only justified for Locke as long as the proviso that even the poor are better off holds good". <fnote>Levine, A. (2002) Engaging political philosophy : from Hobbes to Rawls Oxford : Blackwell, p. 111 </fnote><fnote>Locke, J. (ed. Laslett, P.) (2004) Two Treatises of Government CUP, p. 294 </fnote><fnote>Hampsher-Monk, I. (1992) A history of modern political thought : major political thinkers from Hobbes to Marx Oxford : Blackwell, p. 94 </fnote>To conclude, an analysis of the apparent contradictions in Locke's argument have shown that Locke does in fact justify unlimited accumulation for two fundamental reasons. The first is his inclusion and acceptance of wage-labour capitalist relations in the state of nature. To his critics, this may be because of the historical context in which he was working. Ashcraft highlights the political conflict between members of the gentry and the Whigs (including Locke himself) in Britain as an influential force on Locke's work: "if the security of these property rights (of the gentry), were perceived to be jeopardised by a Whig victory, the Whigs would stand little chance of gaining the support of the gentry". An alternative or additional factor is Locke's ultimate view that unlimited accumulation will lead to the greater good of society - a justifiable view, but one which perhaps overlooks the moral implications of inequality which results from unlimited accumulation. Here lies the second reason for his justification of unlimited appropriation: Locke's insistence that there are "no new individual rights in civil society" means that the moral rights inherent in the state of nature, as he perceives it, are his sole, moral concern. The role of civil society, therefore is to sustain and govern these rights, not to address their moral consequences which form the most convincing argument against the justification of unlimited accumulation. <fnote>Ashcraft as quoted in Sreenivasan, G. (1995) The limits of Lockean rights in property OUP, p. 15 </fnote>