To begin with, it is important to set the context of democracy in America. America has an elections culture where there are a lot of elections, ranging from state, local and congressional elections to national elections however it does lack an active voting culture to match up to it. According to a statistical ranking (by Norman J Ornstein, Thomas E. Mann and Michael J Malbin) on the proportion of the voting-age population casting ballots in the most recent national elections as of 2001 in various democracies, America is ranked 23 rd with an average of 52.1 percent as compared to the first three high ranking countries; Greece with 89 percent, Iceland with 86.2percent and Italy with 84.9 percent. Moreover, it is even more astonishing as the number of voters has declined from the high point in 1960 despite the numerous stimulating effects of increased education, reduced legal barriers and loosening of registration laws that should facilitate voting. Even the parties' best get-out-to-vote drive in the 2000 presidential election boosted turnout to 51 percent. As the health of a democracy is correlated to the level of turnout in national elections, the declining turnout rate is enough to worry American political scientists about the state of democracy in their country. With this contextual basis set, the essay will explore the general voting behaviour of Americans in two perspectives over time and space; the increasing trend of non-voting behaviour and the plausible explanations for it as well as the voting behaviour of those who vote. In addition, the focus will be on national elections as it is the most significant and common election across nations. This will facilitate the comparison of electoral systems across nations that will allow us to infer some structural differences that have encouraged or restricted voting which in turn have produced different turnout rates - high turnout rates in Malta and low turn out rates in America and Switzerland. Increasingly, Americans are becoming non-voters. This phenomenon can be attributed to a number of plausible reasons which will be presented as historical, structural, individual and societal reasons. Firstly, the low voting participation of Americans is historically linked. The initial nature of voting was to discourage voting. Most Americans could not vote until the effective enfranchisement of southern blacks, the abolishment of literacy tests and the poll tax. Moreover, the fact that there are so many local jurisdictions and variations in registration requirements across states is due to the federal heritage of the US, in which the national government established by the US constitution arrived later than local state governments. This led to the complexity of voting procedures today. Secondly, there are some fundamental structural barriers to voting as we compare the nature of the American voting and electoral system with other similar democracies. The most distinctive feature will be the un-automatic registration process. Unlike the citizens of foreign democracies in which the government takes responsibility for voting, Americans must prepare for the eventual vote by taking the initiative to register before the election at a time in the political cycle, when political information and interest are at a low point. Permanent registration does not come automatically as an attribute of citizenship; they vote according to their place of residence and due to the high geographic mobility rate of Americans, it is difficult to keep reregistering. For example, since 1972, most states require that one has to reside for one year within the state, 3 months within the country and thirty days within the precinct to vote in any election, including presidential elections. It does not help that certain states are very stringent on registration laws, for instance, in Philadelphia, it is required that a citizen obtain the registration application form in person from a designated outlet. Furthermore, Stanley Kelley and his collaborators also noted that ''local differences in the turnout for elections are to a large extent related to local differences in rates of registration and these in turn reflect to a considerable degree local differences in the rules governing and the arrangements for handling the registration of voters" which can affect overall turnout. As we compare electoral systems across nations, the proportionality of the electoral system does suggest why American voters lack the incentive to vote. Since America operates on a winner-takes-all electoral system, there is a lack of competitiveness as some constituencies are likely to be written off as hopeless with less mobilization by the parties and less incentive for voters to go to the polls. In direct contrast, certain nations that rely on proportional representation will provide added incentives for parties to mobilize and voters to vote. In electoral systems that has a higher linkage between legislative election outcomes and government complexion, it will increase turnout as it increase the stake of such elections. Therefore, an electoral system that ensures that every vote counts like Malta where every important political decision is going to be affected by the outcome of a single electoral contest will have higher turnout rates. Thirdly, there are many reasons that lead to non-voting on the individual level. The primary reason is the decline in party identification. Identification with political parties declined after the mid-1960s and people saw fewer benefits from involvement. For example, Americans were far less satisfied with the choices the 1980s offered them - Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, Walter Mondale, George Bush, Michael Dukakis, than with the choices of the 1960s - John Kennedy, Richard Nixon, Lyndon Johnson, Barry Goldwater, Hubert Humphrey, George Wallace. This is also evident today as some individuals who chose to abstain in 2004 elections stated that they had no clear preference of which presidential candidate or political party they supported. Lastly, on the societal level, a distinctive feature is the non-voting behaviour of the younger voting population. Since the adoption in 1972 of the 26 th amendment which lowered the voting age from 21 to 18, this change accounted for some of the post 1960 drop in turnout as the size of the voter group least likely to participate increased by 40percent overnight. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, the enormous postwar "baby boom" generation also moved into the electorate. The reasons for non-voting behaviour of younger Americans are varied, linked to the lack of historical ties with the country (did not go through civil war and the world wars) as well as other factors like higher occupational and geographical mobility that does not ignite a necessity to vote. In close relation to the point mentioned above, the decline in interest in voting is linked to that of generational change as noted by Putnam. He observed that the decline in turnout is only part of a much broader change in the American political and civic landscape where the newer generations are less integrated with society and into the social life of their communities. There have been major declines in participation in other social aspects as well, in clubs, churches, unions and social visits hence the decline in voting is generational in origin. It is firmly expressed in his words that "it is as though the post-war (WWII) generations were exposed to some mysterious X-ray that permanently and increasingly rendered them less likely to connect with the community." Hence it is not entirely true to say Americans do not vote, as Miller and Shanks observed that an older cohort of individuals - the New Deal cohort defined as those first eligible to vote btw 1932 and 1964 never wavered from its high propensity to go to the polls, rather it is the non-voting behaviour of the new generation of Americans that should be of the main concern of political analysts. Overall, the non voting behaviour of Americans, specifically of the younger generation, stems from the lack of the knowledge and skills that arise from experience and lack of incentives and benefits to vote. Strikingly, the 2004 elections serve as a reversal in non-voting trends. Curtis Gans, who is in the committee for the study of the American electorate reckons that 119.8million people voted in 2004 which is 14.4million more than in 2000 elections. An article in the Economist also stated that "..(the turnout rate) at 59.5%, the estimated figure was the highest rate since 1968 and the rate of increase since 2000 was almost twice as great as it had been in 1996-2000." It is indeed an affirmation that if the election is a close one, if the outcome seems likely to determine the course of public policy (gives more incentives for voters) and if there are large perceived differences between policy alternatives (gives more choices for voters), then political involvement will increase. Therefore, the rate of increase of non-voting behaviour is dependent on the nature of election itself. <fnote>The Economist, online edition, titled "Back to Basics", dated 4th November 2004 </fnote>On the flipside, for the Americans that do vote, the basic assumption we make here is that American voters have some motives to reach decisions, that some are able to distinguish among choices and among their purported consequences and that they have preferences over the consequences. These preferences in turn lead to decisions. We shall examine whether voters vote according to political or social groupings, adhere to conscious and subconscious group influences or whether they make individual choices based on issues and candidates independent of the socioeconomic structure and influences. For the former, this trend of "social" voting is linked to the idea of partisan politics which is more prevalent in 1950s than in today's context. American voting behaviour was first accepted as a habitual ritual when voters have a political past of carefully cherished psychological commitments and ideological values. This is evidently displayed in the 1956 elections when party identification was the key to the vote. Despite the number of democrats who crossed party lines to vote for Eisenhower, 83percent of Americans with a party identification voted consistently with that identification in the presidential elections. Similarly, about 90percent of voters voted consistently with their identification in the congressional elections. First national voting studies carried out in US by Campbell, Converse, Miller and Strokes also affirmed that voting decisions were based primarily on parties and partisan identification provided a guide to the vote that applicable election after election for the individual voter. This suggested that there was regularity in voting behaviour and voting decisions were based on long term factors. However this trend of voting based on party identification and attachment declined from 1964 to 1974; citizens did not depend as heavily as they once did on party labels in deciding their vote. Moreover, the major components of the stable support bases of each of the parties have also weakened. The Democrats cannot rely on the South or the north working class. The Republican Party can no longer rely as heavily on the Protestant upper middle class. The breakdown of some of traditional bases of party support is paralleled by a spilt within the two parties btw the active and the inactive supporters. All these changes add up to an "individuation" of American political life with the rise of independents that have no political affiliation and base their decisions on more short term considerations. The American voter now votes as an individual, not as a member of a collectivity. Studies in the 1970s suggest the shift to issue voting which indicate that voting has become more "individualised" as it is now dependent on more short term and less predictive factors for e.g. on candidates, campaign issues and media influence. In particular, Miller and Shanks found that attitudes on homosexuals in the military affected the 1992 presidential vote and likewise, Smith, Radcliffe and Kessel in 1999 found that social benefits helped Clinton in 1996. Similarly, the results of the 2004 elections suggest that people voted based on the candidate's stand on moral issues. President Bush's chief political adviser, Karl Rove, stated that opposition to gay marriage was one of the most powerful forces in American politics today. Moreover, Harold M. Ickes, a former senior adviser to Bill Clinton also stated that there are "three big cultural issues of this election: guns, abortion and gay rights, epitomized by gay marriage." Hence the present electorate has developed a more coherent set of issue positions and uses these issue orientations as guides in voting. The result is that they are more likely to vote based on candidate personal characteristics (Bush and his typical southern American image) or on his issue position (Iraq war or moral issues) rather than a long term commitment to a political party. Despite the decline in partisan attachment, there is a still a prevalent trend that people may vote by tradition (long run factor) in the short run even though they may not vote by partisanship tradition. This is because individuals do make their decisions on issues and candidates in a social and historical context and individuals within particular demographic groups (age, religion, ethnicity, gender, etc) may make unconscious collective decisions as a whole. Hence if a comparative study was taken between two recent elections, such as 2000 and 2004 elections, there are trends of "regularity" if we compared the results statistically. For instance, there were only three states who switched their support from one party to another, Bush's major advantage came among non-Hispanic whites, men, southerners, those with some college or college degree, married people, church attendants and Protestants. Similarly, the democratic support for Kerry came from non whites, young voters (18-29years old), easterners, and urban dwellers, those with post-graduate degrees, unmarried people, union households and Catholics. This suggest that such subgroups may continually reflect support for a particular party over time as each individual within the subgroup may adopt the same stance as others(in the same subgroup) in decisions made on campaign issues and candidates which will in turn produce "regularity" in election outcomes even though each vote is made on the decision of more "individualised" choices and preferences. Therefore, even if partisanship exists, it will be a dynamic partisanship which is subjected to changes and it would mean that issues and candidates are important not only through their impact on election outcomes but on partisanship. With that, it is clear that each election is not fought from scratch but it is increasingly difficult to determine base support. Long term partisanship will exert an indirect influence on vote choice by shaping voters' attitudes towards many of the short term forces in a given campaign, as well as by exerting some direct or unmediated influence of its own on the vote decision. Vice versa, short term considerations may overrule long term established political affiliations. There is a new intricate balance between the role of short term considerations like issues, candidates, campaign events, geopolitical changes and the role of long term historical factors like party affiliation, socioeconomic background and policy disposition that will determine how Americans vote if they vote at all. 