In examining the decline of any great empire in history, it is not possible to isolate the decline in time and space, ignoring the complexity of the ideological loaded term. Even though the essay questions the importance of international trade to the sustenance of the empire, the scope of this essay will examine this external factor in a wider context; establishing that this factor is a subset of the general external factor - challenges posed by the Europeans, acknowledging the centrality of internal factors in explaining the decline and the complex interaction of both external and internal factors. Before we embark on assessing the contributory value of each causal factor to the decline, it is important to acknowledge the complexity of the decline itself. Firstly, the decline should be understood as a process, hence we can safely establish a period of decline, in particular, the years 1683 to 1827 marks the decline of the Ottoman Empire. Furthermore, the Ottoman decline is a relative decline as implicit in any notion of "decline", is some kind of comparison. After all, an empire can only be seen as declining in comparison to some measures, and in this case, it is measured against other powers and its imperial and military past. In its broadest application, the characteristic features of its decline is most evident in its inability to match the march of progress and rising power of western society since the seventeenth century. On top of that, it is not possible to adopt a monocausal explanation for a shifting phenomenon, therefore this essay adopts a dynamic approach to examine the decline of the Ottoman Empire; to assess the degree of importance of the sub-causes (economic, social, political, military and ideological) within the twin core branches of internal and external causes. In conjunction, each causal factor will be weighed accordingly to whether it is an immediate or underlying cause and how it relates to the decline; whether it affects the timing, nature and speed of decline. The decline of the Ottoman Empire can definitely be attributed to the external challenges posed by the European powers. In particular, the Europeans' discovery of a sea passage to Asia played an indirect yet crucial part as this illustrated European's challenge to Ottoman's hegemony on trade routes to Asia. The basis of this argument is laid on the economical structure of the Empire being defined by geopolitical structure. The Ottoman Empire stood strategically between East and West; at the crossroads of intercontinental trade, stretching from the Balkans and the Black Sea region through Anatolia, Syria, Mesopotamia, the gulf to Egypt, and most of the North African coast . <fnote>Qevket Pamuk, 'Institutional Change and the Longevity of the Ottoman Empire, 1500-1800', Journal of Interdisciplinary History,32.2(2004), p. 225 </fnote>Due to its strategic location, all bilateral trade between Europe and Asia had to pass the harbours of the Ottoman Empire, yet the discovery of new trade routes to Asia meant that the Ottoman Empire lost the revenue it derived from the tariffs on all goods passing through it. In addition, it also meant the loss of resources as international trade was crucial to the sustenance of the empire as territorial expansion and the incorporation of Syria and Egypt during the 16 th century made long-distance trade and the intercontinental trade routes critical for meeting the need for provisions. This was evident in the patterns of territorial expansion which coincided with the desire to control international trade. By gaining mastery of the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea, the Ottomans controlled all the routes leading from the Near East to India. It also blocked the route eastwards when Spanish and Portuguese navigators set out in search of a new route to the Orient. Therefore, the current Ottoman studies imply that the decay of the Ottoman Empire could be linked to the new sea routes and the loss of significance of the land routes, particularly the silk route which linked China, India and the Mediterranean world. <fnote>Pamuk, 'Institutional Change and the Longevity of the Ottoman Empire', p. 235 </fnote>It was not purely the founding of new trade routes to Asia that affected the empire, but Ottoman's loss of hegemony of the previous trade routes that led to the demise of its international prestige and military confidence. In the mid 16 th century, the Russian Tsar, Ivan IV occupied the Volga basin as far east as Astrakhan which threatened their position in the Black sea basin and the Caucasus. Towards the end of 16 th century, the English were still buying pepper and other spices in Cairo but with the establishment of the East India Company in 1600, they bought directly from India since custom duties levied in Ottoman ports and the greater expenses incurred on the land route meant that the prices of pepper were three times as high as in near-eastern ports. Eventually, none of the Indian trade with the west passed through the Near East. Loss of superiority on the seas was thus an important factor in Ottoman economic decline. In the same period, the search for new routes for the export of Persian silk to Europe was another threat to the Ottoman economy. Asia Minor was the main transit route for Persian silk and European woollens. Until the end of the 16 th century, English cloths were sent through Asia Minor as far as central Asia and it has been estimated that this transit trade alone assured the Ottoman Treasury of 300 000 ducats a year in customs revenue.  <fnote>Halil Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, The Classical Age 1300 - 1600 (USA, 1973), p. 39 </fnote><fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 44 </fnote><fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 45 </fnote><fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 45 </fnote>Hence, with international trade being an integral feature of the Ottoman Empire, it falters as it loses its grip on its old trade routes with the discovery of new trade routes. In the same way as the Indian trade had been transferred to the Atlantic route, dominated by the Dutch and the English, the trade route between Europe and Central Asia came under Russian control. Hence, the Ottoman Empire had become politically and economically a regional empire confined to Asia Minor, the Balkans and the Arab lands and even within this area could defend her boundaries only with difficulty.  <fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 45 </fnote>In conjunction with the above discussion, it must be noted that Ottoman's failure to secure their place in international trade only played an indirect role and merely added external pressure to the fast declining Ottoman society. Furthermore, the rise and sustenance of the Ottoman Empire was closely associated with military conquest rather than economic hence external military threats and continued military battles aggravated the domestic problems it was facing. In the eighteenth century, the Ottomans fought a series of wars with European powers. Between 1714 and 1718, they fought with the small country of Venice; between 1736 and 1739, they fought with Austria and Russia in order to stop the expansion of these powers into Muslim territories. Interestingly, European historians tend to present Ottoman decline solely from the perspective of the wars with Europe. Yet, while these external threats in the form of economic and military challenges were significant, they were merely immediate threats to the already declining empire and the Ottoman Empire's decline was more pronounced internally. It must be emphasized again that the interaction of external and internal factors contributed to the decline of the Ottoman Empire. However, while external factors merely played a complementary part to internal factors and supporting part in explaining the decline, internal factors dictate the origins and nature of the decline. The various internal factors will be examined in sub categories of societal, political, ideological, economic and military. To begin with, the foundational tenets that characterise the Ottoman society were upset by internal changes. The society was sustained by the "Circle of Equity" that referred to the circular relationship and interdependence between the various social classes and their functions within the state. Within that circular context, the two fundamental institutions of the Ottoman Empire were the slave and timar system. They defined the state's military and political order, taxation system and forms of land tenure, determining its whole social and political structure. By the end of the 16 th century, the system was strained when inflation affected timar holders and many of them oppressed and exploited the reaya by extracting higher taxes and imposing illegal levies. The infiltration of the reaya into the askeri class through the acquisition of timars meant a loss of revenue, because they escaped their tax obligations. More importantly, this marked the blurring of boundaries between the two great social divisions. Furthermore, the growing complexity of provincial society made it more difficult for the sovereigns to control the peripheries of the domain. <fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 47 </fnote>Lastly, population increases also led to more social unrest as peasants who had to vacate their lands due to lack of land, joined up with existing bandits from nomadic Anatolian tribes. They ravaged the countryside and defied political authority, contributing to a breakdown in law and order. This is illustrated in the state records from the second half of the 16 th century when landless and unemployed youths known as levends or gurbet taifesi were mentioned more frequently. Linked to a disintegrating society, there was also a lack of political integration as the Ottoman Empire was a congeries of people with conflicting loyalties. Furthermore, in such an absolutist state, the personality and ability of the sultan was very crucial and the empire was unfortunately characterised by a deplorable succession of inept sultans. And nearly all the 17th century sultans came to the throne without having had any experience of government, Murad III (1574-95) was the last sultan to have had trained as a provincial governor and none of his successors had seen active service with the army before their accession. Hence, the political system was disintegrating from within, as bribery and corruption, coupled with oppression spread downwards through the administration system. <fnote>Eric Jones (ed.), The European Miracle, Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia, (Cambridge, 2003), p. 180 </fnote><fnote>Jones (ed.), The European Miracle, p. 186 </fnote>Following on, the Ottoman Empire also faced a financial crisis that aggravated the domestic situation. With the influx of cheap silver, mainly from Peru entering the Empire via Ragusa (Dubrovnik) and Genoa, the Ottoman Empire which was based on a silver coinage was affronted with an inflation which was badly managed. The Ottoman coinage lost value against other European currencies and became increasingly unacceptable to foreign traders, even in the internal markets for empire. Faced with a depreciating coinage, the government was forced to increase taxation to meet expenses. This placed additional burdens on the tax paying peasants and led to more social unrest.  <fnote>A Stiles, The Ottoman Empire 1450-1700, (London, 1989), p. 126 </fnote>In addition to that, the strength of the Ottoman Empire was built on wars and conquests. These provided the land for timars, wealth from taxes paid by the reaya working these lands, candidates for the devshirme and hemployment for central and provincial government officials. However, as early as 1560, the age of conquests was drawing to a close - only two important acquisitions were to be made in the West, Cyprus in 1570 and Crete in 1669. The conquests failed due to the empire's geographical and logistical limitations as the choice of Istanbul as the capital fixed the limitations of Ottoman's empire. Moreover, the Ottomans failed to keep up with advances in European military technology and tactics. New formations of pikemen were used to defeat any possible Ottoman pincer movement and Cuirassiers (cavalry with defensive armour) were employed as shock troops to break up the Janissary formations. Hence, in the 17 th century, the Ottomans waged a series of exhausting wars against the Persians in the east and the Habsburg in central Europe. The Ottomans had to fight simultaneously on their eastern and western fronts at a time when civil disturbances were shaking the empire. <fnote>Stiles, The Ottoman Empire 1450-1700, (London, 1989), p. 129 </fnote><fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 36-37 </fnote>In essence, the Ottoman Empire was a "society interested not in change but in preservation of the existing society". The fundamental institutions of the classical Ottoman Empire had disintegrated under the impact of a new Europe and the Ottomans failed to grasp the modern economic, political, social and military problems. While Europe was rapidly developing, the Ottoman Empire clung over more fervently to the traditional formulae of the near eastern civilisation, becoming inward looking and closed to outside influences. Hence, it led inevitably to a widening of the gap btw Europe and the empire, to the grave detriment of the latter.  <fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 46 </fnote><fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 51-52 </fnote><fnote>Stiles, The Ottoman Empire, p. 130 </fnote>In conclusion, Halil Inalcik's rightly sums up the gist of this essay, that the decline was attributed to the near eastern state's failure to adapt to European economic, political and cultural challenges which "... made the Ottomans aware that the traditions of a near eastern state had outlived their usefulness." External factors merely aggravated the internal declining state and while internal changes could have been adopted to meet the new circumstances, the extreme conservative ideology and attitude of the Ottomans made it impossible. Hence, in the end, it was this inability to accept the need for, or desirability of, change which sealed the fate of the empire. <fnote>Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 47 </fnote>