The objectivity of political issues as presented in the media should always be questioned. Political issues by themselves may consist of definite and objective facts and figures, but the interpretation and presentation of political issues will always be a product of the writer's analysis and perspective. This sets the basis for the political issue to be discussed. Taiwanese leader, President Chen Shui Bian recent calls for cross straits dialogue on 10 th October 2004 as part of the National Day speech is an attempt to revive a bilateral dialogue frozen since the last negotiation in 1992. This recent Taiwanese move to restore bilateral ties is controversial enough to spark off a lively debate in the Chinese and Taiwanese papers and impactful enough to incite commentaries in international press media all over the world. Selective articles have been taken from Taipei Times, BBC, CNN, Straits Times Singapore, China Daily, China post and the Economist which enables a comparative study of the diverse styles of reporting and presentation of papers written in different countries in different contexts which in turn reflect their diverse perspectives on President Chen's speech; whether they presented, interpreted or perceived the move as conciliatory or confrontational. There are some articles that are distinctly pro-Taiwan due to the specific target of readers (Taiwanese public) such as the article (labeled Article 1) published in Taipei Times which is known for its pro-government stance. As a Taiwanese national paper, it presented the political issue from a Taiwanese viewpoint and based the rates of success of such a revival of communication on the Taiwanese willingness to establish bilateral talks and the assumption that China may resume talks on the same basis established by President Chen. The article is Taiwanese-centric and geared towards the public as it attempts to convince readers that Taiwan has adopted a more open and flexible attitude with regards to the "one China" policy by shifting to an increased "willingness to pursue solutions that are 'not necessarily perfect, but acceptable." However, there is lack of details as to the type of "workable" solutions to be implemented and the timing they will be implemented. There is also a lack of elaboration on Taiwan's stance on the "one China" policy that China has stood firmly by, which reiterate that the deliberate omission of information in the media is equally as important as the selective information presented. Overall, it presented the ambiguous speech in an ambiguous manner which ties in with the general Taiwanese consensus that "ambiguity" does serve its purpose. In addition, another article in Taipei Times (labeled article 2) quotes China's media sources directly and focuses on China's response to Chen's speech, indirectly portraying China as the unrelenting party. Once again, there is no conclusive end to the debate and the article does leave space for readers to reflect on China's responses and whether they are legitimate accusations hurled at Chen's speech. In comparison to Taiwanese press coverage, the Chinese press, in particular China Daily presented the speech as confrontational. By simply comparing headlines of Taipei Times and China Daily, we can safely infer that both papers reported President Chen's political speech based on their own perceptions or rather misperceptions of the speech. Both are equally judgmental in the interpretation and judged the issue from its own political biasness and viewpoint. One striking feature in China Daily is that it addressed Chen as a "regional leader" instead of "president". It is also highly selective in the presentation of the speech as it picked up specific sentences that does seem provocative towards China's "one China" principle. The entire article is written on the basis of the "one China" principle; therefore it is highly skeptical and suspicious of President Chen's intentions. It does not only attempt to report the speech but to heighten the gravity of the issue as well as to question the accuracy and sincerity of the speech by denouncing it. In addition, political discontentment with an issue may be expressed as political cartoons which are equally useful in delivering the key sentiments and ideologies. For example, Article 5 clearly degrades Chen into a multi-faceted man who cannot be trusted. This is in accordance with China daily's stance that President Chen's speech is more confrontational and provocative than conciliatory. There are two articles which align positively with Chen's stance for bilateral talks though they present the sentiments and ideologies of the Americans and view the political issue from an external perspective. This media approach brings in a third party - the Americans that will result in a "volatile triangle of relations between China, the United States and Taiwan." The article from CNN highlights the military aspect of the political issue and the vulnerability of Taiwan in relation to China. It mentioned that "China offensive capabilities will outstrip Taiwan's defensive advantage in a few years" which is backed up by Chen's speech on Sunday that mentioned the need to "increasing Taiwan's defensive strength". Moreover, if we analyze this article with American interests in mind, the mention of the arms deal may be an attempt to increase public awareness and generate positive public support on the domestic front. Furthermore, with contextual knowledge of China's growing economic strength and US commitment to Iraq war and domestic politics, there is a subtle message expressed in the article that the US is urging Taiwan to take more responsibility for its own defense by sealing the arms deal. Similarly, the article titled "US rebukes China for Taiwan threat" from Straits Times presents the pro-dialogue stance of the US and an increased determination to "fulfill its obligations to aid in the island's defense." This direct US proclamation in the papers changes the nature of the issue from a localized affair to a potential international conflict that may engage two superpowers (China and US). In this case, the media treatment of the issue is harsh towards a specific target (China) and the effect of the media does increase international recognition and status of this issue yet it may also upset the present status quo. Written in year 2001, three years before Chen's initiatives for dialogue, an article from the Economist (refer to Article 8) sets the historical context for the present situation. It is written analytically and diplomatically. It adopted a balanced approach, did not portray any one player as having more leverage over the other instead it explained the independency of each player in this triangular relationship. The parallel drawn to the "cold war" does bring to mind a historical concept of antagonisms between two ideological blocs and the arms race that resulted from it. The approach gives a more holistic analysis, drawing parallel situations from the past and enabling us to view present situations with the benefit of hindsight. Similarly, another article dated 4 days after the speech is also another piece of evaluative work. It evaluated the reasons for the content and style of presentation of President Chen's speech. It also brings in a new dimension to the issue, the next round of Taiwanese elections - the legislature in December which will affect the success rate of cross-straits dialogue. Largely due to the larger pool of audience targeted as compared to national papers and the evaluative and analytical nature of the magazine, both articles from the Economist explored this issue with a global perspective. There are relatively more "objective" articles which presented the political issue informatively. An article written in The China Post (Article 18) addressed the issue diplomatically and highlighted the nature of the relationship and the interdependency between the three countries. Even though both the China Daily and The China Post are both written in China, each approached the issue differently. Unlike the skeptical approach adopted by China Daily, the informative and evaluative approach taken by The China Post highlights the importance of each country and their respective role in preserving the status quo. It even suggested that China should reciprocate the "goodwill" that Taiwan demonstrated "to building a foundation for closer cross strait ties among the people of Taiwan." Hence, papers of the same national origin may not treat an issue in the same way and instead may be conflicting in perspective. Another similar "objective" report is reflected in the article in The Guardian where the approach was more narrative and descriptive than evaluative and analytical. The approach may be explained by the fact that this issue is not particularly as relevant to the UK as compared to the US and there is no direct European involvement in this political issue. To conclude, the press media can become a volatile political battleground especially when countries resort to using the press media to voice their displeasure and discontent with other countries. It can also be an effective arena of study for political scientists because any political issue can be interpreted and presented in diverse ways as shown above due to the political affiliation of the writer, the aspect he or she wishes to report on and the presentation style. 