C. A Bayley's account of the crises of empire derives from his contextual understanding of the global interconnectedness of the economic and political turbulence of that era and he strives to unravel the common moral and material conditions which underlay the global conflicts of the "Age of Revolutions" within the timeframe of 1770 to 1850. Such an account stems from his intellectual belief that all local, national or regional histories must be placed within a wider framework of global history. <fnote>C.A Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914 (Oxford, 2004), pp. 89. </fnote>To accurately assess his account of the crises, it is crucial to first understand the complexity of the term "crisis" itself which is a conundrum in historical studies. Historians have often overused and perhaps abused the term "crisis" till it has become merely an affirmation of the undisputable fact that something happened in a particular era and to put it simply, has "become a synonym for what historians concerned with other centuries call 'history'". As Theodore Rabb noted, there are two criterions to be fulfilled to be labeled a "crisis"; one requirement is that it has to be short-lived lasting for a little more than two decades and it ought to be distinct, both from what precedes and from what succeeds. With this in mind, Bayley has adopted the word crisis accurately as he noted the series of upheavals distinctly within that timeframe of 1770 to 1850 as compared to the prior period of stability from 1660 to 1720 where there was upswing in economic activity following the consolidation of the great agrarian states of Asia and Africa. <fnote>Niels Steensgaard, 'The Seventeenth Century Crisis' in Geoffrey Parker and Lesley M Smith (eds), The General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century (London, 1997), pp. 33. </fnote><fnote>William S Atwell, 'A Seventeenth- Century "General Crisis" in East Asia?' in Geoffrey Parker and Lesley M Smith (eds), The General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century (London, 1997), pp. 237. </fnote>The degree of importance and relative value of a historical account is often derived by adopting a comparative framework of assessment and analysis. Hence, by comparing Bayley's account of the crises of empire alongside with Goldstone's account of world crises, not only does it illuminate Bayley's line of argument, it also highlights its limitations and strengths with regards to Goldstone's. The comparative framework will examine their approaches to the issue, their analyses of the causal factors underlying the world crises, parallels and divergences in the dimensions or character of the crises and lastly, the evaluations of the consequences. The obvious similarity in both Goldstone's and Bayley's accounts of the world crises in their individual timeframes stems from the recognition of the crises that were truly global in scope and scale (refer to illustrations 1 and 2). Both emphasized the importance of an "over-all framework that integrates economic, social and political changes, providing a common background against which we can better discern the peculiarities of each case". However, Jack Goldstone was a lot more specific in his selection of case studies of which he examined the English Revolution of 1640, the urban riots and Anatolian Rebellions in the Ottoman Empire and the fall of the Ming dynasty in China. In contrast, Bayley focused his account on empires such as the Mughal and Safavid Empires, phenomenon such as the European Fiscal decay and revolutions such as the French Revolution within the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. <fnote>Jack A Goldstone, "East and West in the Seventeenth Century: Political Crises in Stuart England, Ottoman Turkey and Ming China", Comparative Studies in History and Society, 30 (1988), pp. 104. </fnote>Similarly, both acknowledged the limitations of a Eurocentric approach and instead adopted a general context of which the crises arose; there was no East or West causal distinction, hence giving credit to both Eastern and Western crises in generating and sustaining the world crisis if such a distinction even applies. With the above comparative analysis in approach established, the analysis of the causes of the crises shall be examined. In examining any world crisis, it is crucial to pinpoint causal factors explaining the timing and nature of outbreak and perhaps, Goldstone and Bayley would have differed in the degree of focus on each aspect. The factors that Bayley listed seemed to relate more towards where crises occurred where they did, as he sieved out the common causal factor which can be attributed to resentment against government attempts to change the status quo and also examined the nature of the "culture of opposition" in different contexts which is critical in transforming economic conflict into wholesale social crisis. This will help us to understand why different societies took different trajectories through an age of revolution which had different origins (time) but broad global consequences. Hence, the spread of the world crisis that Bayley accounts for is geographically determined by the causal factors he laid forth; fundamentally, it was the opposition to the legitimacy of the state that was evident in the collapse of the old regime in Europe and also the social disruption in Asia, North Africa and the New World. <fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 101. </fnote>On the other hand, Goldstone substantiates his causal arguments by adopting a demographic or structural model of state breakdown to explain parallel features and why these crises occurred at nearly the same time. As Goldstone noted, there are two periods of unusual demographic pressures that occurred in early modern times; in the 16 th and early 17 th centuries and in the late 18 th and 19 th centuries which coincided with both "Ages of Revolutions". Essentially, in each period, the problems of population growth across Eurasia manifested itself through inflation, heightened competition for status and deterioration of popular living standards. This in turn undermined state finances, gave birth to intra-elite factionalism and to elite adherence to religious heterodoxy. <fnote>Goldstone, "East and West in the Seventeenth Century: Political Crises in Stuart England, Ottoman Turkey and Ming China", pp. 133. </fnote><fnote>Steensgaard, 'The Seventeenth Century Crisis', pp. 22. </fnote>Both writers account differently for the nature of the causes. Bayley reiterates that there are deeper and more fundamental causes beyond the larger materialistic explanations (financial or military defeats) posed, focusing on the ideological and cultural thread that binds all these upheavals. For example, the representation of royal financial incompetence in France was turned into a moral issue - eroded the moral bases of the monarchy, the aristocracy and the church through obscenity and political libel. Similarly, in India, the ruling dynasty and the Indo-Muslim ruling elite were unable politically to counter the growing restiveness of emerging local powers which could employ new claims to legitimacy - the moral campaign to establish dharma (righteous rule). The Ottoman Empire also faced radical challenges to its legitimacy as the notions of "Liberty, Equality and Fraternity" released during the "Age of Revolutions" continued to threaten rulers and religious establishments worldwide. Hence, Bayley emphasizes that "popular culture, beliefs and representations of politics gave us an important middle stage in a 'model of revolution', standing between social tension and radical political breakdown" and acts as a "conceptual accelerator" which translates conflict into crisis. <fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 100. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 106. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 103. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 103. </fnote>In contrast, Goldstone's account of world crisis in the mid-17 th century focuses on the sociological and demographical aspect. His framework suggests a balance of material and cultural factors as compared to Bayley's account; it gives predominant role to material factors in bringing about state breakdown but a predominant role to culture and ideologies in shaping state construction which will be discussed later. For the former, he was right in asserting the drastic increase in population in the agrarian empires; Asia Minor witnessed 50 to 70 percent increase between 1500 and 1570 while Istanbul's population of 1000 in 1520 swelled to a metropolis of 700 000 by 1600. With these population surges in mind, he noted that this trend exerted severe pressure on state finances as inflation eroded revenues which led to attempts to raise taxes which alienated social groups, as noted in the Ming Dynasty where "under-registration of the population on a gigantic scale" led to the subsequent "fossilization of the official tax base". Similarly, the English Revolution of 1640 began with a financial crisis of which an expanding population led to inflation on a highly vulnerable system of taxation. Hence, demographic pressure translated into a political crisis of fiscal bankruptcy, elite dissatisfaction, social unrest and popular anti-tax resentment. <fnote>Goldstone, "East and West in the Seventeenth Century: Political Crises in Stuart England, Ottoman Turkey and Ming China", pp. 106. </fnote><fnote>Goldstone, "East and West in the Seventeenth Century: Political Crises in Stuart England, Ottoman Turkey and Ming China", pp. 112. </fnote><fnote>Goldstone, "East and West in the Seventeenth Century: Political Crises in Stuart England, Ottoman Turkey and Ming China", pp. 116-117. </fnote>With both writers examining causes of world crises from both ends of a spectrum, one can firmly establish that both material and non material causal factors interact to trigger and sustain a world crisis. The third aspect of analysis covers the nature or character of world crisis. In C.A Bayley's coverage of the world crisis in late 18 th - early 19 th centuries, there was a predominance of the feature of military warfare and revolution that shaped the nature of the world crisis as it had its origins in a growing imbalance between the perceived military needs of states and financial capability. This is evident in the Safavid and Mughal Empire as the first cracks appeared due to "imperial overstretch" when they were forced to fight wars on internal and external frontiers but lacked the financial resources to do so. Similarly, the Ottoman Empire's military failure against the Austrians and Russians in the 1690s and 1760s had humiliated the regime and sapped its resources. The collapse of all these Eastern Empires attracted the greed and ambitions of the Europeans, leading to an extension of conflict beyond the Eastern frontiers. On the European side, the Seven Years war in which Austria, Russia, Prussia, France and Britain took part put a great strain on all European states. Hence, all these pockets of turbulence resulted in a military fiscal crisis which pushed governments into risky types of internal political reform and external expansion. Furthermore, the Napoleonic state within Europe and briefly in Egypt, itself provides a good example of the "same explosive combination of military ambition and financial need which had driven on the world crisis from its origins". On the other hand, the nature of the conflicts in the 17 th century as Goldstone noted was a worldwide crisis of agrarian absolutist states that affected both Eastern empires and Western monarchies. In all three of his case studies, he noted that there was a combination of internal factors - "urban disorder, popular heterodox religious movements led by products of the overcrowded school systems and revolts involving leadership or allegiance of disaffected provincial elites". Despite the different focus on internal or external dimensions of the world crisis, both accounts highlight the difficulty of disentangling the symptoms of the crises from the crises themselves. <fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 100. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 97. </fnote><fnote>Goldstone, "East and West in the Seventeenth Century: Political Crises in Stuart England, Ottoman Turkey and Ming China", pp. 128. </fnote>Lastly, in examining the world crises in their respective timeframes, both writers drew fairly similar insights into the consequences and impact of the world crises. The most important insight was that each world crisis was not an isolated event; repercussions span over time and space escalating each local crisis to an international one. In the same light, the world crisis outside Europe was brought about by changes working within these societies and economies as much as by the export of the European conflict. Most evidently, the ideals of French revolution fought on national soil was for export; which manifested itself as revolutions as seen in Spain, Naples and Sicily in 1820 and to antislavery movements in Britain and United States. Furthermore, many Asians, Africans and South Americans received and transformed these dangerous new doctrines in situations already riven by ideological conflicts with a global reach as epitomized in the slave revolts of the Caribbean between 1791 and 1808. As Bayley reiterated, "warfare in the Americas and Asia between Europeans or between Europeans and indigenous people hastened the crisis of the old regimes in Europe.... The repercussions of these extra European conflicts fed back into the European convulsions," hence the force of events ricocheted around the globe. <fnote>C.A.Bayley , Imperial Meridian: The British Empire and the World 1780 - 1830 (New York, 1989), pp. 165. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 107. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 86. </fnote>In addition, both writers acknowledged the role of ideology in post-crisis restructuring, state formation and subsequently leading to a divergence btw East and West. Goldstone highlighted that ideological differences governing state construction after the 17 th century would influence the divergence of East and West. State construction in England was based on Puritan ideology which was apocalyptic and hence the political change was to create a new Protestant world while the Ottoman and Ming revolts were governed by a cyclical ideology that was to return to the institutions that had existed at the height of the empire, returning to a more orthodox and conservative style of rule. Similarly, Bayley mentioned ideology which will also play a crucial part in the formation of the international social order after 1815 to the extent that new states would claim different ideologies, aims and inspirations that would conflict with others and the colonized world had a "sharper sense of the outside world and the dangerous foreign races which beset their kingdoms." With the spread of "revolutionary imperialism", the world crisis of 18 th and early 19 th centuries certainly produced a post-crisis status quo that was built on notions of nationalism, national identity and state power, drawing sharper territorial boundaries between West and the Rest. <fnote>Bayley, Imperial Meridian: The British Empire and the World 1780 - 1830, pp. 172. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 113. </fnote>In conclusion, by examining both writers and their accounts of world crises in specific timeframes of history, it illuminates larger themes in the study of history. As one seek to highlight larger trends and patterns in history, it is important to realize the limitations of generalized theories as the transition from world crisis to individual political upheavals and vice versa depends on personal decisions, local conditions and unforeseen accidents to a degree that makes it highly individualistic. With that in mind, crises can be generally classified as global in terms of their causal frameworks and consequences; the former related to the patterns of worldwide upheaval that reveals the basic global causes beneath the more obvious local precipitants while the latter emphasizes the circularity of crises that leads to "ripple effects" around the globe. Hence, how historical trends and sequences of events which have been treated separately in regional or national histories can be brought together reveals the interconnectedness and interdependence of political and social changes across the world before the onset of the contemporary use of the word "globalization" after 1945. As Frederick J Teggart asserts, "the comparison of histories is necessary for a comprehension of what has actually happened within the borders of any national state," and despite the inconclusive debate on world crises, the struggle for a consensus concerning its nature and causes has demonstrated beyond doubt, that no national history in any period can be seen in isolation. <fnote>Geoffrey Parker and Lesley M Smith, 'Introduction', in Geoffrey Parker and Lesley M Smith (eds), The General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century (London, 1997), pp. 6. </fnote><fnote>Bayley, The Birth of the Modern World 1780 - 1914, pp. 1. </fnote><fnote>Atwell, 'A Seventeenth- Century "General Crisis" in East Asia?' pp. 248. </fnote>