The Social Contract, published in 1762 is Rousseau's best-known work and the most intensively studied. Many have devoted their time in assessing The Social Contract in its totality, however it is clearly out of a question to attempt a comprehensive treatment of it on that extensive scale here hence I shall merely attempt to highlight the crucial cardinal issues and give a fairly thorough account to the extent that it is sufficient for a just overall understanding of his work and its worth. The first half of the essay will present an explanatory view of Rousseau's fundamental problem in terms of its origins and nature as well as the solution he proposed which will examine the essence, legislation and execution of the general will. Having illuminated Rousseau's political thought of the fundamental problem and the accompanying solution, the second part will adopt a critical and evaluative analysis of the general will, focusing on its limitations, practicality and relevance in the application to and practice of politics and ultimately assessing the worth of his solution. <heading>Fundamental causal roots of the fundamental problem</heading>The diagnosis of the fundamental problem stemmed from The Discourse on Inequality, published in 1754 of which he theorized about the original or natural state of man and charted the development or degradation towards the formation of civil society. Rousseau's conception of the state of nature parallels the other social contract theorists in that it is a hypothetical condition of humanity before the state's foundation with law and morality. But he extends beyond that definition to envision it as "an analytical device that signals a special condition, viz., that amoral condition where the only rule is the rule of superior force". It is questionable whether such a state of nature can ever exist as there can be no qualitative or quantitative measures to affirm its existence but it is an important starting point of which we can compare the effects societal development have on mankind. <fnote>Noone, J.B. (1970) "The Social Contract and the idea of Sovereignty in Rousseau", The Journal of Politics Vol. 32: p.697. </fnote>Rousseau's envisioned man in his natural state as isolated, self interested neutral beings with amour de soi (self love) and that "man was born free". In addition, man possessed natural liberty which was only limited by the powers of the individual and implied no duty towards individuals or from others to them. In essence, he is neither a mere object in the hands of nature nor the will of any other person. In direct contrast, a political man possesses a "partial and corporate existence" because "all natural powers are completely dead in a political society". It is obvious that he conceived the difference between natural man and political man in very sharp terms.  <fnote>Rousseau, J-J. (1968) The Social Contract. trans.and intro, Cranston,M, London: Penguin Books, p. 49. </fnote><fnote>Riley, P. (1982) Will and Political Legitimacy: A Critical Exposition of Social Contract Theory in Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Kant and Hegel. Harvard: Harvard University Press, p. 100. </fnote><fnote>Riley, Will and Political Legitimacy. p.100. </fnote><fnote>Riley, Will and Political Legitimacy. p.100. </fnote>His greatest criticism of modern political society was that it is insufficiently political; it "compromises between the utter artificiality and communality of political life and the naturalness and independence of pre-political life" which divides man against himself, enjoying neither the "amoral independence of nature nor the moral elevation afforded by true socialization". <fnote>Riley, Will and Political Legitimacy. p.100. </fnote><fnote>Riley, Will and Political Legitimacy. p.100. </fnote>Furthermore, the unnatural creation of social institutions will ultimately lead to the creation of "chains" of dependence; material dependence as we depend on each other for livelihood and psychological dependence due to our dependence on the opinion and will of others and to the unruly passions of envy, pride, jealousy and glory to satisfy our amour propre (egoistic self love). In close relation, Hobbes also mentioned in the Leviathan, the metaphor of chains of laws as artificial chains, stating that men have created "Artificiall chains called Civill Lawes..." In this aspect, Rousseau is aware that laws can be chains but he is also proposing that not all chains of laws are inimical to our freedom, in actuality, legitimized chains uphold the common good. Therefore, in this respect, he echoes Locke as a proponent of 'positive freedom'; his notions of freedom stems from being free from dependence in contrast to 'negative freedom' from interference advocated by classical liberals. <fnote>Bertram, C. (2004) Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. London: Routledge, p.43. </fnote>As much as Rousseau voiced criticisms against modern society, he recognized that the transition from the state of nature to society is an inevitable and irreversible process brought about by the need for self- preservation. Therefore, the accompanying problem lies not in abandoning the "chains" but in seeking a solution that facilitates and justifies the legitimization of the change from natural freedom to civil and moral freedom. <heading>The paramount problem</heading>Rousseau's fundamental problem is neatly encapsulated as the search for "a form of association that defends and protects the person and goods of each associate with all the common force and by means of which each one, uniting with all, nevertheless obeys only himself and remains as free as before".  <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.60. </fnote>By this astounding statement, the fundamental problem was to find reasons or basis of legitimacy that would make obedience to political law and adherence to a political order justified. In essence, it was to "unite what right sanctions with what is prescribed by interest, in order that justice and utility may in no case be divided" such that rule of law is compatible with individual freedom. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.49. </fnote>Hence, Rousseau's view of the fundamental problem presents itself as a theoretical alternative to the order propounded in Leviathan for Hobbes had done nothing to ameliorate the essential wrongness of modern politics: private interest was rampant and indeed paramount, in Hobbes's system. Indeed, his problem was also a lot more extensive than Locke's who had merely to "provide a judge and a sanction for an already acknowledged law"  while his problem is to provide an alternative political system in place of total anarchy and to "create out of illegality the rule of law and at the same time preserve the principle of liberty". <fnote>Cobban, A. (ed.) (1964) Rousseau and the Modern State. London: Allen and Unwin, p.62. </fnote><fnote>Cobban, Rousseau and the Modern State. p.62. </fnote><heading>Rousseau's resolution for a solution</heading>The need for a solution arises from a state of necessity when "men having reached the point where the obstacles that interfere with their preservation in the state of nature prevail by their resistance over the forces which each individual can muster to maintain himself in that state". Therefore, as much as institutions may have corrupted men but they also offer the solution to his problems; to establish a legitimate association guided by the general will, upheld by legitimate laws formulated by and applied to all to ensure equality, liberty and security for all. Rightly put, "let us endeavour to derive from the evil itself the remedy which will cure it". With that, the "social contract holds the solution" to the "fundamental problem".  <fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.72. </fnote><fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.130. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.60. </fnote>We shall examine the solution by structurally breaking it into its various ideological branches, starting with the concept of an association. <heading>A. A legitimate association </heading>The solution is to transform the chains of the present corrupt and corrupting society making from them fraternal bonds of liberty and the correcting element lies in the general will. This "association" must be understood with respect to an "aggregation". The former has a "common good", constitutes a "body politic" and is defined by a principle of unity lacking in the latter. Rousseau applies the former concept of an "association" to the relation of "a people and their ruler" and the latter concept of "aggregation" to the relation between master and slave respectively. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.58. </fnote><fnote>Forsyth, M. & Keens-Soper, M. (1992) The Political Classics - A Guide to the Essential Texts from Plato to Rousseau. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 173. </fnote>The articles of the association can be reduced to a demand for "the total alienation of each associate of himself and all his rights to the whole community". Essentially, every individual "gives himself absolutely" but it is to the "whole community" that he consents to and under conditions of strict equality. Unity of the highest level is the solution to the dependencies of individual upon one another and is achievable by complete identification of the individual with the whole. This is illustrated in article three of the social contract which states that "since each man gives himself to all, he gives himself to no one". In consequence, "by means of which each one, uniting with all," everyone benefits by a strict reciprocity of equal and mutual dependence on the unity they created. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.60. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.60. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.61. </fnote><heading>B. Nature of the Social Contract</heading>It establishes itself as a moral and collective body, compromising of "as many members as there are voters in the assembly" and by this act alone, it achieves "its unit, its common self, its life and its will". <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.61. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.61. </fnote>Until now, it is crucial to establish some terminological points before we continue. The nature of this collectivity is complicated for it entails different roles with different names. Rousseau is interested in determining the principles and procedures of a just and well ordered human community of which every member is subject to a common rule of law for personal conduct and which the observance of such rules is enforceable by all and applicable to all. The ultimate source of the legitimate authority, judge and director of these common rules is the sovereign. This concept of the sovereign is closely intertwined with the general will which will be explored later. Sovereignty is the exercise of this absolute power by the general will and is self limiting, for people place the same limits on the freedom of others that persons are willing to accept for themselves. For persons who have associated together to form this sovereign, to be governed by it constitute the state or body politic. As they actively deliberate the laws within the state, they are also citizens of that state. And lastly, as they are "ruled by the deliverances of the sovereign", they are also subjects of that state. With that, any subsequent references to the terms sovereign, sovereignty, citizens, body politic, subjects will be in line with such definitions. <fnote>Dent, N.J.H. (1988) Rousseau: An Introduction to his Psychological, Social and Political Theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, p.171. </fnote><heading>C. Legitimacy of the Social Contract </heading>The basis of its legitimacy stems from a general idea that "all legitimate authority among men must be based on covenants". Since the sovereign derives its power from the people themselves, "it is always everything it ought to be" and it simply could not be illegitimate. Rousseau does not believe in force being a basis for legitimacy as "might does not make right and that the duty of obedience is owed only to legitimate powers", therefore legitimacy of an association is fully established when citizens are themselves authors of the law and they legislate according to the general will and execute by just laws. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.53. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.63. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.53. </fnote>Its strength is derived from its legitimacy as well. Theoretically speaking, its strength comes from the "common force" of which "the votes of the greatest number always bind the rest". By entering the social contract, individuals consent to subject themselves to the decisions of the society by majority decisions and all laws passed. <heading>D. Quintessential of the social contract: The general will</heading>In this section, we will explore the concept and character of the general will as well as the methods and devices of which it is discovered, expressed, executed and sustained. Unlike earlier contract theorists such as Hobbes, Rousseau's true interest lays not in the social contract which "sinks into secondary importance", but the general will which is "the true vanguard of the people" that defines the characteristics of the state. The centrality of the solution lies in the general will. <fnote>Cobban, Rousseau and the Modern State. p.73. </fnote><fnote>Muschamp, D. (1993) Political Thinkers. United States: MacMillan Press, p.132. </fnote>Firstly, what is the general will? It is difficult to come to a definite conclusion on what it is due to possible conflicting interpretations however there are two possible trait marks that define it. It can be seen as a decision as well as a transcendent standard or principle. In effect, the former conceives the general will as the legislative arm of the social contract which has a law-making responsibility while the latter sees it as the binding force of the social contract. Furthermore, it is seen not only as an attribute of the people as an entirety but also as a property of each individual. It is the product of every citizen's reason as applied to determining what is in the common interest. <fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.98. </fnote>As Rousseau reiterated, it has to be distinctly defined apart from the 'will of all". The "will of all" refers to an aggregation of particular wills and "studies private interests" whereas the general will is "real will understood in the social context". While both are arithmetically similar in nature, the difference lies in the motivations behind individual decisions, while the "will of all" is driven by individual selfish interests, the general will is motivated by public good and places the benefits of the community over that of the individual. <fnote>Boucher, D. (2003) 'Rousseau' in David Boucher and Paul Kelly,eds, Political Thinkers: From Socrates to the Present. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 178. </fnote>There is also another defining characteristic of the general will. Its generality in formulation and application is derived "less from the number of voices than from the common interest which unites them". Essentially, it is only on this basis of this common interest that society must be governed for if the opposition of private interests made the establishment of societies necessary, it is the agreement of these similar interests that made it possible. Yet its formulation assumes that there exists an objective common good that is distinct from the particular interests and wishes of the individuals within society and that there is always a possibility of executing policies that will serve that common good. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.76. </fnote>Closely related to the above point, the general will, "to be truly what it is, must be general in its purpose as well as in its nature; that it should spring from all for it to apply to all; and that it loses its natural rectitude when it is directed towards any particular and circumscribed object". For it to "spring from all", there has to be a procedure or process by which the principles are formulated and enforced by every person involved. In addition, for it to "come from all", it has to be formulated on common interests; these principles will markedly and securely improve the material conditions for each associate beyond what it was if they were not associated with such principles as well as to afford each associate that recognition and honour of their being and standing as morally titled persons. The latter condition states that no one is above the law and none is exempted from the scope of application of the rule even though the extent of its impact may differ for everyone. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.75. </fnote>Even if the general will exist, the difficulty comes about in discovering it. This section will focus on the role of the Lawgiver which is the most anomalous feature of The Social Contract. The role and importance of the Lawgiver has to be examined within the transitional framework from pre-societal state to a civil society. At the start of the social contract, the people plucked from the state of nature are not likely to generate the will successfully for they lack the social spirit, sense of solidarity with others that only comes about after living together within a set of common social institutions over time. Therefore, at the very beginning of its formulation, the agglomeration of individuals would certainly fail to recognize where their common interests lies. Even if they perceive the common interest, there would probably be insurmountable problems of compliance for "citizens are going to lack an assurance of the cooperative intentions of their fellows and the whole social edifice would quickly collapse". With that context established, it is evidently crucial that there has to be a special individual to guide the people to frame suitable laws and mould the people into a moral and cultural community. <fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.129. </fnote><fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.129. </fnote>Henceforth, he reiterated that to kick start a civil society, "the effect would have to become the cause; the social spirit which must be the product of social institutions would have to preside over the setting up of those institutions; men would have to have already become before the advent of law that which they become as a result of law". <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.87. </fnote>Following its discovery, the next aspect is to examine how the general will is expressed. The state which is established by the social contract and upheld by the general will is animated and preserved by law. As Rousseau stated "laws are acts of the general will" hence they "obligate an individual as though it were self imposed even if he rejects it psychologically, provided he still consents to the social contract itself". However those laws are only legitimate when they "consider all subjects collectively" and they allow us to "remain as free as before" for the laws are merely an expression of what we desire. Consequently, the law is an act of sovereignty and an expression of the general will, which is not to be confused with the government whose sole legitimate function is to administer not make laws. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.82. </fnote><fnote>Noone, J.B. (1970) "The Social Contract and the idea of Sovereignty in Rousseau", The Journal of Politics Vol. 32: pp. 707. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.82. </fnote>With the expression of the general will springs forth the need for the execution of laws. Such responsibility resides in the government who holds the legitimate power to execute whose authority derives from the sovereign power of the people. It is an agent comprised of members known as magistrates who acts as the intermediate body between subjects and sovereign and puts to practice the public force in alignment with the directives of the general will. It is important to note that there is a clear distinction between the sovereign legislative body and the executive arm; the government that administers laws is created by the former. Despite the fundamental difference, both are complementary arms of the same "body politic" who has a will embodied in the legislative power and strength vested in the executive power though the power of the executive is always secondary to the power of the legislative. This view of government as possessing merely "a kind of borrowed and subordinate life" is of great importance in Rousseau's thought because of his conviction that man's servitude to arbitrary powers originated from the confusion between sovereignty and government; to misplace the power of the former into the hands of the latter, resulting in the illegitimate chains of rule. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.106. </fnote>Having established all the devices necessary for the legislation and execution of the general will, there are some crucial conditions for the devices to function effectively over time. The following safeguards are: Absence of sectional associations: The corporate will of these groupings will reflect self interest rather than common interest and such coalition formation against the common interest must be avoided at all costs. Absence of communications among individuals: Individuals must be unconstrained by any communication and political debates to remove any form of external influence on their decisions. This is in line with the Condorcet's Jury Theorem which states that the general will would emerge from a vote of the assembly if properly informed citizens were to deliberate and decided separately.  <fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.109. Condorcet showed that as long as each citizen has a better than 50:50 change of being right, than as the number of citizens increases, the probability of the majority being right gets closer and closer to 1, the condition that each person casts their votes independently is crucial here as if one's vote is dependent on another's, then the number of genuinely independent voices diminishes to that same extent. </fnote>Therefore, with these two conditions fulfilled, it will ensure that the will of the majority is an accurate interpretation of the general will. Whether or not these two conditions are achievable in practice is debatable. <heading>E. Benefits of the social contract </heading>As Rousseau stated clearly, "it is a legitimate covenant, because its basis is the social contract; an equitable one, because it is common to all; a useful one, because it can have no end but the common good; and it is a durable covenant because it is guaranteed by the armed forces and the supreme power". In essence, the three cardinal virtues of security, equality and liberty will be secured and protected. <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.77. </fnote><heading>Ensures Security </heading>"Distributive justice is at the center of Rousseau's concerns and the purpose for which men agree to live with each other in a society". Rousseau believes firmly that full fledged property rights can only be established with the formation of a political community via the social contract. In the social contract, every member gives not only himself but alienates 'all his resources, including his goods" to the state which assures each one of their lawful enjoyment because his legal rights to property are respected and secured by the collective force of the community. In all, it "defends and protects the persons and goods of each associate" by changing "usurpation into valid right and mere enjoyment into legal ownership".  <fnote>Kateb,G. (1961) "Aspects of Rousseau's Political Thought", Political Science Review Vol. 76: p.523. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.65. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.67-68. </fnote><heading>Maintains Equality</heading>Equality is clearly both the basis and consequence of the general will. To achieve security as mentioned above, it is only achievable in an ideal situation of equality where each gives himself entirely such that the condition is equal for all and it is also a prerequisite for liberty as inequality would only allow one segment of society to chain another. Equality is also achieved via the general will since all individuals have an equal right to the expression of the general will (procedural equality) as well as an equal duty to obey the laws that arise out of general will (substantive equality) . Simply put, all enjoy the same rights and bear the same obligations. Everyone has an equal consideration and entitlement to protection, equal interest in remaining alive (life) and in remaining master of his own will (liberty) such that "men become equal by covenant and by right" via the social contract. In this manner, the general will is as Hampsher-Monk suggests, a "constant tendency to equality". <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.68. </fnote><fnote>Hampsher-Monk, I. (2001) A History of Modern Political Thought. United Kingdom: Blackwell Publishers, p. 183. </fnote><heading>Achieve Liberty</heading>Freedom may have become problematic but any solution must preserve this vital feature of man's being. In this essay, freedom and liberty shall be used interchangeably. In order to understand how man 'remains as free as before", it is crucial to understand the different strands of freedom so as to comprehend how it allows man to acquire a new and better form of freedom and still remain "as free as before". As Rousseau emphasized, "civil association is the most voluntary act in the world", such an act of association produces a fundamental change in the nature of the associates. In essence, "what man loses by the social contract are his natural liberty and the absolute right to anything that tempts him and that he can take; what he gains by the social contract is civil liberty and the legal right to property in what he possesses" , which enables one to "remain as free as before". <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.65. </fnote>In simplistic terms, moral freedom is achieved when individual respects the laws that they have agreed to for laws are essential for preserving freedom. After all, Rousseau emphasizes in The Social Contract that man acquires moral freedom which enables him to transcend the "mere impulses of appetite" to be a "master of himself"  since the "obedience to a law one prescribes to oneself is freedom". The core issue is not that the our civil condition presents us with moral attributes we lacked or neglected before but rather there is an enforcement of law according to the general will which requires us to live by them and "make us effective followers of our own reason, creatures who actually enact the law of reason which is within us". <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.65. </fnote><fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.65. </fnote><fnote>Dent, N.J.H. (1988) Rousseau: An Introduction to his Psychological, Social and Political Theory. p.207. </fnote>Closely related to the above notion of moral freedom lies civil liberty which denotes freedom that is limited by the general will but gives the individual the legal right to possessions i.e. property. It refers to the freedom to act according to one self prescribed law because each individual is a participant in the law making process by voting. In the civil society, civil freedom is ensured when people as a sovereign have the power to enact and amend laws according to their common interest and the social contract is annulled once the general will does not dominate. Hence, Hobbes rightly asserts the "practical worthlessness of natural freedom" of which we would sacrifice that in favour of civil liberty. <fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.11. </fnote>Henceforth, his thesis relies on the claim that each individual wills the general will in order to argue that obedience to that general will is not a restriction on their freedom. With that, he effectively legitimizes the rule of law for if men are by nature free and equal in respect of all authority, their subjection to authoritative constraints can only be justified if the authority consented to is seen to be in their own interests, where interests are defined on the basis of the initial basis or position of freedom, security and equality. <heading>Critical analysis: Solution creating more problems? </heading>To fully grasp Rousseau's solution to the fundamental problem, it is insufficient to simply highlight the theoretical aspect of it. As we challenge Rousseau's solution by questioning his assumptions and generalizations, we open up another question in this field of enquiry; whether his theoretical solution can exist as a practical solution to the fundamental problem. With that, more questions arise. To what extent is it a legitimate solution? Is it not a solution that leads to more problems? Such areas of doubt will be examined below, though there may not be adequate answers to the questions raised, yet the fact that there are questionable areas speaks sufficiently for the theory. <heading>(a)The General Will</heading>The general will is at the heart of Rousseau's solution to the fundamental problem and the central concern about it lies with the issue of whether the general will can err. There is always a margin of error when drafting the general will, after all, he asserts that "it does not follow from it that the people's deliberations are always equally upright. One always want one's goods but one does not always see it: one can never corrupt the people but one can often cause it to be mistaken and only when it does, does it appear to want what is bad". <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.72. </fnote>The margin of error increases when we consider the implausibility of subordination of one's private interest to public interest. He neglects the inclination of man to want what is good instead of willing what is good. After all, we are dealing with "men as they are", why would individuals not pursue their particular interests at the expense of the common good? The only reason he provides that avoids this situation is that individual good and common good are not mutually exclusive though he still "needs to make the step from individuals seeking that good to the collective successfully doing so". <fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.104. </fnote>Furthermore, even if individuals in a society theoretically desire the public good over self interest, Rousseau fails to prove that every individual has the reasoning, judgment and information to rightly discern the public interest and vote for it. This is especially probable because politics is an art, not a science, the common interests is felt, not calculated.  <fnote>Muschamp, D. Political Thinkers. p. 134 </fnote>Most importantly, the general will itself is an ambiguous intangible concept. Similar to Hegel's rational organic state, it is not an empirical item discoverable by a simple majority vote that can be discerned by any electoral measures. Rousseau is weak on saying what a general will should include even though he covered extensively on what it should exclude. He does not give examples of the political institutions or society he thought necessary to embody and realize it. Who are the people to decide the general will? How would one know and why should that answer be preferred to another? What sort of agendas should be decided? What should be on the agenda and what should be omitted? Theoretically a general will can exist but logically speaking, the ideas of generality and will are mutually exclusive. Will, whatever its crudity as a psychological construct, is characteristically a concept of individuality, of particularity; it is only metaphorically that the will can be spoken of as general. Hence it becomes only a model of perfection. <heading>(b) The lawgiver </heading>In the words of Rousseau, the lawgiver is an "extraordinary man in the state"; he is to be aware of the passions that animate man yet not be subjected to those passions himself because if he were, he would not provide the guidance necessary for the people. Rousseau presents him as one with many tasks and responsibilities but fail to explain how he is going to perform all of them. After all, does such a mystical figure exist in reality? Even if he exists, where is he to be found? For someone with such a stature and knowledge, he must have been someone from another polity who has already been reshaped by participation in a political civil order. But it leads to the same problem of circularity of which the lawgiver is meant to resolve: how did the people of the lawgiver's native country get themselves guided to just laws?  <fnote>Bertram, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Rousseau and the Social Contract. p.134. </fnote>Hence, it is questionable whether the lawgiver is a plausible genius in reality. <heading>(c) Freedom</heading>Rousseau admits in the last four chapters of The Social Contract that "freedom is not a fruit of every climate, and it is not therefore within the capacity of every people" which downplays the plausible success of laws that are representative of the general will. Indeed, he shifts his focus from the achievement of individual freedom to how differing traits and circumstances of "a people" affect their receptivity to law. Such factors will include differences in "time of maturity", "size and population" and habits and characteristics of people.  <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.124. </fnote>Indeed, Rousseau contends that small countries are most conducive to individual freedom. The inverse relation between extent of freedom and size of country arises the "more the social bond is stretched, the slacker it becomes". <fnote>Rousseau, The Social Contract. p.51. To put it simply, if I as private citizen obey myself as sovereign in a state of 10 000 citizens, I contribute 1/10 000 to the sovereign authority, yet experience its full constraints. Hence, the larger the state, the more disproportionate the relationship between my obedience as subject and my role as sovereign in prescribing a law to myself, by extension, freedom and legitimacy is more easily achieved in small states. </fnote>Linked to the notion of freedom is the accusation raised against strands of tyranny in Rousseau's theory. Some totalitarian aspects include his doctrines on the civil religion "to make the people think they want what some have decided they ought to want", the abuse of power of the lawgiver and the death penalty who could be imposed on anyone who does not adhere to the general will. It seems plausible that the rule of the majority could lead to the tyranny of the majority, resulting in the coercion of minority groups, as evident in the spirit of Robespierre and the vanguard party of Lenin. Clearly, as J W Chapman stated, it is a fine example of ""achieving liberal ideas by totalitarian means" of which the intentions may be right but the means may be misguided. <fnote>Quote by Lester G Crocker in McManners, J. (1972) "The Social Contract and Rousseau's Revolt against Society", in Cranston, M. & Peters, R.S. et al (eds.) Hobbes and Rousseau: A collection of critical essays. New York: Doubleday and Co, p. 293. </fnote><fnote>Quote by J. W. Chapman in McManners, J. (1972) "The Social Contract and Rousseau's Revolt against Society", in Cranston, M. & Peters, R.S. et al (eds.) Hobbes and Rousseau: A collection of critical essays. New York: Doubleday and Co, p. 294. </fnote>Although Rousseau suggested some safeguards against tyranny, such safeguards would only hold true in his ideal polity where people are ruled by reason and hence the general will within a community truly represents what people want and laws as determined by majority decision are accurately representations of the general will. In our imperfect reality, his political philosophy would be allowing totalitarian measures. <heading>Practical worth: credible solution to a hypothetical problem? </heading>In effect, it is a theory detached from reality. It becomes evident that there are too many conditions to be fulfilled in order to achieve this ideal solution. Its implausibility arises from his method of laying down one contract containing one set of terms that was applicable to any and all societies and his reliance on arguments not based on historical premise and quantifiable research that leads to its fallacy. As such if we take the worth of any political theory to be weighed in relative terms such as its theoretical credibility and relevance to practical politics, it is safe to assert that Rousseau presents a solution to the fundamental problem but not the best nor most practical solution. <heading>Conclusion </heading>Even with its limitations and drawbacks as a practical solution, it will be unfair for us to impose our expectations of the theory before understanding his intentions. What Rousseau intended was to formulate an ideal civil society to which we should aware of and we should all aspire towards. He brings us through what is needed if individuals are to be liberated from the will of others and addresses faults in political culture and institutions that are plainly still with us in contrast to the idealistic social contract model he offers. By this manner, the strength of his theory lies in raising awareness of what is lacking and inadequate in civil society, for once we have identified the conditions of legitimate authority; we can see how impossible it would be to create it, so we are saddled with the inferior and illegitimate sort of societies which actually prevail. By deliberating resorting to such a paradox, he is not concerned to deny the received opinion which the paradox appears to challenge but to alert the reader of something which he might otherwise overlook. His fundamental focus is to provide a theoretical justification for the republic and not to the practical question of how it can be brought into existence. This is a doctrine whose only claim is to provide a solution to hypothetical problems and which does not pretend to offer a historical reconstruction of the way in which political societies evolved. Rousseau's purpose is to deal with the justification of society, not its origins. Henceforth, if we examined the fundamental problem and his accompanying solution to it with his intentions in mind, it is a noble attempt to fuse individual consent with the most distinctive and profound elements of contract theory, with his perfect unified ancient models built upon a foundational idea of the morality of the common good to bridge the connection between individual and state, such that each gains a fuller meaning. 