Governments commonly use fiscal policy to increase income in the economy. In response to the 1997 Asian financial crises, Thai prime-minister Thaksin tried to boost domestic consumption by increasing government-spending as loans to villagers. These measures were based on the logic that government-spending (G) is a component of aggregate demand (Z): Z = C 0 + C 1Yd + I + G, where C 0 is autonomous consumption, C 1 is income-dependent consumption, Yd is disposable income (total income minus taxes), and I is investment. <fnote>"Asia: In search of elusive domestic demand". The Economist. London: Oct 15, 2005.Vol.377 </fnote><figure/>Since aggregate demand equals national income (Z = Y), a rise in any of the components of Z causes a rise in income. In Fig1, an increase in government-spending from G to G 1 causes aggregate demand to rise from Z 0 to Z 1 and income to rise from Y 0 to Y 1. The final increase in income, dZ, that results from an increase in G is greater than the original increase in G, dG. In Fig2, we extend the line at Z 0 to form a right-angle triangle with vertices ABC, where sides BC and AC are of equal lengths dZ and dY. <figure/>When the initial change in G, dG, is compared to the length of side BC, dZ, the increase in government-spending provokes a larger-than-proportional increase in income. This 'multiplier effect' occurs because a fraction of the income injected into the economy by government-spending is used by households to consume goods. The same fraction of the income spent by these households on consumption is then used by the owners of the goods to consume goods themselves. This process continues, getting progressively smaller until the final change in income is dG * δY/δG, where δY/δG is the derivative of the income function with respect to G. The change in income caused by a change in government-spending can be calculated by finding δY/δG. To obtain an accurate derivative, we refine the equation Y = C 0 + C 1Yd + I + G. We treat express I as (b 0 + b 1Y - b 2i), where b 0 is non-income related investment, b 1 is the sensitivity of investment to income Y, and b 2 is the sensitivity of investment to the interest rate i. We also replace disposable income Yd by (Y - T), decomposing taxes T into (t 0 + t 1Y), where t 0 is non-income related taxes and t 1 is income tax. G is fixed exogenously by the government. This yields the equation:  FORMULA , simplifying to :  FORMULA  This equation, however, expresses equilibrium income only in the goods-market. To obtain an equation for equilibrium in the economy as a whole, we must consider financial markets as well through the IS-LM model (Fig3). At all points along IS, the goods-market is in equilibrium (the equation Y = (C 0 - C 1t 0 + b 0 - b 2i + G) / (1 - C 1 (1 - t 1) - b 1 ) is satisfied). At all points along LM, the financial-market is in equilibrium (real money supply M/P is equal to money demand M d , which equals d 1Y - d 2i, where d 1 is the sensitivity of money demand M d to income and d 2 is the sensitivity of money demand M d to interest rate). <figure/>At A, both goods and financial markets are in equilibrium. Equilibrium income Y e , found by solving IS and LM simultaneously, occurs at  FORMULA  Taking the partial derivative of Y with respect to G, one finds  FORMULA , the government expenditure multiplier. The greater this multiplier is, the more an increase in G will boost national income. The impact of different parameters on the effectiveness of fiscal policy can be hypothesised by observing their effect on δY/δG. Mathematically, enlarging any of parameters d 2, C 1 and b 1 enlarges the multiplier; these parameters make fiscal policy more effective. Enlarging the variables b 2, d 1 and t 1 makes the fraction smaller by enlarging the denominator - these parameters reduce the efficiency of fiscal policy. Graphical analysis suggests similar relationships: Fig4 shows that fiscal policy has more effect the shallower is IS: for a change in government-spending dG, a shift in the steep IS-curve (IS 1 to IS 1') causes income to increase only by distance , which is less than the increase in income that results when a shallow IS-curve shifts by the same amount dG (IS 2 to IS 2'). Since the slope of IS equals - (1 - C 1 (1 - t 1 ) - b 1 ) / b 2i, the IS-curve is shallower - and government-spending is more effective - the smaller is the absolute value of the slope, hence the greater are C 1 and b 1 and the smaller is t 1. <figure/>Similarly, fiscal policy is more effective the shallower is the LM-curve : <figure/>When IS shifts to IS' along a steep LM-curve (LM 1), the resulting increase in income from Y 0 to Y 1 is less than the increase in income from Y0 to Y1 that results from a shift of IS along a shallow LM-curve, LM 2. As the slope of LM is (d 1/d 2), fiscal policy will be more effective the smaller is the slope, hence the smaller is d 1 and the larger is d 2. Both mathematical and diagrammatical analyses suggest that the parameters d2, C1 and b1 increase the effectiveness of fiscal policy, while the variables b2, d1 and t1 do not. We now proceed to explaining the economic logic underlying these observations. The first effect of increased government-spending occurs in the goods market: an increase in G causes an increase in aggregate demand, which causes an increase in national income, which in turn increases AD, and so on. The extent to which the initial change in Y is multiplied into a larger increase in national income depends upon how much of this injection continues to circulate in the economy (as consumption), as opposed to how much is withdrawn (as savings). The larger is consumers' marginal propensity to consume (C 1), the greater the fraction of the original injection will be multiplied around the economy. Thus, fiscal policy has little effect on national income in China, as saving is "astonishingly high" at 25% of disposable income. The opposite is true of Korea, where C 1 is high due to high consumer confidence. The larger is C1, the more effective is government spending. <fnote>"Survey: The frugal giant." The Economist. London: Sep 24, 2005.Vol.376, Iss. 8445 </fnote><fnote>"Survey: The frugal giant." The Economist. London: Sep 24, 2005.Vol.376, Iss. 8445 </fnote><fnote>"Growth spurt." Business Asia; 2/20/2006, Vol. 38 Issue 4, p14-14 </fnote>An initial change in income is also more likely to generate further increases if the sensitivity of investment to income (b1) is high. In this case, a small rise in national income is sufficient to spark increased investment, which is itself an injection into the economy. An increase in G therefore causes IS to shift outwards to IS', with an accompanying rise in income (A to B in Fig6). <figure/>The movement from A to B reflects the impact of G on the goods market alone, however. Since the economy is in disequilibrium at B, (IS ≠ LM), this increase in income must feed back into the financial market. When income rises, individuals' level of financial transactions rises, as does their liquidity-demand and their money-demand M d. In Fig7, representing the money market, the shift in M d causes an excess demand for money (EDM). The extent of this EDM depends upon the sensitivity of money demand to income (d 1). This parameter varies between economies; in cases where d1 is low, the increase in income resulting from government spending will cause little EDM. <figure/>As money can be substituted for bonds, when M d increases, the demand for bonds falls, as does the price of bonds. This means that interest rate rises (i 0 to i 1) because there is a negative relationship between the price of bonds and the interest rate. The money market regains equilibrium at C. The extent to which the interest rate must increase to choke off EDM depends upon the sensitivity of money demand to interest rate (d 2). The higher is d2, the less interest rate will have to rise to reestablish money market equilibrium. This increase in interest rate is reflected by the move from B to C. <figure/>These dynamics influence the effectiveness of fiscal policy. If an increase in G causes i to rise in the financial market, this increases the price of loanable capital and reduces the amount of capital available to other borrowers: the government 'crowds out' other investors. This leads to a drop in investment; as investment is a component of national income, increased government-spending can backfire and cause income to drop (C to D in Fig8). Government-spending is therefore more effective when it causes a smaller rise in interest rate, in which case there is less crowding out. Thus, a low sensitivity of money demand to income (d1) and a high sensitivity of money demand to interest rate (d2) contribute to a more effective fiscal policy. The degree to which this rise in interest rate causes a subsequent decline in investment in the goods-market then depends on the sensitivity of investment to interest rate (b 2). In Poland, investment is highly responsive to changes in the interest rate: when "interest rates were cut to 5.5% in May from a peak of 19.0% in February 2001", investment levels "picked up" dramatically. The more responsive investment is to interest rate changes, the more crowding out will be caused by government-spending. A lower b2 can thus make fiscal policy more successful. <fnote>Europe Monitor, "Modest Recovery Likely". Emerging Europe Monitor: Central Europe. July 2003, Vol. 10 Issue 7. </fnote>Yet fiscal policy involves not only government-spending, but also taxation. Government-spending is itself a more effective form of fiscal policy than is taxation. This is because, whereas the entirety of any increase in G directly enters the circular flow of income, a cut in taxation increases disposable income, and some of the increased Yd is withdrawn from circulation as savings. (Note below that the government-spending multiplier δY/δG is larger than the taxation multiplier δY/δT). Similarly, income taxation is a less direct way of affecting income than is non-income taxation. The incidence of a sales tax, for example, falls more heavily upon the producer than on the consumer. A cut in sales tax increases income by lowering production costs of firms and increasing aggregate supply. By contrast, a cut in income tax impacts consumers' disposable income, which may then be saved rather than reinvested into the economy. A high rate of income tax also lowers the effectiveness of government-spending, as it reduces disposable income so that less of a change in G is multiplied around the economy. Mathematically, the taxation and government-spending multipliers are larger if taxation is assumed as exogenous than if income tax rate t 1 is accounted for. Without income tax, δY/δT is -C 1 / (1 - C 1 - b 1) and δY/δG is 1 / (1 - C 1 - b 1); with income tax, these multipliers shrink to δY/δT = -C 1 / (1 - C 1 (1 - t 1) - b 1) and δY/δG = 1 / (1 - C 1 (1 - t 1) - b 1) as their denominators enlarge. Thus, tax cuts based mostly on income tax may not be very efficient: in France, drastic plans to cut tax rates were criticised for the very reason that they "touch only income tax, not the other host of contributions that choke the tax-payer". <fnote>"When cuts aren't kind enough". Economist. 9/24/2005, Vol. 376 Issue 8445 </fnote>In summary, fiscal policy is most effective when investment is responsive to income, marginal propensity to consume is high, and money demand is sensitive to the interest rate. It is less successful when the rate of income tax is high, when investment is sensitive to the interest rate, or when money demand is sensitive to income. Thus, while government-spending in Argentina was "the central reason for impressive economic growth" in 2005, fiscal policy "does little to stimulate the [United States] economy". The effectiveness of fiscal policy varies greatly from one economy to the next. <fnote>"Consumer market insights: Consumers in Argentina are spending." Market: Latin America. Jan2006, Vol. 14 Issue 1, p3-3, 1/3p </fnote><fnote>Hashemzadeh, Nozar, and Saubert, Wayne, "The Effects of Bush's Tax Cuts on Income Distribution and Economic Growth in the United States." Problems and Perspectives in Management. 2004 Issue 3, p111-120 </fnote>