Why do some political systems enjoy enduring steadiness, civil order, legitimacy and effectiveness, while others seem perilously fragile? Identifying the causes of regime stability is a central concern for both politicians and political scientists. This is a difficult task, however, as stability is influenced not only by regime type and by the structure of the existing world order, but also by the norms, rules, habits, traditions and belief systems prevailing in a society. These values form a 'political culture' that filters the perceptions of political participants and shapes their behaviour. An unchanging political culture can foster an enduring political situation; accordingly, certain forms of political culture appear to be more conducive to regime constancy than others. There may be a fundamental relationship between political culture and stability. <fnote>Lijphart, Andrew, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration. London : Yale University Press, 1977, p4 </fnote>An established political culture can enhance the steadiness of a political system primarily because a consistent belief system breeds a consistent political environment. Indeed, Rousseau sees morality and custom as bases of political constancy. Thus, a political system that reflects and reinforces its society's long-established traditions achieves what Max Weber calls "traditional legitimacy": the regime becomes part of an accepted status quo that political actors do not question. Such legitimacy was sought by Saddam Hussein when taking power in Iraq in the 1990's. The Baathist leader adapted his executive and legislative bodies to the nation's customs - creating a tribalistic legal system and emphasizing the tribal roots of his party's members - so as to ensure his the permanence of his regime. By contrast, overturning cultural norms can have disastrous consequences on regime stability (Burke 1982). This logic partly explains the collapse of the communist system in the late 1980's: in attempting to reform Soviet policy away from tradition, Gorbachev allowed for criticism of the government (glasnost) and introduced political and economic restructuring (perestroika); these changes conflicted with the political culture of the time and arguably led to the downfall of the Soviet regime. Political constancy can thus depend greatly upon the political culture prevailing in a given society. <fnote>Rosamond, Ben, "Political Culture", in Axford, Barrie; Browning, Gary K.; Huggins, Richard; and Rosamond, Ben, Politics: an Introduction. 2nd ed, Routledge, 2002, p84 </fnote><fnote>Weber, Max, "Bases of Legitimate Order", Part 4 from Basic Concepts of Sociology,  URL  </fnote><fnote>Global Security, "Military: Societal Framework",  URL  </fnote><fnote>Rosamond, "Political Culture", p84. </fnote><fnote>Brzezinski, Zbignew, "The Cold War and its Aftermath", Foreign Affairs Vol.71 No.4 (1992) p.35 </fnote>Consequently, certain political scientists suggest that particular forms of political culture are more conducive to regime stability than others. Almond and Verba develop this argument in their 1963 study of political culture in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Mexico. After interviewing a large sample of respondents from each country, the investigators identify three ideal types of political culture, each of which has a distinct impact on political consistency. In a parochial culture, the electorate is ignorant of political events and rarely becomes involved in political activity; in a subject culture, citizens have wider knowledge, but feel politically impotent; and a participant culture comprises highly informed actors who are willing to take part in the political process. The authors explain that, while a subject culture may foster resentment in the masses and hence serve to destabilise a regime, a participant culture can also weaken the political system by causing a 'democratic overload', where excessive pluralism hinders the decision-making process. In order to maximize regime constancy, therefore, Almond and Verba advocate the creation of a 'civic culture', in which citizens feel influential but still recognise the state's legitimacy and power. This conclusion establishes a direct causal chain between political culture and the permanence of democratic systems. <fnote>Rosamond, "Political Culture", p.86 </fnote>For Kavanagh, however, these findings rest on a flawed methodology. By assuming that political culture is uniform throughout the countries they consider, Almond and Verba dismiss the possible existence of subcultures within these societies. Yet, in numerous states, certain social groups do possess a different set of political attitudes to that of the majority. Furthermore, the presence of such subcultures can itself have a significant influence on the stability of a political system. Whether they reflect class, ethnic, religious, linguistic or even generational distinctions, cultural divides are generally perceived to weaken a regime. Almond himself identifies different forms of democracy (1956), which he relates to different degrees of fragmentation in political culture, and hence to varying levels of political stability. He associates 'Anglo-American Democracy' with a "homogenous, highly secular political culture"; such a regime hosts numerous interest groups and autonomous parties, which allow it to "respond more flexibly to internal and external demands than . . . most other systems". By contrast, 'Continental European Democracy' has a more divided political culture. Such systems are generally unstable, as sub cultural rivalry makes democracy difficult to sustain and can easily lead to the emergence of dictatorial rule. According to this interpretation, therefore, the relative fragmentation of political culture is a decisive factor in determining political stability. <fnote>Rosamond, "Political Culture", p.91 </fnote><fnote>Lijphart, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration, p6 </fnote><fnote>Lijphart, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration, p6 </fnote><fnote>Lijphart, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration, p6 </fnote>Almond's hypothesis is contested, however. Andrew Lijphart suggests that even societies with markedly diverse political cultures can achieve political constancy. In a 'consociational democracy', Lijphart argues, cooperation between the leaders of different segments of the population can offset the potentially dividing influence of cultural cleavages. Case studies of successful consociational democracies in both developed and developing nations illustrate that "[while] it may be difficult, . . . it is not at all impossible to achieve and maintain stable democratic government in a plural society". In Belgium, for example, Catholic, Liberal and Socialist "spiritual families" coexist. These subcultures are clearly divided from one another, and their membership is mutually exclusive; nonetheless, their leaders' cooperative attitudes ensure a secure political situation. Similarly, between 1943 and 1975, Lebanon boasted a highly multicultural executive, with a Maronite president, a Suni Prime Minister, a Shiite chairman of legislature, and a Greek deputy Prime Minister. The tendency for fragmented political cultures to destabilize regimes can therefore perhaps be countered by careful organization of the state executive. <fnote>Lijphart, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration, p1 </fnote><fnote>Lijphart, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration, p1 </fnote><fnote>Lijphart, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration, p16 </fnote>Maintaining a consociational democracy is a complex process, however, which requires specific power-sharing institutions. If they are to govern a country jointly, the different elites must form a 'grand coalition' and they must agree to abide by a mutual veto; the representation of different subcultures in this elite should be proportional to the size of the cultural groups concerned, and each of these groups should be autonomous. This form of political system can seem impractically complex, and critics suspect that its cultural cleavages could cause a country to secede. On the contrary, however, Lijphart argues that in a deeply divided society, enforcing a homogenous political culture would lead to instability. As the value systems of distinct groups are deeply rooted in tradition, replacing plural political cultures by unified ones would "stimulate segmented cohesion and intersegmental violence rather than national cohesion." The influence of both fragmented and unified political cultures on a regime's sustainability may consequently depend on the particularities of a given societal context. <fnote>Lijphart, Democracy in Plural Societies: a Comparative Exploration, p4 </fnote>Political culture influences political durability through more than domestic forces, however; it can also shape external factors crucial to a regime's sustainability. In particular, some suggest that wide disparities between the political cultures of different states can lead to international discord. Thus, Huntington foresees a 'clash of civilizations' between the Islamic and Western worlds, arguing that "in the new world, . . . the most pervasive, important and dangerous conflicts will be between people belonging to different cultural entities". He attributes the current tensions between the West and Islam to the contrasted political values between these two groups: whereas the West espouses secular authority and democratic ideals, Islam supports religious leadership and rejects democracy. Norris and Inglehart highlight other deep cultural differences in the two regions' contrasted attitudes towards gender equality. According to a World Values Study, a cultural clash does exist between these societies: the modern-day tension between the Islamic and Western worlds may indeed be a product of their conflicting political cultures. <fnote>Huntington, Samuel, The Clash of Civilisations and the Remaking of World Order. New York : Simon & Schuster, 1996, p.28. </fnote><fnote>Norris and Inglehart, "Islam and the West: Testing the 'Clash of Civilisations' Thesis". </fnote><fnote>Norris, Pippa and Inglehart, Ronald, "Islam and the West: Testing the 'Clash of Civilisations' Thesis". Harvard University Working Paper.  URL  </fnote>It therefore seems clear that a fundamental relationship between political culture and political stability does exist. This has implications when considering the strategies that a regime can use to retain power - a government may choose to manipulate the belief system of its citizens to reap personal benefits. Indeed, Marxists argue that political socialization can become a mechanism of control, and that the dominant ideas of any moment of history simply reflect the interests of the ruling class. Today, Marxists argue, the current capitalist class is indoctrinating the masses into the ideology of liberal democracy to create an artificial political culture that conceals the inequalities in the capitalist system and legitimizes their regime's permanence. Such socialisation is believed to occur through what Louis Althusser (1971) terms 'ideological state apparatuses', seemingly private institutions - such as the family or religion - that actually serve to spread the state's ideological hegemony. However, one must keep in mind that for those who see liberal democracy as maximizing individual freedom, political socialization can instead be considered as a beneficial process. Furthermore, a state can rely on political culture to maintain its constancy in perfectly transparent ways or in order to avoid international conflict, in which case the manipulation of public values becomes a beneficial endeavour rather than one of oppression. <fnote>Rosamond, "Political Culture", p.93 </fnote><fnote>Rosamond, "Political Culture", p.93 </fnote>To conclude, political culture does have a significant impact on the stability of political systems. This does not mean, however, that certain forms of political culture are naturally conducive to regime steadiness while others invariably lead to disorder. No single political value system ensures unconditional political constancy: while a fragmented political culture can help a consociational democracy to thrive, for instance, it may become a source of conflict in a consensual democracy. The success of distinct political cultures in maintaining stability depends entirely on the nature of existing regimes, and each form of political culture is best suited to a specific political system. So as to achieve stability, a regime must adapt itself to the beliefs and values of its citizens. Understanding the dynamics of political culture and political systems is a crucial task for any regime that aspires to sustainable rule. 