In the field of political science today, one word in particular seems to be "on the lips of politicians, professors and pundits alike": globalization. This phenomenon has become "the buzzword of the 1990s, the primary attractor of books, articles, and heated debate", particularly because of its controversial and uncertain consequences. Whilst proponents of globalization claim that the phenomenon increases worldwide equality by liberalizing trade, allowing all citizens access to a global market and creating a worldwide 'family' of social and cultural interconnectedness, many others resist globalization on the grounds that it undermines state sovereignty or that it exacerbates income differentials and culture loss within societies. But what really is globalization? The process is generally understood as a reduction in the importance of national boundaries at all levels of socio-economic life; as put by Anthony Giddens, however, "there are few terms that we use so frequently but which are in fact as poorly conceptualized as globalization." Reaching an accurate understanding of what globalization comprises - and of whether such a process really exists at all - is vital to assessing its advantages and disadvantages. Analyzing the effects of economic, political and cultural globalization should enable us to establish whether the phenomenon is to be welcomed in our societies, or whether it is rather to be feared. <fnote>Brecher, Jeremy and Costello, Tim. Global Village or Global Pillage? South End Press. Pg. 4. </fnote><fnote>Kellner, Douglas. "Theorizing Globalization". Sociological Theory, Volume 20, Number 3. Pg. 285. </fnote><fnote>Giddens, Anthony. Essential Matter: "Globalization Excerpts from a Keynote Address at the UNRISD Conference on Globalization and Citizenship". UNRISD. Accessed at:  URL  </fnote>Before delving too deep into the implications of globalization, we must recognize that many political scientists doubt the novelty and the very existence of this process. 'Globalisation skeptics' such as Hirst and Thompson argue that today's levels of financial and economic integration are not unprecedented; for them, globalization is "nothing new", and the heavy emphasis placed on it in the last decade simply allows states to blame failed policies on uncontrollable global forces. Some historians indeed argue that globalization is a very old process: O'Rourke and Williamson pinpoint the start of globalization in the 1820s, Janet Abu-Lughod extends this to the 1350s, and Jerry Bentley locates the beginnings of globalization with Colombus's discovery of the Americas. Others argue that today's world is not as globalised as it is claimed to be, as states remain significantly protectionist, particularly in the agricultural sector. National borders indeed continue to constrain trade - Dani Rodrik points out that the volume of trade between two Canadian provinces is for instance twenty times larger than between a province and an equidistant US state. Even when globalisation is deemed to exist, theorists such as Robert Latham reject the process as an incoherent "absence of order" involving contradictory processes - integration and fragmentation, diffusion and concentration, localization and transnationalisation. Whilst the majority of political scientists nonetheless insist that globalisation remains "the most fundamental phenomenon of our times", these alternative viewpoints should be kept in mind when considering globalisation's impact on world politics. <fnote>Hirst, Paul, and Thompson, Grahame. Globalisation in Question. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1999. </fnote><fnote>O'Rourke, Kevin H. and Williamson, Jeffrey G. "When did globalization begin?" European Review of Economic History, Pg. 24. </fnote><fnote>Rodrik, Dani. "Feasible globalizations". NBER Working Paper No. 9129. September 2002. </fnote><fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics: A introduction to international relations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005 (2nd edition)). </fnote><fnote>Giddens, Anthony. Essential Matter: "Globalization Excerpts from a Keynote Address at the UNRISD Conference on Globalization and Citizenship". UNRISD. Accessed at:  URL  </fnote>The majority of recent globalization literature views the process in predominantly economic terms. Theorists such as Nicholas Crafts define globalization as, "the integration of markets that results from the reduction of barriers to international trade and factor flows". This economic globalization promotes the convergence of international prices, facilitates world trade, and broadens the role of trans-national corporations and other international producers on the world stage. The advantages of such trade liberalization are obvious, based primarily on the theory of comparative advantage: if each country, rather than spreading its production efforts over many industries, specializes in the production and exportation of the good that it produces most efficiently, all countries will trade in specialized low-cost goods and consume outside of their initial production possibilities. Not only will this benefit the consumers in each country, but income equality should be attained worldwide as all citizens have access to same-priced products from the global market; moreover, relaxed international borders should enable the free flow of technology between countries, allowing all countries to reach equal levels of development. China's adoption of an economically open stance in the 1980s was largely guided by such reasoning, and today generates unparalleled growth rates of nearly 9% of the country's GDP; such 'success stories' lend support to the trade liberalization arguments made by the World Bank and other proponents of economic globalization. <fnote>Crafts, Nicholas. 'Globalisation and Growth: an Historical Perspective.' The World Economy 27, no. 1 (2004). Pg. 47. </fnote><fnote>Crafts, Nicholas. 'Globalisation and Growth: an Historical Perspective.' The World Economy 27, no. 1 (2004). Pg. 44. </fnote>This viewpoint, however, is flawed: beyond its clearly idealistic dimension, it ignores the damaging side-effects of trade liberalization currently experienced across the world. Jeremy Brecher and Tim Costello point out that economic globalization, by forcing national markets to compete for corporate investment by multinational companies, fuels a 'race to the bottom' as governments drastically relax labour, social and environmental legislations so as to best attract such investment. Globalisation for this reason provokes a 'downward spiral': as countries cut back on wages and social spending, income and infrastructures deteriorate, causing the economy to stagnate - and forcing governments to further cut regulations in a yet more desperate attempt to capture investment and to 'save' the economy. Economic globalisation furthermore causes a loss of governmental control in countries, as states' manipulation of their monetary and fiscal policy becomes subject to the policies of international financial institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank. As Dani Rodrik points out, such deterioration in sovereignty in turn erodes democracy, meaning that "international economic integration [could] contribute to domestic social disintegration". This risk also lies in the reduction of barriers to trade and investment, which accentuate asymmetries between groups that can cross international borders (such as owners of capital and skilled workers) and those that cannot (predominantly unskilled workers, who remain unemployed as cheaper substitutes for their labour are found abroad). Economic globalization may thus be exacerbating wealth inequalities within countries and undermining nations' democratic stability. <fnote>Brecher, Jeremy and Costello, Tim. Global Village or Global Pillage? South End Press, Pg. 25. </fnote><fnote>Rodrik, Dani. Has Globalisation Gone Too Far? Institute for International Economics, Pg. 2. </fnote>The side-effects of globalization spread beyond sub-state relations; economic inequality is also significantly deepening at the international level. Developing states in particular are disadvantaged in the world market, being forced to compete with the exceedingly low prices set by more technologically advanced and heavily subsidizing nations. As a result of these processes, globalization may be channeling income away from poor countries and unskilled sectors of society and towards richer countries and more economically-developed sectors. This is contributing to the polarization of resources in the hands of a "globalisation elite" and to increasingly vast global income disparities: whilst in 1970 the richest fifth of the world population received thirty times more income than bottom fifth, for instance, by 1989 they received sixty times more. Inequality is likewise spreading in global money markets, in which obstacles to capital flows are disappearing even more rapidly than in the goods market. Interstate transactions, as well as the set of rules which powerful countries impose on global finance, are rapidly increasing. One the one hand, such financial integration is claimed to stimulate economies by allowing capital to be allocated to the most effective and socially-desirable activities, regardless of government intervention and national boundaries. On the other hand, however, whilst the richer segments of global society gain greater access to this capital, the poorer segments are made more fragile as capital can be instantaneously removed from their grasp. The unexpected financial crises encountered by Mexico in 1994 and the 'Asian Tigers' in 1994 due to sudden withdrawal of international investment point to the potential dangers of today's deepening financial integration. The gains of economic globalization are clearly unevenly distributed, both in the goods and money markets - as a result, despite the appeal of trade liberalization theories, the phenomenon may foster conflict between nations as well as within them. <fnote>Kellner, Douglas. "Theorizing Globalization". Sociological Theory, Volume 20, Number 3. Pg. 285. </fnote><fnote>Brecher, Jeremy and Costello, Tim. Global Village or Global Pillage? South End Press, Pg. 25 </fnote><fnote>Sinclair, Timothy J. and Thomas, Kenneth P. "Structure and Agency in International Capital Mobility". London and New York: Palgrave, 2001. Pg. 30. </fnote><fnote>Rogoff, Kenneth. "International institutions for reducing global financial instability". Working Paper 7265. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1999. </fnote><fnote>Rodrik, Dani. Has Globalisation Gone Too Far? Institute for International Economics, Pg. 4. </fnote>Economic globalization's benefits are thus significantly offset by its side-effects on countries that do not have the political and economic power to impact decisions at the global level. Naomi Klein accordingly labels economic globalization the "new imperialism", a means by which Western powers reinforce their dominance over less developed states. Similarly, Susan Strange sees economic globalization as a political project that "has not happened entirely by accident". For Strange, "the shift from state authority to market authority has been in large part the result of state policies . . . for 'reasons of state'." If economic globalisation is indeed planned by the powerful states in today's world, it may be designed to serve these states' short term interests only. Do these interests coincide with the long-term global interest and with the interests of less influential countries? The dangerous consequences of trade openness and financial liberalisation suggest that the answer is worryingly negative. Economic globalization, however, is not the only facet of globalization today; indeed, if it were, a more appropriate term for the process would be 'triadisation' - so far 'deep' economic integration only really covers North America, Europe and East Asia. Political globalization, on the other hand, very likely extends to all states and communities worldwide. This form of globalization is characterized by a diffusion of state power, both in the supranational direction (as state sovereignty is redistributed amongst global and regional policy coordinators such as the European Union, the United Nations and international financial institutions) and in the transnational direction (as governments increasingly compete for power with transnational companies and NGOs). In the face of such changes, 'hyper-globalisers' such as Kenichi Ohmae predict the "end of the nation-state", arguing that, due to the internationalization of investment, consumer habits, and information technology, the nation-state is becoming obsolete and is being replaced by region-states or zones of specialized economic activity. To what extent can such transformations be considered beneficial for the global population? Although political globalization has provoked many discussions concerning the loss of state sovereignty, one must question whether sovereignty is after all truly a positive or necessary force in today's world order. The coordination of state policies at the regional level (as exemplified in the European Union) or globally (as developed in the UN) is arguably desirable, as it fosters interdependency amongst nations and thereby reduces the likelihood of war between states. Political globalization is thus seen by many states and theorists as a wholly advantageous project. <fnote>Giddens, Anthony. Essential Matter: "Globalization Excerpts from a Keynote Address at the UNRISD Conference on Globalization and Citizenship". UNRISD. Accessed at:  URL  </fnote><fnote>Ohmae, Kenichi. The End of the Nation-State. Redwood Books, Pg. 5. </fnote>The desirability of this globalization however depends heavily on the adequacy of the supranational institutions which would govern the new international system. Dani Rodrik warns that globalization exposes states to a Political Trilemma, by which deepening one's economic integration with other states comes at the cost either of a country's democracy, or of its national power and sovereignty. Were today's international institutions fully effective in substituting for national power, political globalization would be without risks; as it is, however, in a world in which the UN and the Bretton Woods institutions are increasingly facing legitimacy crises, many states prefer to hold on to their sovereignty, dangerously choosing to obtain economic integration at the expense of democracy instead. Indeed, Daniel Drache remarks that, since the end of the Cold War and of states' ideological preoccupations with welfare and social equality, "markets are no longer deemed to serve any larger purpose in accommodating full employment objectives or other equity issues". Accordingly, Drache claims, governments are today focusing primarily on issues of trade liberalization and are abandoning their prior concerns with the "democratization of wealth" . Similar critiques of political globalization are issued by Devetak and Higgott, who warn that justice may be compromised in a world where "the social bond is constantly being disrupted or transformed by globalization". They argue that, as traditionally concepts of justice have been based on "the presence of a stable political society . . . and a Westphalian cartography of clear lines of authority", in the absence of state power international institutions would have to be exceptionally well-structured in order to preserve justice in the global community. As with the side-effects of economic globalization, the possibly damaging consequences of political globalization must be countered by effective, unbiased international institutions. <fnote>Rodrik, Dani. "Feasible globalizations". NBER Working Paper No. 9129. September 2002. </fnote><fnote>Drache, Daniel. "Globalization: Is There Anything to Fear?" Centre for the Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation, Warwick University. 2005. </fnote><fnote>Drache, Daniel. "Globalization: Is There Anything to Fear?" Centre for the Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation, Warwick University. 2005. </fnote><fnote>Devetak, Richard, and Higgott, Richard. "Justice Unbound? Globalisation, States and the Transformation of the Social Bond". Centre for the Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation, Warwick University. 2005. </fnote>One may argue that the two forms of globalization discussed thus far only indirectly affect the majority of the world population - state governments, international institutions and multinational corporations alone are first hit by the transformations wrought by economic and political globalization. Cultural globalization, however, bypasses the state and its policy-making and affects citizens of every country on the individual level. This form of globalization is perhaps the most potent of the three, as it comprises an abstract process - essentially, the global spread of a common ideology - and cannot therefore be regulated by supranational bodies. On the one hand, cultural globalization has been acclaimed for increasing individuals' exposure to the cultures of others and for creating 'cosmopolitan citizens' who hold different communities' values in high respect and who are well-disposed to transnational cooperation and altruism. Unfortunately, this view may however be highly idealistic. In practice, cultural globalization has been targeted by many for being a one-way process, spreading predominantly Western (and particularly North American) values to the rest of the world whilst undermining minority cultures. George Ritzer criticizes this "McDonaldisation" of society, pointing out that, as the United States multiplies its economic ventures around the world, it replaces culturally-laden domestic enterprises and modifies consumption habits so that these fit the 'American way of life'. Storm and Rao warn that the creation of a 'monoculture' under United States hegemony may well provoke a dangerous 'nationalism backlash' as countries react to American cultural dominion with "growing support for cultural-nationalist, populist, [and] sometimes fascist, parties" . This has been illustrated by recent rightist electoral trends in France and the Netherlands, as well as by the political strength both of India's Hindu-nationalist BJP party and of religious fundamentalist parties in the Islamic world 25. To combat aggressive nationalist tendencies and the dangers of culture loss, the homogenizing of cultural differences fostered by globalization must be halted before it becomes irreversible. <fnote>Ritzer, George. The McDonaldization of Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press, 1993. Pg. 40. </fnote><fnote>Storm, Servaas, and Rao, Mohan J. "Market-Led Globalization and World Democracy: Can the Twain Ever Meet?" Development and Change, Vol. 35, No 3 (2004). Pg. 575. </fnote>To conclude, in spite of the positions held by globalization skeptics, it is clear that globalization does exist in today's world and that it may be revolutionizing the contemporary international system. Whether this is desirable or not largely depends on the effectiveness of supranational organizations and regional groups in monitoring the harmful effects of political, economic and cultural globalization, and in ensuring an equal distribution of its benefits. As put by Professor Keith Griffin, "many problems generally attributed to globalization . . . arise because, so far, we lack effective democratic institutions at the global level . . . we have a closely integrated and rapidly expanding global economy, but not a global political system." For now, the harm caused by globalization seems to far outstrip the benefits; there are too many losers and not enough winners. But even the winners are not immune to down-sides of globalization; as Dani Rodrik points out, "social disintegration is not a spectator sport - those on the sidelines also get splashed with mud from the field". If globalization is to become a sustainable force which strengthens the world in which it operates, the efficient 'global political system' which Keith Griffin alludes to must be developed without delay. <fnote>Storm, Servaas, and Rao, Mohan J. "Market-Led Globalization and World Democracy: Can the Twain Ever Meet?" Development and Change, Vol. 35, No 3 (2004). Pg. 570. </fnote><fnote>Rodrik, Dani. Has Globalisation Gone Too Far? Institute for International Economics, Pg. 32. </fnote>