Throughout history, the world's poorest countries have faced challenges to economic growth, ranging from disadvantageous factor endowments to inefficient institutional frameworks. The past decades have seen the emergence of another developmental barrier in the form of HIV/AIDS. To what extent does HIV/AIDS truly hinder a country's economic development? Does under-education, in turn, contribute to the spread of HIV/AIDS? These questions can partially be answered by comparing a sample of 50 non-OECD countries based on their HIV prevalence levels (measured as a percentage of the total population aged 15 to 49), on their primary school completion rates (a percentage of the total population's relevant age group), and on their Global National Income per capita (gross national income, converted to current US $ and adjusted for price and exchange rate variations using the World Bank's Atlas Method, then subsequently divided by a country's midyear population). Due to the scarce availability of data spanning all chosen 50 countries, this study will focus not on the years 1995, 2000 and 2003, but on 1999, 2000 and 2003, in an attempt to answer the above questions. <fnote>All data was obtained from the World Bank Group website:  URL  </fnote><fnote>"World Development Indicators: Dataset and Subject Overview", ESDS International. Internet. Accessed at:  URL  </fnote>To assess the impact of any social factors on economic development, it is necessary to find whether these countries are growing or not. This has been done by calculating average rates of annual growth between 1999 and 2000, and between 2000 and 2003. These rates were obtained through the compound annual jump growth formula: FV = PV (1+r)t, where FV is the future value of GNI per capita (for instance, the 2003 data), PV is the present value (the 2000 data), r is the growth rate and t is the years between PV and FV. Rearranging for r, this gives: r = (FV/PV)1/t- 1. When using Excel, this was expressed as: ((E4/D4)^(1/3))-1, where the 2003 and 2000 values are in cells E4 and D4 respectively. The results of these calculations are shown in Appendix 1 below. This data can be better visualised in the form of a scatter plot, where countries' average annual growth rates in 1999-2000 (Period 1) are plotted against 2000-2003 (Period 2). The Excel Chart Wizard yields the following graph: <figure/>Countries growing faster in 2000-2003 than in 1999-2000 are here represented as points that are closer to this graph's y-axis (above the added 45º line in the graph's top-right quadrant and below it in the bottom-left quadrant), while points lying closer to the x-axis (below the 45º line in the top-right quadrant) represent slower-growing countries. Unfortunately, such graphical analysis is rather difficult to read accurately. A more practical approach would be to plot countries against their growth rates, using two series: Series 1 (1999-2000, blue points below) and Series 2 (2000-2003, pink points). In the interests of legibility, the fifty countries were split into five such graphs of 10 countries, in which countries were attributed numbers (featured in Appendix 1 below). By comparing these graphs' series, the countries growing faster in the second period can easily be distinguished from those growing slower (see Table 1 below): <figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><table/><table/>Now that these countries' growth rates have been established, they can be compared to the two social indicators mentioned, HIV and primary school completion levels. Countries' relative performances in these two factors can be efficiently compared by considering their frequency distributions. The distributions given at left suggest that the majority of non-OECD countries have rather low HIV rates (39 countries out of 50 do not exceed the 6% level), and that extremely high HIV prevalence (of 20% or higher) is thankfully rare - only found in 3 of the analysed countries. Drastically low primary school completion levels (below 22%) are similarly rare, existing in only one country out of the 50 studied. Though useful, these distributions are however problematic: the Excel programme calculates frequencies by organising the data into eight "bins" of equal size, which, although accurate, are based on impractical decimal values (such as 33.14% above). When one attempts to better visualize this data in a frequency histogram - focusing here on the primary school completion levels - the Excel-generated chart accordingly uses the same impractical bins: <figure/>To simplify the current analysis, a revised histogram based on simpler self-generated bins - once again specific to primary school completion rates - can be created. To find how many bins (K) are needed, the following calculations can be made: 2 K must ≥n, therefore where n = 50 countries, K ≥ 6 bins. The bin width is found by dividing the range of the data (in this case, 78) by this value of K (6), giving a width of 13. From the resulting bins and their frequencies (at right), a more comprehensive histogram for school completion rates can be plotted: <table/><figure/>This analysis provides a relatively positive outlook on primary school completion rates: by far most frequently countries' rates lie in the highest bin (between 87 and 100%); however, the second-most frequent primary school completion level in these countries lies in the lowest bin (between 0 and 35%). These results therefore suggest that non-OECD countries' primary school completion levels may be distributed around extremes - either a very high rate of schooling is maintained, or an extremely low one. <table/>To better investigate these  FORMULA  frequencies, this data can be reviewed in terms of summary statistics. Table 4 indeed indicates that most countries boast high levels of primary school completion, as 92% is the mode (the most frequently-occurring value). The measure of skewness corroborates this analysis - being a negative value, it suggests that most of the data is concentrated towards the right of the graph, or closer to the 100% maximum. The mean of 69.4% (the sum of data values x divided by the number of countries analysed N, using the formula ) however suggests that some worryingly low rates persist in quite a few countries. This again implies inequality in the distribution of primary schooling in non-OECD states. The degree of this inequality can be more closely analysed through measures of dispersion. Standard deviation, firstly, measures to what extent values are spread about the data's mean - the higher the deviation, the less common the mean value is and the more unequal the frequency distribution. Standard deviation follows the formula: FORMULA , where x is the data's arithmetic mean, and N is the population size (in this case, 50). In the Excel programme, the "population" option for standard deviation calculations was selected - as opposed to the "sample" option, as the fifty countries analysed are not a sample of a larger group of countries. Both the result to this formula (a standard deviation of 26.1916) and the data's range (there is a 78% difference between the lowest primary school completion rate and the highest) are unusually high. This indicates, as the central tendency measures did above, that schooling rates among non-OECD countries are very unequally distributed - perhaps due to disparate levels of educational funding and international aid provided to these states. To which extent is a country's economic growth impacted by these HIV and education levels? This can be investigated by calculating two sets of unweighted averages for these social variables: one set for the "faster-growing" group of countries identified above, and one for the "slower-growing" group. Comparing these averages discloses surprising results, as can be seen in Appendix 2 below: unexpectedly, the "faster-growing" countries in fact have the lower average rate of primary school completion (approximately 65% compared to 79% for the "slower-growing" group), and the higher rate of HIV prevalence (approximately 5.44% compared to 1.67% in the "slower-growing" group). At first glance this defies all theories pointing to the harmful impact of AIDS on economies - which claim that the virus decimates a country's potential working force and burdens it with towering health care costs - as the data correlates high levels of HIV/AIDS with economic growth. Furthermore, these figures suggest that education is not conducive to economic growth, as the countries with the highest primary school completion rates lie in the "slower-growing" group. Before the data above is judged to be nonsensical, however, one must temporarily ignore growth rates and focus on the relationship between the two social variables. Here, as expected, high levels of AIDS do coincide with lower education levels. The fact that these are illogically both found in faster-growing countries does not nullify the data; it may simply suggest that this study's categorization of countries into "faster-growing" and "slower-growing" groups may be inaccurate. Indeed, this separation was based on countries' competence over a very limited time period (the years 1999 to 2003), and is therefore poorly representative of their long-term growth potential. In summary, this study demonstrates that a country's economic growth is a continuous, long run process that cannot merely be deduced from viewing GNI figures over three years. This analysis's method of distinguishing faster-growing countries from slower-growing ones was further flawed because it included countries in the "faster" group (for instance, country 13 - Cote d'Ivoire) that were not growing at all in the second period - their GNI levels were in fact dropping, but at a slower rate than they were in the first period. Also, the growth formula used above incorrectly assumes that growth is compounded annually rather than measured continuously. Moreover, per capita income itself is not a wholly accurate measure of development, as it only averages GNI and ignores other influential factors of economic growth, such society's income distribution. For now, therefore, analysis of this data based on its frequency distributions and on its measures of dispersion and of central tendency can only tell us that there is a correlation between under-education and HIV/AIDS prevalence; this explains the increasing importance of information campaigns in combating the spread of the virus today. The data further indicates that both of these social indicators are unevenly spread throughout OECD countries. Before relevant conclusions pertaining to growth can be drawn, however, a measurement of economic development that is more comprehensive and accurate than per-capita GNI must be found. <heading>Complementary websites providing useful information on developing countries'performance in meeting the Millennium Development Goals:</heading>Having completed the statistical analysis above, the conclusions drawn should be put into context. Growth in developing countries has recently been given significant direction through the establishment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Countries' performance in meeting these goals is well evaluated in following websites: Website 1 (see 'Sources Consulted' below for details) provides a highly useful introduction to the MDGs by fully describing all eight goals and providing detailed links to each of them. These links not only supply further information on the goals themselves, but offer links to other websites and key agencies relating to each goal in question (the 'Goal 1' page on eradicating hunger, for instance, provides a link to the World Food Programme's website). Links to online campaigning sites are also available here, enabling readers to personally promote the MDGs if they wish to. Additionally, website 1 explains how the MDGs differ from previous UN commitments, which is especially useful in analysing the potential efficiency of the goals. Websites 2 and 3 provide useful antitheses to Website 1's unmitigated support of the goals, by viewing the MDGs in a more critical light. Website 2 thus reveals that these goals may be unrealistic, as achieving them would require certain developing countries to "out-perfor[m] even the historical rates of progress of the rich countries today". Again, both sites are also offer highly practical links: Website 3 offers a link to the UN's webpage on the MDGs, which allows readers to compare its own MDG criticisms to a far more positive outlook; this site furthermore provides links to its sources, through which one may read into the discussed subject in greater depth. Website 2, similarly, provides links to numerous articles dealing with the goals' criticisms, as well as to more generally-related topics such as education and health-care worldwide. <fnote></fnote>Website 4 is also useful in so far as it questions the validity of the Development Goals; this site furthermore gives factual details of the implementation of the goals in various countries, with a focus on Central Asia and Europe. In the context of the statistical analysis undertaken above, this site is particularly useful because it centres on the mitigation of HIV/AIDS - one of this study's social variables - as part of the MDGs. The site is also highly practical, providing useful links to details on various regions of the world and on their policies, as well as to statistical figures relating to the MDGs. Lastly, Website 5 is particularly valuable to understanding countries' performance in reaching the MDGs, as it offers links to papers discussing the implementation of these goals in various countries. Particularly relevant paper titles include, for instance, "Achieving the Millennium Development Goals: What Really Works on the Ground", "Millennium Development Goals Needs Assessments in Ghana, Tanzania, and Uganda", and "Changing Course: Alternative Approaches to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals and Fight HIV/AIDS". This site offers precise synopses of these papers, as well as information regarding the languages in which they are available. It also boasts an advanced search engine which sorts articles according to country, further speeding up the research process for readers. Particularly due to the links that they provide and to their exposition of contrasting viewpoints over the MDGs, the above five websites therefore allow readers to research into the goals as efficiently as possible. 