Of all the areas of social science studied today, world politics may be one of the oldest and most persistently controversial. Over the years, changes in political interactions have sparked the emergence of numerous different approaches to the field. Today, the 'world views' that remain dominant are Realism, Liberalism, and Marxism. Each of these theories rests on distinct assumptions which shape both their interpretations of world events, and, more importantly, how international politicians consider the world when taking decisions. An understanding of these world views is therefore essential to students of world politics, as they not only help us to interpret the past, but to understand the likely future development of international relations. As we enter the 21 st Century, Marxism seems to be regaining the momentum that it lost with the end of the Cold War, while Realism arguably triumphs in the academic domain, and liberalism is most often used to support political moves. To comprehensively study world politics it is necessary to evaluate the efficacy of these approaches in explaining today's world; one may do so by comparing Realism, liberalism and Marxism based on their main assumptions and on their degree of empirical backing throughout history. Such an approach to this century's dominant world views will hopefully reveal their major failings and advantages, enabling students of world politics to decide which theories to pay more heed to and which, if necessary, to reject. The main assumptions of realists, liberals and Marxists critically influence the study of world politics, as they define the field's key concepts. Realists, firstly, view the state as the main actor of world politics, which seeks to maximize national interests in a hostile international environment. Being devoid of central authority, the international system operates in anarchy; it therefore possesses no mechanism for punishing aggressors, and states must rely on 'self-help' to survive. Underlying this concept is structural realists' assumption that the drive for power is a fundamental aspect of human nature, which is reflected at the state level. Because states primarily seek to gain power relative to other states, they are accordingly in constant competition; there can therefore be no trust in the international system, as the stakes involved - possibility of war, for instance - are too high. Consequently, as liberal realists such as John Mearsheimer point out, "states in the international system fear each-other". In a realist world, cooperation between states is hence impossible, making the outbreak of war a perpetual possibility. <fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics: A introduction to international relations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005 (2nd edition)). </fnote><fnote>Mearsheimer, John J. "The False Promise of International Institutions". International Security, Vol.19, No.3 (1994). </fnote>The conclusions drawn from liberal assumptions are vastly different. Rather than establishing the state as international politics' main actor, liberals claim that individuals - and, according to liberal institutionalism, other non-state actors such as intergovernmental organizations - play the greatest role on the world stage, and that a state only possesses the authority invested in it by its people. On the economic level, liberalism advocates minimal state intervention and free trade abidance to market forces; on the political level, liberals conclude that states seek absolute rather than relative gains, through interstate cooperation rather than competition. While realists see war as a necessary tool of international relations, liberals therefore condemn war, attributing it, like liberal internationalists, to excessive government intervention in trading relationships, or, like liberal idealists such as Woodrow Wilson, to a lack of international diplomacy. Liberalism thus appears more moral and less pessimistic than Realism, possibly accounting for its popularity in political discourse today. <fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics </fnote>In contrast to the above two theories, Marxism explains state behaviour based not on states themselves or on the individuals within them, but on the deeper structures and ideology pervading the international system. This theory proposes a materialistic view of history, arguing that historical change is triggered by society's economic development and by class conflicts between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. World-system theory extends this core-periphery divide to the international scene, applying it to developed countries' capitalist exploitation of developing ones. Gramscianism goes on to include ideological manipulation of the periphery in these assumptions, while critical theory claims that the proletariat worldwide is subdued by media and cultural influences. Consequently, Marxist explanations of political transformation rely heavily on the principle that oppressed classes - both domestically and internationally - seek emancipation from their oppressors. Clearly, Marxist, liberal and realist assumptions thus differ significantly in explaining international relations. While Realism attributes decisions in world politics to state choices, liberalism relates them to human nature, and Marxism explains them from a broader economic base; while liberals and realists divide the political world into interacting state entities, Marxists split international relations along class lines that surpass state boundaries. For students of world politics, choosing between these approaches depends on more than these purely theoretical distinctions, however; one must verify whether these views truly apply to the world that they describe. How much historical backing, therefore, do Realism, liberalism and Marxism possess? Because Realism assumes a hostile international system in which the 'security dilemma' forces states to view other states' defensive moves as threats to their own security, every outbreak of war could support realist theory. The 2003 Iraq war, for instance, is seen as a manifestation of the United States' self-interested behaviour and security priorities - both realist concepts - triumphing over liberal attempts at international cooperation under the United Nations. The war reinforced the realist view that "international organizations have [no] great influence separate from those bestowed upon them by powerful states". Likewise, the collapse of the European balance of power system due to World War I, the failure of League of Nations with the Second World War, and the continuation of international violence today despite beliefs that, "with the end of the Cold War, virtually all the major problems that afflicted Great Power relations . . . had been resolved", all support realist assumptions that, due to the anarchy of the international system and to states' power-maximising goals, interstate cooperation is simply unrealistic. <fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. "Realist IR Theory and the Iraq War". Baylis and Smith Companion Website. </fnote><fnote>Hawthorn, Geoffrey. "Liberalism since the end of the Cold War" Review of International Studies, Vol.25 Special No (December 1999). </fnote>Accordingly, the empirical support gleaned by Realism may automatically discredit liberal claims, as the two theories' assumptions are somewhat mutually exclusive. Nonetheless, many liberal concepts underlie current world events as well; the 1999 Kosovo crisis, for instance, witnessed the intervention of a coalition of states in the interests of human rights. This war thus refuted realist claims that states act only in a self-interested manner, and suggested that, consistent with liberalism's 'collective security' concept, interstate cooperation is in fact possible. Liberalist John Ruggie points to the establishment of nuclear nonproliferation agreements and to the withdrawal of British and French forces from Egypt in 1956 due to abidance to UN resolutions, as further evidence of the effectiveness of institutions promoted by liberalism. While Realism thus finds empirical support in past instances of war, liberalism is backed by examples of international cooperation; this perhaps reveals a clear threat in Realism, which may encourage military intervention by viewing it as rational state behaviour. From a less moralistic view, however, one may note that, despite numerous efforts at cooperation, war repeatedly returns to the international stage - sadly, Realism's cynical assumptions may therefore be more relevant to world politics than liberal ones, because the world itself may be more war-prone than we would like to believe. <fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. "Liberal IR Theory and the 1999 Kosovo Crisis". Baylis and Smith Companion Website. </fnote><fnote>Ruggie, John. "Promises, Promises: Can Institutions Deliver? The False Premise of Realism". International Security, Vol.20, No.1 (1995). </fnote>How does the third view of international politics, Marxism, fit into such a world? Marxist theories have significantly suffered over the past century, particularly with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989. Nevertheless, the theory is regaining strength; Marxists in fact attribute the Soviet Union's downfall to factors other than the inapplicability of Marxist ideas to the modern world. Some theorists deny that the Soviet regime was genuinely socialist, and attribute their implosion to a repressive "economy of waste" that developed independently of communist ideas. Others argue that the Soviet Union only disintegrated as a result both of Gorbachev's destabilizing policies after 1985 and of the United States' aims of "spending the Soviet Union into bankruptcy". Many Marxists thus claim that the end of the Cold War left their approach to world politics unscathed. In fact, more recently Marxism has been supported by international developments; the dialectic Marxist approach to the Kosovo war, for instance, sees the intervention of humanitarian forces on behalf of the oppressed Kosovo-Albanian minority as a reflection of emancipatory Marxist goals on the one hand, and, more cynically, as evidence of the international core's (or the West's) attempt to impose its ideologies on poorer peripheral countries on the other Marxist theory has further been supported by the collapse of capitalist optimism in Asia, which Marx himself predicted would result due to systematic overproduction in these countries. In a world in which interstate relations and institutions are gaining a markedly economic slant, Marxism's economically-based world view is likely to gain ever more empirical support. <fnote>Cox, Michael. "Rebels without a cause? Radical Theorists and the World System After the Cold War". New Political Economy, Vol.3, No.3 (1998). </fnote><fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. "Marxist and Radical Theory and the 1999 Kosovo Crisis". Baylis and Smith Companion Website. </fnote><fnote>Cox, Michael. "Rebels without a cause? Radical Theorists and the World System After the Cold War". </fnote>By thus comparing Realism, Liberalism and Marxism based on their main assumptions and on their empirical backing, one should be able to detect which of the three views most accurately explains international politics. However, as seen above, different historical events - or in the case of Kosovo different perspectives on the same event - can support each of the theories equally well. For students of world politics, then, the most useful treatment of the world views may be not to identify which of the three is 'better' than the others, but to adopt an eclectic stance and to ascertain which perspective is most useful in which situation. Liberalism's primary strength, for instance, arguably lies in its attempts to minimize the international system's anarchy. Liberal institutionalism suggests that this may be done by enforcing the power of the institutions regulating state interactions; collective security theory argues that states must unite against aggressive nations so as to 'abolish' military intervention; and critical theory advocates securing peace by changing individuals' very ideas concerning world politics. Realism, in turn, is comparatively strengthened by the 'timelessness' of its assumptions - as the continuing conflict in today's world suggests, interstate cooperation may indeed be unachievable. Marxism, finally, stands out by its analytical prowess - by what Hoffman sees as "a rare ability to expose and explain"  which, Schlesinger argues, "in a world of low wages, long hours, exploited workers and social resentment", may grant the theory "a new lease of life". When viewed in the context of a globalizing environment, each of the world theories therefore claims distinct strengths. <fnote>Cox, Michael. "Rebels without a cause? Radical Theorists and the World System After the Cold War". </fnote><fnote>Cox, Michael. "Rebels without a cause? Radical Theorists and the World System After the Cold War". </fnote>These advantages have nonetheless been challenged in the past. Mearsheimer attacks Liberalism's 'solutions' to the international system's security dilemma on the grounds that they are irrealistic as states cannot detach themselves from their relative-gains concerns. New Marxists such as Rosenberg in turn accuse Realism of inaccuracy, claiming that the theory's very timelessness precludes the possibility of state forms changing as production modes change. Realism consequently loses in predictive value - as Vazquez argues, "[while] the great virtue of Realism is that it can explain almost any foreign policy event, its great defect is that it tends to do this after the fact, rather than before". Marxism, finally, is predominantly criticised for its lack of direction: as put by Cox, "until [Marxists] can provide a coherent answer to the question of what it is they are for rather than what it is they are against, they will remain . . . well-informed rebels without a political cause". Such accusations provide students of world politics with a critical and dialectic approach to the world views, and further promote the eclectic approach that I personally lean towards. <fnote>Mearsheimer, John J. "The False Promise of International Institutions". </fnote><fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics </fnote><fnote>Cox, Michael. "Rebels without a cause? Radical Theorists and the World System After the Cold War". </fnote>Today, Marxism, Liberalism and Realism all vie for status in the study of world politics; while some theorists argue that heeding one approach would exclude the possibility of abiding by the others, others suggest that a mixture of world views would in fact broaden our understanding of international relations. Nye, for instance, advocates the union of Neorealism and Neoliberalism, claiming that Realism's precise explanation of state interactions is complemented by Liberalism's extension of state interests to concepts other than mere power. From comparing the three world views based on their key assumptions and their degree of empirical backing, it seems that such a multidimensional view would indeed be the most efficient approach to studying world politics. The moral implications of each theory should however also be considered when taking such a decision. Realism's ethically challenging tendency towards war to me seems justified by its sadly colossal amount of empirical evidence. Liberalism, on the other hand, I see as inherently contradictory: behind its altruistic façade and its claim towards human rights promotion, this view's support of free trade promotes a from of "economic genocide", by which rich nations drastically exploit less developed ones through their unfair advantage in trade. Marxism, with its emancipatory goals and its recognition of interclass struggles, appeals to me as the most moral and widest-ranging of the three theories, reminding liberals and realists of the international system's deeper ideological structures. Overall, therefore, while an eclectic approach to the world theories seems to be the most useful treatment of world politics, as a student of this field I would choose a slightly more Marxist slant, so as to balance Realism's cynicism with a minimum of optimism and morality. <fnote>Nye, Joseph S. "Neorealism and Neoliberalism". World Politics, Vol.40, No.2 (1998). </fnote><fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics </fnote>