When modifying their economy's output level, governments often resort to fiscal policy: manipulating government-spending and taxation to influence overall economic output. Whilst it has been described as "the central reason for impressive economic growth" in some economies, fiscal policy is not always completely functional, however. Its effectiveness is variable, and primarily depends on the size of government-spending and taxation multipliers and on the extent of an economy's crowding-out (to what degree an increase in private spending in the goods-market - triggered by tax cuts or boosted government expenditure - is undesirably countered in the money-market by a drop in investment and an increase in savings). The size of crowding-out and of these multipliers varies with the slopes of the IS and LM curves, as economies reach equilibrium where IS=LM. These slopes in turn depend on an economy's sensitivity of investment to both income and interest rate, its marginal propensity to consume, its income-tax levels, and its sensitivity of money demand to both income and interest rate. Mathematically and economically analyzing each of these components will hopefully yield insight into the use and effectiveness of fiscal policy in today's economies. <fnote>"Consumer market insights: Consumers in Argentina are spending." Market: Latin America; Jan2006, Vol. 14 Issue 1, p3-3, 1/3p </fnote>Equilibrium in an economy's goods-market is expressed by the IS curve, which follows the equation Y = [(Co - C 1T + b 0 + G) / (1 - C 1 - b 1)] - [(b 2 / 1 - C 1 - b 1) i], where Y is total output, Co is autonomous (or income-free) spending, C 1 is marginal propensity to consume (the fraction of every additional unit of income that people choose to spend rather than save), b 0 is autonomous investment, b 1 is the sensitivity of investment to income, b 2 is the sensitivity of investment to interest rate, and i is the interest rate. As G (government-spending) and T (taxes) are also central to this equation, fiscal policy - changes in G or T - clearly affects an economy's goods-market equilibrium. Fiscal policy also impacts money-market equilibrium as, by modifying demand for money in the goods-market, it affects the price of bonds and therefore the money-market's interest rate. Money-market equilibrium (where real money demand equals real money supply) lies along the LM curve, which follows the equation i = (M/ d 2P) + (d 1/ d 2)Y, where d 1 is the sensitivity of money demand to income, d 2 is the sensitivity of money demand to the interest rate, P is the price level, M is money supply and Y is income or the economy's output level. When the IS and LM equations are solved simultaneously, they produce an income level Y  e at interest rate i e (Graph 1) where both the goods and money-markets are in equilibrium: Ye = [(Co - C 1T + b 0+ G)+ b 2 (M/P)] / [ d 1b 2 + d 2 (1 -C 1 - b 1)] <figure/>Both IS and LM therefore impact fiscal policy's effectiveness. Expansionary fiscal policy, involving increasing spending (G) or decreasing taxes (T), would for instance shift the IS curve to the right (increasing output to Y 1 in Graph 2). To return to equilibrium (where IS once again equals LM) the economy undergoes the following automatic responses: the increase in IS triggers excess money demand of Y eY 1 (A B), which makes it less attractive to withhold money as bonds. Demand for bonds therefore drops, decreasing bonds' price, which in turn causes the interest rate to rise (i e to i 1, B C). This rise increases returns to saving as well as the cost of investment - as a result, investment drops while savings rise, withdrawing money from the economy's circulation and thus reducing spending. Output therefore moves back down (C D), settling the economy's new equilibrium output level at Y 2. This drop in output is a result of the crowding-out effect, by which increased government-spending boosts private spending but counter-availingly decreases private investment. The larger crowding-out is, the less effective fiscal policy therefore becomes. <figure/>Graphically, the extent of crowding-out varies with the IS and LM curves' slopes: <figure/>Comparing a relatively flat LM curve (LM 1) to the far steeper LM 2 suggests that, for the same shift in IS and the same resulting excess demand for money (Y 2Y B), there is much less crowding-out in the LM 1 case. The interest rate has to rise by less to choke off EDM - i e increases to i 1 rather than to i 2 - and therefore the government's increased spending has less of a counteracting effect on the money-market: total output is reduced by Y BY 1 rather than by Y BY 2. Crowding-out is therefore lower and fiscal policy more effective when the LM curve has a smaller slope. <figure/>Comparing a set of shallow IS curves (IS 1 and IS 1') to a steeper set (IS 2 and IS 2') above indicates that the IS curve's slope also impacts fiscal policy. If both sets shift by the same amount due to equal increases in government-spending (dG), the resulting EDM in the IS 1 case (Y eY 1a) far exceeds that in the IS 2 case (Y eY 2a). Nevertheless, fiscal policy remains more effective with IS 1: the amount by which output then drops back (Y 1aY 1) is a smaller fraction of the original output increase (Y eY 1a) than in the I 2 case, where crowding-out is almost complete (Y 2aY 2 is very nearly as large as the initial spending increase, Y eY 2a). Following the same dG, the shallower IS curves therefore settle at a higher equilibrium output than the steeper ones (Y 1 compared to Y 2). Crowding-out is thus lower and fiscal policy more effective the shallower the IS curve is. These conclusions are confirmed by a more economic analysis of the IS and LM curves' slopes. The LM curve, firstly, follows the equation i = (M/ d 2P) + (d 1/ d 2 )Y, where (d 1/ d 2) is the slope. Mathematically, a smaller slope implies a low d 1 value and a high d 2 value. As d 1 represents sensitivity of money demand to income, the smaller it is, the less EDM can result from the increased income generated by government-spending boosts or tax cuts. Lower EDM implies that holding illiquid money is not so costly, so demand for bonds, and therefore their price, do not fall as much. Accordingly, interest rate does not rise as much, and thus does not inhibit investment or attract savings as much. Output therefore drops by less - fiscal modifications in the goods-market have a smaller 'spill-over' effect into the money-market, and crowding-out is lower. A high d 2 (sensitivity of money demand to interest rate) further reduces crowding-out by enabling the increasing interest rate (B C in Graph 2) to choke off the excess money demand more efficiently; interest rate must therefore rise less to return the economy to equilibrium, again lessening fiscal policy's counterproductive effects on investment and savings. A low d 1 and a high d 2 - or a flatter LM curve - indeed render fiscal policy more effective. The IS curve, in turn, has a slope of [(1 - C 1 - b 1) / b 2]. Mathematically, higher values of C 1 and b 1 and higher values of b 2 all yield a flatter slope. Economically, higher marginal propensity to consume (C 1) and higher sensitivity of investment to income (b 1) coincide with more effective fiscal policy because government additions to consumers' incomes are spent or invested more readily, thus increasing output as desired. Moreover, a low b 2 (sensitivity of investment to interest rate) lessens crowding-out, as the unavoidable increase in interest rates resulting from EDM (B C in Graph 2) has less of an inhibitory effect on investment; output therefore lowers less (C D), reducing crowding-out. Fiscal policy is thus more effective the smaller b 2 is and the larger b 1 and C 1 are, or the steeper the IS curve is. Beside the IS and LM curves' slopes, an economy's tax and government-spending multipliers significantly impact fiscal policy's effectiveness. The higher these multipliers are, the more increases in consumer income (generated through welfare benefits or tax cuts) will affect output. If, for instance, government-spending increases consumer income by dG, a high government multiplier will cause consumers to spend a large fraction of this new income on goods; the sellers of those goods will then themselves experience an increase in income, part of which they will in turn spend, and so on. Accordingly, high tax or government multipliers increase output by more than the initial fiscal policy move (Y 0Y 1 or Z 0Z 1, as shown via an equilateral triangle, is greater than dG). These multipliers are therefore vital to this policy's effectiveness. <figure/>The government-spending multiplier is the partial derivative of the IS-LM function with respect to G. As this function, Ye = [(Co - C 1T + b 0 + G) + b 2 (M/P)] / [d 1b 2 + d 2 (1 - C 1 - b 1)], inaccurately assumes that all taxes T are flat, it has been rewritten to account for proportional taxes such as income-tax as well. When T = To + T 1Y, Ye = [(Co - C1T0 + b 0 + G) + b 2 (M/P)] / [d 1b 2 + d 2 (1 - C 1 + C1T1 - b 1)]. The government-spending multiplier is therefore [d 2 / (d 1b 2 + d 2 (1 - C 1 + C 1T 1 - b 1)]. Mathematically, the multiplier is bigger as d 2, C 1 and b 1 increase and as d 1, b 2 and T 1 drop. This is confirmed economically: a higher marginal propensity to consume (C 1) and sensitivity of investment to income (b 1) augment the importance of government-spending, as more of the latter is spent by consumers. A lower tax rate (T 1) also allows more to be consumed following a rise in income. Also, a lower sensitivity of money demand to income (d 1) reduces the amount of EDM caused by increased government-spending - interest rates must rise less in response, reducing crowding-out. Lastly, less sensitivity of investment to interest rate (b 2) also reduces crowding-out by allowing EDM to be choked off with less of an interest rate increase. The tax multiplier (differentiating with respect to T 0) is very similar: [-C 1d 2 / (d 1b 2 + d 2 (1 - C 1 + C 1T 1 - b 1)]. It therefore increases in much the same way as the government-spending multiplier. As C 1 is a fraction, the tax multiplier's numerator (C 1d 2) is nonetheless smaller than the government multiplier's numerator (d 2 alone), and thus the whole multiplier is smaller. Expansionary fiscal policy may accordingly affect consumer behaviour more when undertaken as a welfare increase than when it results from tax cuts. Having analysed the parameters C 1, T 1, b 1, b 2, d 1, and d 2 in the context of crowding-out and of both the IS-LM curves' slopes and the government-spending and taxation multipliers, one can therefore assert that, economically as well as mathematically, fiscal policy's effectiveness is greatly dependent on these variables. Higher marginal propensity to consume, sensitivity of investment to interest rate, and sensitivity of money demand to income all enhance fiscal policy's effects, whilst increases in income-tax levels, sensitivity of investment to income, and sensitivity of money demand to interest rate all reduce fiscal effectiveness. Armed with such conclusions, we must however remain cautious when applying them to today's world, as, in an environment of externally-managed, corruption-weakened and culturally biased economies, economic theories pertaining to government policy are seldom fully reflected in practice. 