Today's world is fraught with economic inequality: the breach between the incomes of 'Northern' countries and those of poorer 'Southern' countries is relentlessly widening. What explains such a trend? Why do some countries accumulate so much wealth while others become so radically poorer? Traditional economic theory has attributed underdevelopment to differences in resource endowments between rich and poor nations, or to Western exploitation of less developed states. Such theories, however, do not satisfactorily explain why underdevelopment persists in poor countries in spite of the guidance which more successful 'model' countries provide them with. Only recently has the persistence of underdevelopment been seriously considered; in particular, theorists such as Douglass North have looked to the role of institutions in shaping countries' economic performance. These scholars argue that institutions, when efficient, are vital to achieving modern economic growth; inefficient institutions based on incomplete information, however, irremediably harm economies' long-term development. Such claims can be investigated by looking into the role played by institutions in governmental structures, in long-distance trade, and in economic change throughout history. By comparing the institutions which led to the rise of the "European Miracle" in the post-Renaissance period to those present in third-world countries at that time, one can assess the extent to which North's institutional theories promote a modern understanding of the persistence of underdevelopment today. How far can institutions be considered relevant to economic performance? For North, institutions are "the rules of the game in society", which structure incentives in human exchanges and reduce social uncertainty by defining and limiting individuals' choices. As Kuznets demonstrates by including institutional change (or changes in society's structure and ideology) in his six characteristics of modern economic growth, efficient institutions will therefore develop incentives conducive to growth. Changes in Britain's institutional framework, for instance (in particular, the temporary establishment of a republic and of a House of Lords) enabled the government to credibly uphold property rights and patent laws, thus fostering the technological innovation and market-led growth that culminated in the 1688 Glorious Revolution. This in turn stimulated the development of public finance and parliamentary systems unique to Europe at the time. Likewise, the Netherlands' push for modern economic growth in the 17 th Century was enhanced by its development of commercial institutions modeled on those of earlier Italian city states. Institutions, when they provide society with the appropriate incentives, can thus be an important source of economic stimulation. <fnote>North, D.C. (1991), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. </fnote><fnote>Kuznets, S. (1974), Population, Capital and Economic Growth: Selected Essays, London: Heinemann. </fnote><fnote>North, D.G. and Weingast, B.R. (1989), "Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England" </fnote><fnote>North, D.C. (1991), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance </fnote><fnote>Maddison, A. (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, Paris:OECD. </fnote>Institutions are considered vital to economic development not only because of the incentives that they provide, however, but because of the constraints they impose on members of society. As noted by North, if humans were to interact in a system devoid of rules, due to the "noncoincidence of wealth-maximising behaviour and of socially cooperative outcomes" the common good would be sacrificed to individual gain. Such a dilemma is reflected in society's inherent 'fundamental problem of exchange', by which trade, even when potentially profitable, is forgone because actors have no means of ensuring that their counterparts will pay for traded goods, rather than 'reneging' and illegally holding onto them. Greif claims that, "for individuals to enter mutually beneficial relationships they have to recognize them as such and have to be able to fulfill their contractual obligations". In this light, institutional constraints are key to enabling trade and profitable economic exchange, as they mitigate the FPOE by providing "rules" to the "game".  <fnote>North, D.C. (1991), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance </fnote>Different types of institutions - both governmental and private-order - have thus been formed throughout history to counter the FPOE. In Medieval Europe abuse of foreign merchants by local rulers was widespread - as noted by England's Edward I in 1923, as a result "many merchants [were] put off coming to the land with their merchandise". Institutions employing multilateral reputation mechanisms consequently evolved to constrain rulers' actions: a large subgroup of merchants would cease trade with a ruler if one of their members was abused. However, traders themselves did not always comply with the rules set by their organizations - in imposing an embargo on Norway in 1294, for instance, German towns had to post ships in the Danish straits so as to intercept any defecting German traders. Such costly means of enforcement were gradually countered by the establishment of merchant guilds, more complex institutions that heavily ostracized defecting traders as well as conditioning future trade with rulers on past protection. Inter-city organizations such as the German Hansa, or the subdivision of city administrations in Italian city-states, thus succeeded in mitigating the FPOE at both the ruler and inter-merchant level through their use of institutional constraints. As trade grew in scale, institutions had to further be formed at the global level, to govern relations between merchants and overseas agents. Such institutional frameworks are found in 11 th Century trading on both sides of the Mediterranean: in the collectivistic agency relationships among Maghribi traders, and in the individualistic systems employed by Genoese merchants. These traders again reduced the problem of trust by imposing constraints on each-other through third-party enforcement (fear of collective punishment through the Maghribis' extended kinship networks ensured agents' honesty in trading, whilst the more individualistic Genoese system necessitated government enforcement and the creation of legal contracts to stabilise trade). In both long-distance and intra-European trade, therefore, institutions have been vital means of mitigating the FPOE, and of thus enabling capitalist gains through comparative advantage, division of labour, technological innovation, and specialization. North's insistence on the importance of institutions to economic development therefore seems well-justified. <fnote>Greif, A. (2000), "The Fundamental Problem of Exchange a research agenda in historical institutional analysis", European Review of Economic History. </fnote><fnote>Greif, A. "The Fundamental Problem of Exchange: a research agenda in historical institutional analysis" </fnote><fnote>North, D.C. (1991), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance </fnote><fnote>Greif, A. "The Fundamental Problem of Exchange: a research agenda in historical institutional analysis" </fnote><fnote>North, D.C. (1991), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance </fnote>While such a focus explains the development of certain economies, however, what does it contribute to our understanding of underdevelopment? According to Greif, "once an institution has evolved in a society to mitigate FPOE, it can cause that society to evolve along a particular trajectory and in the long run explain distinct economic performances". In this light, just as efficient institutions can trigger growth, inefficient ones can trap their users in detrimental economic habits; this is particularly dangerous because institutional change is a difficult and highly incremental process, due to the informal constraints - including deep-rooted cultural and ideological customs - underlying them. Such 'lock-in' problems can be observed by comparing Chinese and European institutional frameworks in the post-Renaissance period, as these may have fostered much of the difference that now lies between the Eastern and Western worlds. The Chinese institutional framework promoted agricultural development and best-practice in the first millennium due to its highly efficient bureaucratic elite; in the second millennium, however, China's institutions failed to keep up with the global expansion of trade and technology and became detrimental to their economy: the bureaucracy's monopoly restricted the emergence of an independent class of commercial bourgeoisie, thus forbidding potentially profitable trade and entrepreneurship. This bureaucracy furthermore promoted an ethnocentric outlook, thus rendering China impermeable to Western scientific development and trade. As put by Deng, such "deeply engrained attitudes" prevented China's dynamic growth in the 18 th century, and may continue to do so today. By contrast, the institutional and governmental structures behind the 'European miracle' countries were all particularly permissive at this time - Venice provided merchants with securitising legal frameworks, Portugal welcomed Jewish merchants and scholars driven out of Spain by the Inquisition, and the Dutch republic's tolerance drew many merchants from Antwerp to Amsterdam - thus highly promoting innovation. This comparison suggests that institutions can explain both economic backwardness and economic growth. <fnote>Greif, A. "The Fundamental Problem of Exchange: a research agenda in historical institutional analysis" </fnote><fnote>North, D.C. (1991), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance </fnote><fnote>Maddison, A. (1998), Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run, Paris:OECD. </fnote><fnote>Deng, K.G. (2000), "A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History", Economic History Review. </fnote>But do solutions to these institutional problems exist? Can faulty mechanisms be modified so as to increase chances of growth? For North, such change is possible within an institutional context that "makes new compromises between players possible". Oppressive institutions as were found in China must therefore evolve to grant their members greater intellectual and ideological freedom. Such freedom, according to Mancur Olson, is far more prevalent in democracies than in autocracies - consequently, democracies allow economies to "reap all possible gains from investment and long-term transactions". How feasible, then, is a transition from autocratic to democratic governance in underdeveloped countries? In the past century Africa has seen over 52 governments transit from neopatrimonial rule to 'democracy'; most of these countries' economies, however, have not significantly improved since the change. Karen Remmer notes that, even in these apparently democratic states, "contemporary political changes are conditioned by mechanisms of rule [or institutions] embedded in the ancient regime". Even in the context of modified institutional frameworks, therefore, the 'lock-in' or 'path dependence' problem fundamental to North's theory continues to apply. <fnote>North, D.C. (1991), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance </fnote><fnote>Olson, M. (1993), "Dictatorship, Democracy and Development", American Political Science Review. </fnote><fnote>Bratton </fnote><fnote>Bratton </fnote>In the year 2000 the United States economy was nine times the size of China's, and over 1,000 times that of Ethiopia's; clearly, such a trend cannot simply be attributed to factor endowment discrepancies amongst countries. Backed by evidence throughout history - from Maghribi and Genoese long-distance trade, to the 17 th Century's "European Miracle", to the demise of China's bureaucratic system - Douglass North's theory of institutions provides a more satisfactory explanation of the persistence of underdevelopment in today's world. Today institutions fundamentally explain not only economic discrepancies between countries, but also, according to Plamenatz, the securing of power in societies; on a wider scale, liberal institutionalists consider the role of institutions in determining interstate relations and the future of the world order. Since they were first analysed by North in the 1980s, institutions have thus adopted an increasingly international scope; in today's globalizing world, we can thus expect them to contribute to an ever broader understanding of the persistence of underdevelopment. <fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics: A introduction to international relations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005 (2nd edition)). </fnote><fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics </fnote>