<abstract><heading>Abstract:</heading>This experiment involved determining the distribution of succinate dehydrogenase between three subcellular compartments; namely the nucleus, mitochondria and cytosol. These fractions, obtained from homogenation of rat (Rattus rattus) liver cells, were examined under a phase contrast microscope to examine degree of contamination. Then the protein and succinate dehydrogenase content of each fraction was determined. A standard curve of BSA in water was constructed (appendix p.6) and total protein content was assayed by the Folin-Ciocalteu method. Succinate dehydrogenase activity was assayed by monitoring reduction of INT into a coloured compound. Hence, the enzyme's activity was calculated. It was concluded that the supernatant cytosol fraction contained the most protein but the mitochondrial fraction the most enzyme. From the calculations, it was deduced that the mitochondrial fraction contained the most specific succinate dehydrogenase activity, with a value of 2.03 units of activity / mg protein. </abstract><heading>Introduction:</heading>Succinate dehydrogenase is an enzyme which catalyses the oxidation of succinate to fumarate in the citric acid cycle. The enzyme transfers two hydrogen atoms from succinate to the cofactor FAD to produce fumarate and FADH 2. However, in the reaction assayed, FAD was replaced by an artificial electron acceptor, INT. This is a tetrazolium derivative which changes from a colourless compound into a red fromazan when reduced. INT is particularly useful in this case as it serves as a means to assay the enzyme quantitatively by spectrophotometry. Succinate dehydrogenase is found in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Thus the obvious hypothesis established was that enzyme activity will be greatest in the mitochondrial fraction. <heading>Method:</heading>No deviations were made to the set procedure in the manual. <heading>Results:</heading>The table below (table 1.) shows a brief description of each fraction, as viewed under the phase contrast microscope. <table/>As expected, the fraction O contains all organelles that were observed in the other fractions. The nuclear fraction contained nuclei and clusters of small units. These are probably cell debris and smaller organelles found in cells. The M fraction had distinctly visible mitochondria and was quite free of other material, apart from some small clusters as found in fraction N. No large organelles were observed in the supernatant. As mentioned, in several of the fractions, large units were found. Possibly these are the many vesicles that can be found in hepatocytes. Hepatocytes are very active cells that synthesise cholesterol and bile, which are stored in secretory vesicles until expelled from the cell by exocytosis. Upon determination of protein content of each fraction, it was observed that fraction S and N contained the most protein, but values were all around 20%. (see graph 1.) Enzyme content is greatest in mitochondrial fraction. According to the results, no enzymes were to be found in the last supernatant fraction. <figure/>Table 2. overleaf shows that from the three fractions, the mitochondrial fraction has the highest specific activity of 2.03 units of activity per mg protein, followed by the nuclear fraction and original homogenate. The supernatant, which was determined to have no enzyme, has no activity. <table/><heading>Conclusion:</heading>All fractions were fairly pure, as determined from the observation under the phase contrast microscope. However, there were several components that were unidentified, speculated to be secretory vesicles and other small organelles found in hepatocytes. As mentioned, the three fractions had approximately the same amount of protein content, although the supernatant contained the most. Possibly during the homogenation of the cells, broken particles and proteins settled in the supernatant fraction. Indeed, the cytosol itself contains many enzymes and various other proteins. However, according to the results obtained, the supernatant fraction did not contain any succinate dehydrogenase. In contrast, the nuclear fraction did contain the enzyme, although about half the amount found in the mitochondrial fraction. This suggests some contamination. Possibly the mitochondria lysed and some of its enzymes became incorporated into the other fractions. Given the numerous procedures involved in this experiment, it was difficult to avoid contamination and minor errors that carried over to the next step in the procedure. Nevertheless, judging by percentage recovery (appendix p. 5) the amounts obtained were fairly adequate, with 72.4% recovery of protein and 102.6% of enzyme. The percentage of enzyme recovered was over 100%, and indicates the presence of other molecules that could have possibly acted as activators of succinate dehydrogenase. Perhaps the molecules were among the cell debris and unidentified organelles observed in the fractions under the phase contrast microscope. The specific activity of the enzyme was highest in the mitochondria as remarked earlier, and secondly the nuclear fraction. This final result supports the original hypothesis that the mitochondrial fraction should have the highest specific activity of succinate dehydrogenase. 