<heading>Introduction</heading>Manufacturing strategy include a set of decisions which focus on processes and infrastructure investment. It provides crucial support to order winners and qualifiers of market segment of a company. In the past, it always been seen as a tool to provide cooperate request. Nowadays, in a world class manufacturing company, manufacturing strategy can be utilized as competitive advantage for a company, and consistent with marketing, financial and other functions strategies to achieve the highest performance. This assignment is based on an assumption of traditional automotive component manufactory and formulates a complete manufacturing strategy with Hayes and Wheelwright's elements for the requirement of the company's new director. Then it discusses what problems will emerge when implementing the new strategy. Finally, it set up a detail implementation plan and time scale for the plant conversion requirement. <heading>1. Assumption</heading><heading>1.1 Background of the company</heading>Macgregor Seating Ltd. was set up in 1964 at Telford, which is based in the West Midlands in UK. Initially it was family based and grew up to a medium scale enterprise now. Its business is focus on designing and producing seating system for cars and has a big range of brand car plants, such as Toyota, BMW, Land Rover, and Peugeot. Approximately 200 employees work in shop floor and 30 staffs in office for marketing and sales, R&D, IT, finance and so on. Half of the shop floor employees are fully skilled machinists and rest of them are semi-skilled machine minders. The shop floor still uses traditional manufacturing processes and machines. Due to the huge revolution in automotive industry that manufacturing changed from batch production to lean production, the company lost its business and has become unprofitable. It adopted "make to stock" strategy to product with high volume batch for productivity. The machines are comparatively old and automation extent is low. All main procedures are done by operators. Raw materials are supplied by many suppliers which locate in UK. Quality control procedure is that operators inspect the finished products and remove wasters. The plant layout is based process and operators are reward by pieces work. <heading>1.2 Original manufacturing strategy of company</heading>In the past, top management were lack of manufacturing experience and believed that manufacturing management is subordinate in strategy making to marketing and finance functions. Therefore, manufacturing management was focus on short term performance issues and tasks. The most important pressure to meet day to day operation target caused production managers to consider themselves features and ignore the cooperating manufacturing strategy with whole business strategy. <heading>1.3 Problems to be solved</heading>Realized the current urgent situation that they became unprofitable, the top management decided to change the whole strategy to meet the new industry trend and customers requirement. The new young managing director planed to change the machine shop from process based layout into cellular organization. Each cell has self managed team to responsible for the production quality and throughput. Another crucial issue is that the number of employees in the machining area need to be significant reduced because of financial necessary. <heading>2. Manufacturing strategy formulation</heading><heading>2.1Manufacturing strategy academic definition and framework</heading>(Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984) gave a clear definition for manufacturing strategy: The primary function of a manufacturing strategy is to guide the business in putting together the set of manufacturing capabilities that will enable it to pursue its chosen competitive strategy over the long term. In other words, manufacturing strategy can give a company a competitive advantage. During the past years, manufacturing strategy's role has changed absolutely. The cooperation strategy was focus on marketing and finance as competitive advantage and manufacturing was a tool to implement it before 1980s. Then, manufacturing was gradually considered as a part of cooperation strategy and can provide competitive advantage for companies. (Terry, 2000) explained more about its two important roles as part of the strategic strengths of a company. The first is to provide outstanding manufacturing process with unique technology and operations which is hard to be replicated by competitors. It can be an advantage in marketplace. The other one is that the manufacturing support product to win orders better than its competitors. The infrastructures and process of manufacturing must be consistent with existing product order winners and flexible for future changing business needs. (Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984) defined four developments stages in manufacturing strategic role as following: Stage1 is internal neutral. Companies in stage 1 have very limited view of what manufacturing can do for business. Manufacturing here is not as strategic role and emphasis on daily operation, expense control and utilization of labor or machines. It absolutely subordinate to marketing and finance and need to remain flexibility for market fluctuation. In addition, these plants are lack of leadership and management ability and have comparative low skilled workforce. Stage 2 called externally neutral. In this stage companies adopt some practice of normal industry which means important changes can be communicated relative quickly. Top management still have simple concept of manufacturing and pay attention to technology and capital investment. The manufacturing investment is the most possible part to be cut or reduced especially on the wage to labor. They pursue internal standard and economic of scales for productivity. Above all, manufacturing begin to be considered as part of whole business and interact with other function at some extent. When moving to stage3 which is internally supportive, the biggest chance of organization's view is that manufacturing begin to support the objective of business. Senior managers must try to understand the whole business and make decision or long term plan of manufacturing to effect on organization. The manufacturing decisions such as capability, process, scope, flexibility must match the realistic business situation. As production managers, they need to change the attitude from reactive to proactive and pay more attention to strategy. Their skills include not only daily operations control, but also understanding ability to business and strong personnel communications competence with other functions. It's not means that the daily operations aren't important. The strategy and operations both reflect comparative impact of business performance and need to be done well by managers. Stage 4 is represents as externally supportive. Here manufacturing roles and organization are totally changed. Companies pursue manufacturing as competitive advantage. It is an equal partner with other functions for making decision and formulating business strategy. Few companies which can reach this stage are seemed as world class manufacturing. <heading>2.2Analysis of the company and completing manufacturing strategy</heading>According to the background and originally strategy of Macgregor, it is obviously to find that the company's manufacturing strategy was in the stage2 from Hayes and Wheelwright's definition. The new manufacturing strategy should move to the stage 3 to support the objective of business instead of a tool for marketing and finance. To decide a new manufacturing strategy, the first step is to analysis the whole marketing position. John Puttick's market segmentation grid is a useful and classic framework to identify the industry's marketing position. It links market together with order winner criteria, business processes and core competences. The Macgregor is an automotive components manufactory and it belongs to the quadrant called "high product complexity and low uncertainty" which is showed as follow: <table/>Since manufacturing strategy is in line with cooperation strategy and needs to provide competitive advantage for marketing, it will focus on one quadrant to position products range. Each quadrant has typical demand of business process and competences. The high complexity and low uncertainty quadrant focus on knowledge acquisition, product supply flexibility, time to market and flexible manufacturing according to John's theory. (Skinner, 1978) gave the basic ideas of manufacturing strategy's function is that it should provide two of the following seven order winning criteria: <list>Cost, efficiency and productivityDelivery lead timeQualityService reliabilityFlexibility for product changeFlexibility for volume changeThe investment demand in the production system</list>Consider the industry's position and company own situation, the order winning will focus on delivery reliability, lead time, flexibility, cost and quality. The next step is to match manufacturing with order winner criteria for assuring manufacturing strategy decision can delivery the winner criteria. First of all, the decision makers choose a framework to breakdown manufacturing area into categories such as Hayes and Wheelwright's. Then they need to identify which elements are most impact the order winner criteria and have highest priority to be improved. The analysis of Macgregor manufacturing and order winner matrix is as following: <table/>By this method, every element's impact on every order winners can be clearly noticed and easy to refer in manufacturing strategy review. From the John Puttick's grid, the company is able to get more features for their industry's quadrant such as key business process and competences, product types, plant, scheduling systems, skills and so on. <table/>The company can compare the existing facilities with the suggested features and find which need to be reorganized. In this case the plant layout will be reorganized for process based to cellular based for better production. (Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984) defined a framework for formulating manufacturing strategy in their book "Restoring our competitive edge-competing through manufacturing". It embraces structural and infrastructural parts and total eight basic elements. Structural decisions are about the company business size and fixed capital investment. They have long term affection and difficult to be changed or amended when existing. Infrastructural decisions concern with daily operations and they are short term working process which support structural decisions. <table/>Macgregor Company adopts this framework to reorganize their manufacturing strategy. Capacity According to (Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984), a capacity strategy is found on the assumptions of long term marketing, technology and competitor's behavior. They comprise of forecasting growth for demand, speed and trend for technical evolution, cost for building another plant and possible behavior of competitors. Capacity is about the amount of throughput, type of plant and timing of changes. The main problem is to decide the relationship between amount of capacity and demand. Should the capacity is based on expectant demand or the existing demand? Here in automotive component industry, most of world class manufactories adopt lean manufacturing which means producing right productions with right material at right time. It determines the company's amount of capacity should depend on demand rather than lead demand. In other words, the company uses "make to order" management tools to control the capacity. It is a relative traditional method and requires less investment than normal. It insures that the capacity is highly utilized and provides high rate of return on manufacturing investment. In addition, if the new capacity is added, they will be fully utilized at once. Based on the company's situation, the strategy is suitable and practical with low risk. Facilities Facilities concern with company's location and specialization. The company's location is near the major customers. Until now its business is in UK and has only one plant in Telford which is located in the center of west midlands. About 45 automotive industrial manufactories in the town and the location provide the JIT delivery access. Its cost of property, rent, rates and service charge are all below regional average. At the same time, the salary and employment cost in west midlands is the lowest in UK regions. The key success factor of the location is convenience to the major customers like BMW, Land Rover, Toyota and Peugeot. Because of the JIT production process, the layout will be changed from process based to cellular organization. The cellular process has more advantage than the old one, such as less work in process products, better human relations, improved operator expertise, and faster production setup. In conclusion, the facility strategy should be an active part of whole manufacturing strategy rather than a passive one. For example, company should not wait for growth of demand imposes it to add capacity or decide a big change of facilities until an increasing unprofitable. Company need to consider it as main basic strategy for long term's mission and objective. Technology Technology always refers to process technology in manufacturing aspect. (Slack, 1991) mentioned three dimension of process technology in manufacturing: size of capacity, degree of automation, degree of integration. Size of capacity has been discussed in the capacity chart. The degree of automation concerns with the ratio of machine and human. It impacts on the number of employees. The company intended to reduce half of its shop floor workers which means the automotive degree will increase by introducing more machines and robots. Two main benefit of automation are that the reduction of direct labor cost and changeability of manufacturing system which mean the ability of automation is to make standard process flow and makes operation and output forecasting easily and accurately. The other aspect is the degree of technical integration. High degree of technical integration means process flow is predictable and fast throughput of material and information, with the disadvantage of more capital investment and less flexibility. Due to the shop floor adopts cellular and empowered staffs to work in Just in time, the degree of integration should be medium when necessary. The company needs to consider that whether the benefit of integration can be achieved by simply approach, process and organization changes. Vertical Integration Vertical integration is about the extent to which part of the whole supply chain the company hold. For products aspect, it means make or buy decision. As an automotive component company, it purchased all raw materials from UK. The advantage is convenient and delivery flexibility with disadvantage of high cost. The vertical integration strategy is that changing suppliers from UK to abroad for reducing cost. The company will not expend to produce end products or new business for the reason to simplify business and concentrate on core competences. Workforce In (Hill, 2000) opinion, the workforce perspective which operation managers consider include setting up a workplace to help people exert their full potential to do best job. Then they can meet both employees and business needs. Due to the technology evolution strategy, the company plan to purchase more machines and robots instead of operators. Meanwhile, the layout will be changed to cellular pattern which require high self-management and high skilled workforce. Macgregor will lay off about 100 semi-skilled machine operators for reducing direct labor cost. In addition, the company should provide more training and higher wages and reward policy to empower the employees. Quality The company changed their attitude and expectation of quality from inspection of finished defect products because of increasing competitive pressure to produce high quality from customers. Coupled with the layout change and JIT application, quality strategy should focus on total quality management, which means everyone and every process is responsible for quality control. According to (Storey, 1994), TQM is aim at continuously modifying process for improving operational effectively and enhancing employee's commitment to work. In the cellular unit, the whole team takes charge of quality inspection. Once defect products arise, the team will stop to modify them together to assure the finished products meeting customers' requirement. Production planning/materials control (Hill, 2000) explained that planning and control includes all processes which reflect forecasting and actual demand about capacity as following: <table/>Because of the utilization of JIT, the planning and control strategy is adopt "pull" system which means every part of whole operations produce and delivery the exactly needed quantities to next step at the right time. A card type system as KanBan which works as authority of production controls the basic transaction. The core aspect to work effective in this system is that develop close relationship with suppliers. The company will reduce the amounts of suppliers and select one or two outstanding suppliers for long term cooperation. The advantages of these are reduction of total cost of using supplier, inventory and improvement of quality as part of total quality management. Organization Obviously the most valuable asset of company is its staffs. (Slack, 1991) Organization decision involves in structure, control and reward standard and roles of staffs. Coupled with the layout and process changed, all issues of organization need to be adjusted. The structure of organization will be reorganized especially in shop floor level. The units of teams need to be changed from process based to cellular based, which means different working procedure operators work together as a unit for management. The control/reward standard should to be reversed from pieces work output of individuals to team based reward. The role of shop floor operators, manufacturing managers and top management will be redefined. Operators need high skill and self management ability and teamwork spirit. Manufacturing managers are not only good at daily operation, but also understanding of business and high skill of communication with other functions managers. Top management should make strategic decision to assure the changes can be accepted. Performance measures Performance measures are a kind of improving operations and concern with objectives to be measured, establishing targets and standards and improvement method. (Hill, 2000) They always include the following objectives and tasks as following: <table/>Some dimensions are old and used for many years while others will create new performance measures when manufacturing process changed, such as quality conformance, product/service range, new production/service introductions and demand spikes. The company is responsible for redefining and settling performance measures to match whole new systems. New product introduction Considering that all products have their life cycles, the company treats new production introduction plan as a part of its whole manufacturing strategy and routine of operations. (Chase, Jacobs and Aquilano, 2004) In automotive component industry, time to market is a crucial issue for competitive advantage. The strategy of the company is that adopting project management tool for new production introduction. It needs multi-functions staffs such as marketing, R&D, manufacturing to work together as a team and they try their best to reduce the time to market. <heading>3. Supplement for implementation of manufacturing strategy</heading>(Storey, 1994) argued that implementation of manufacturing strategy would not successful unless companies take into account of practice of the strategy with human resources and organizational behavior factors. Based on this company's manufacturing strategy, the organization structure and workforce will have a significant revolution. Some existing system and procedures are possible to resist implementation. Here the company uses an academic analysis tool called "Force Field Diagram" to analyze possible restraining forces in company. The Force Field Diagram is a tool for visualize forces which may impact sustain or against change initiatives. This tool can be used as any level such as personal, organization, project and so on. The forces may include people, habits, customs and attitude. Before adopt this tool, the company need to recognize the current and desired situation they wanted. Then they list all forces which may work on positive or negative to the changes and determine the strong extent of them. After that they can find whether there are some solutions to decrease the restraining forces or increase the driving forces. However, most research in this area recommend that reducing the restraining forces is easier to be accepted and operated. <table/>From the figure, the main difficulties in implementation have been analyzed clearly and their impact intensions are displayed. Before considering the supplement strategy to reduce them, the company recognizes them further as following: • Lack of high skill and self management workforce The significant revolution of layout from process based to cellular unit will result in the new requirement for workforce skills and job redesign. The existing shop floor workforces are half of fully skills mechanisms and half of semi-skilled machine operators. According to workforce strategy, the first step is to lay off half employees in the shop floor level. Because of the high requirement of skills for new layout, the rest staffs should be full skills mechanisms. They still can not be used immediately by reason of obsolete thought and working approach. They are used to their own specific working procedures and don't have skills on relative other procedures. They pay attention to their piece work and pursue high output because of the reward and payment standard and ignore the product quality. They never involved in the work as a host and just do what the manager told as task. They are lack of responsibility and dedication spirit. In addition, they are afraid of their employ security from this enormous layoff. People instinct of resisting change (Slack, 1991) pointed that successful implementation of manufacturing strategy involve changes in many aspects, such as technology, process, culture and organization. It is natural that staffs will feel maladjustment when significant change happening in company. They may bring antipathy and uncooperative attitude when implementing strategy. Lack of communication People's understanding of new manufacturing strategy and actions are the foundation of successful implementation of manufacturing strategy. (Storey, 1994) Good understanding is caused by enough communication for all level in the company. The manager's tasks emphasis on heavy duty communication. The shop floor members can not do the right job unless they are fully informed the new policy and understand them. Based on cellular unit process, knowledge and information need to be shared absolutely. Unfamiliar with new equipments Caused by reduction of half workforce, the company decided to buy some small and flexible machines replaced of human. These machines are completely new and unacquainted for remnant workforce. They need a period to learn and be proficient in them. This will cause that throughput in the initiate time of implementation go down. boredom for long time and complicated implementation Implementation of a strategy usually takes relative long time than ordinary activities. If the organizers do not have a reasonable and calculated plan, the staffs will feel weary after expected period especially no improvement result to be seen. In this case the strategy implementation will be given up and stopped. All the effort already done is useless. Meanwhile, the company will lost capital investment and staff confidence for future. In a word, all the restraining forces belong to personnel and organization aspects. This confirm most literature opinion that most implementation failure due to human or organizational problems. Here the company added more supplement strategy for avoiding the failures: Selection The company should change their viewpoint of employees as component to asset. (Chase, Jacobs and Aquilano, 2004) Component means the employer is interested in staff's current skills compare to future potential development as asset. For future perspective and new manufacturing strategy, the managers need to select potential and aspirant staffs even in new recruitment. Training and Development In new manufacturing strategy, training and development is an urgent issue which needs to be done at the initial period of implementation. It includes technology skill training, management skill training and company regulation training. Technology skill training is about the new machines usage and relative working process skills in cellular units. The purpose of it is helping shop floor worker overcome the unfamiliar with new machines and make them have multidiscipline skills for better operation of JIT manufacturing. Management skill training includes self-management skills, time-management skills and teamwork skills which help them work better in a team based environment. Company regulation training is focus on the new strategy action introduction, new work procedures and performance measures. Communication (Voss, 1992) argued that communication have new meaning in JIT and TOM. It should penetrate in all levels. The company will arrange senior managers and department managers have a plant tour once a week for eliminating barriers between managers and shop floor staff to promote better direct communication. Another policy is that daily staff meeting can make sub groups to discuss special problems and then present them by the open-plan general office. The company will use all media which including posters, board to list new procedures and regulations. It's better to make them visibility for shop floor workforce implementation. Project Management According to (Chase, Jacobs and Aquilano, 2004) definition, a project is a set of relative jobs and activities for required outcome in a demand period time. Project management is the process of planning, directing and controlling resources which include capital, employees, equipments and materials to meet the cost, time, technical restrict of project. The company will use project management tools and methods to implement the whole manufacturing strategy successful in time. <heading>4. Implementation plan and time scale for plant conversion</heading>In this case, the manufacturing strategy's most important part is change the plant from process based to cellular based, which means all the machines and staffs need to be arranged by different groups than before. Furthermore, the implementation of manufacturing strategy needs the cooperation between other functions such as human resource, top management and so on. (Hill, 2000) The company use project management as a basic tool to implement the plan. When set up a project, the company should consider the basic flow elements as following: Appoint a senior executive as champion, project manager: a crucial and basic element of successful implementation is that the top management's commitment and support. The suitable candidate of champion should be the vice director of the company and project manager will be the production department manager. Set up project team: identify prime contacts, fact-holders, implementers. Since this project involve many different function staffs, the implementers are selected from relative departments and have regular meeting to communicate. Prepare a detail action plan and budget. After the team formed, they will discuss the whole plan into breakdown target and procedures and estimate budget. Set up terms of reference, Measures of success. For evaluating the implementation, the project team should set up performance measures and references. Agreed Oversight and monitoring procedures; the team will review and report how it's going on regularly, and set short term targets. Furthermore they should tell everyone what progress has been made, what is happening next. Communicate objectives, benefits, timescale throughout the organization: fully communication and penetration of the project will make it easy to be implemented. Time scale and actions: detail actions are in the time scale figure 8 Monitor progress and amend plan if necessary: sometimes, the plan is always not perfect and suitable for the practical situation. In that case of implementation, the team will monitor it and amend it if any necessary. Meanwhile, the company also needs to consider the special process for changing layout. The detail consideration and time scale is listed as following figure <table/>The initial process of implementation is about 3 months, and then the company will adjust and improve the new system to make it more efficiently and effectively in the future. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Manufacturing strategy is a necessary part of cooperation strategy for a company. It not only serves for marketing and financial requirement, but also gives a competitive advantage for company. Through analysis of an traditional automotive component manufactory's crises and the demand of set up new manufacturing strategy, this assignment adopts Hayes and wheelwright's framework to formulate new manufacturing strategy. Furthermore, it construes possible problems when implementing the new strategy by Force Field Diagram and supplement strategy for solving these problems. Then it set up a detail implementation plan and time scale for changing plant from process based to cellular units. However, all the strategies are formulated under the condition of assumption from the company. In real practice, it will be discussed further and amended if any necessary. 