<heading>Part 1 Question 1</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>Creativity became to a crucial competitive advantage for most enterprises gradually. The organization need to be adjusted to help to form the creativity. This section is a literature review about key factors for creative organizations. After introducing key factors, analysis for some barriers of implementing the creativity have been illustrated. Finally, relative solutions are mentioned briefly. <heading>1.1 Key factors for creative organization</heading>Nowadays, efficient and responsive organizations are not good enough for increasing unstable and competitive business environment. They are under pressure to be more creative in all aspects which include marketing, new product development and others. (Leavy, 2003) Product innovation becomes a crucial competitive advantage for any enterprises and organizations. The advantage embodies in many aspects. For instance, it gives opportunities for companies to enrich their production categories, attempt new technology, explore new market, refresh existing business, average investment and reduce risk. Dougherty pointed out that organizations should have the competency of innovation or creation effectively and efficiently for the adaptability of environment changes caused by market, technology, and competition. It is convinced that many academic textbooks and journals articles concern with the necessary features which creative organizations need. For example, (Amabile, 1998) focused on the three components of creativity and concluded six approaches for organizations to manage it; (Robinson, Hackett, 1997) paid attention to the hard work of creative process and the approaches that how to articulate the process to organizational culture rather than individual; (Meyer, 2000) illustrated several case studies of design companies to explain four elements integration for managing a creative environment. Dougherty reviewed previous literatures of innovation and developed a advanced process for translating production innovation into organizational items. Compared to above normal point of view journals, (Sutton, 2001) summarized absolutely different and weird rules for managing creative organizations from perspectives of hiring, management, risk and randomness. To identify the key factors of creative organization, the first step is to define the creativity. Creativity is an operative science which has been defined from research about 50 years. For individual perspective, creative consists of three elements: expertise, motivation, and creative thinking skills.(Amabile, 1998) <figure/>Enterprise is about professional knowledge which individual master, while creative thinking skills concern with personal adaptability and envision for problem solving. Motivation which comes from individual internal passion to settle issues is the easiest aspect to be influenced by organizations. (Robinson, Hackett, 1997) understood creativity by different way and viewed it on collective level. As a colligate part of organization work process, creativity is not invention based on nothing, but is transformation or improvement of something which is comprehended thoroughly. It is regarded as a process or conditions of environment which make new ideas for possible innovation are developed. Organization structure is the crucial part of for this level view. Amabile is an expert of organization research for about 30 years. He concluded six key categories for managing creativity as organization level. They were the most accepted and popular theory in this domain. The review is based on the above six key factors and compares with others' viewpoints. Challenge of corporate groups (Amabile, 1998) introduced that internal motivation is the most influenced element of the three elements of creativity. As organizational level, the challenge for creative management is that manager should allocate the suitable staff to do match job. The effective allocation means that the job can use people's professional knowledge and creative thinking skills. The most important issue is that the most match job will intensive staff's maximum motivation. (Meyer, 2000) pointed that managers should lead a corporate behavior group in the products innovation process. It means that no single staff can complete all need to be done, and a creative process need all staffs to corporate together. Managers should understand every staff well both on skills and personalities before the whole process. Both the literatures focused on the staff's perspective as challenge of creative organization management. Freedom When studying about freedom, it doesn't mean that managers leave the whole team without any target. (Amabile, 1998) denoted that the organization leaders should set clear strategic targets and give fully autonomy of the process to staffs which will inspire more creativity. The freedom process leads employees to use their professional knowledge and creative thinking skills. Meanwhile, they will exert all their power of motivation and responsibility of ownership to do achieve the goal. Of course, the freedom need a condition called "self management" which suggested by (Meyer, 2000). He paid attention to self management ability as individuals. It indicated that organization is comprised of a mount of staffs, which are work independently without heavy head control or guide. He insisted that the creative process will be operated well under condition that the individual objective is in line with the collective and corporate objective. Self management regard individual which impact all in the organization as crucial and initiative part of the whole creative process. If all the employees have the ability of understanding the strategic goals and approaches to achieve them, the management of organization will trust them to work freedom. Resource Two main resources have been mentioned in Amabile's research about creativity in 1998: time and money. Manager need to allocate these properly for increasing people's motivation. Time schedule could not be too rush or too long and need to fit the project's requirement. In the same way, managers should not allocate other resources such as money so tight that staffs will cost time to find additional resources. On the contrary, too much resource also can't cause creativity. In addition, he argued that the traditional concept which is important to create a physical space for teams is not crucial. Mangers should pay more attention to other initiative actions than this issue. (Robinson and Hackett, 1997) had opposite perspective about workspace as Amabile's. They illustrated a case study of a designer and manufactory furniture company. By the changing of workplace for leadership from private room to an open informal community room, the team increased communication and speed for any change decision making for whole organization. Work group features (Amabile, 1998) suggested that a creative team should have mulriple skills and backgrounds which may have different thinking methods and professional areas to encourage creativity. Furthermore, people in the team should share their experience with others, kindly and helpful for others, and appreciate others' skills. (Sutton, 2001) had the similar opinion as him and embarked to study this issue from the radical step of hiring employees. It is well known that employer prefer to hire quick learner of company culture and they are in need for the company and have similar style with the managers. On the contrary, Sutton argued for a weird theory that organizations should hire slow learner of company code who may bring out some new idea in the process of learning. He gave an example of Xerox laser printer Company's innovation to support his viewpoint. He also suggested two other ways to increase possibility for creativity. One is to employ people who the managers don't like and feel uncomfortable. The other is to use somebody who has the skills the organizations don't need at that moment. Supervisory encouragement For encouraging people to keep passion for creativity, the organization should let them feel their efforts and work are valuable and important. Amabile said that managers in creative organizations usually don't set specific external rewards for especial results. They should realize and acknowledge innovative efforts by individuals and teams. (Sutton, 2001) mentioned this point in his article called "The weird Rules of Creativity" again. He thought that the reward policy should not only for successful innovation efforts, but also for failure. Furthermore, the organization should sustain punishment for those who attempt and accomplish nothing. Organizational support (Amabile, 1998) supplemented that managers' encouragement for creativity are useful but not enough. Organizational support is the radical and strongest power to encourage creativity. Basically, organizations should let all staffs know that creativity is the most priority for company. Then they need suitable system and procedures to evaluate creative efforts value. Foremost, organization managers should encourage staff to participate knowledge for sustaining creativity. By the way, the organization needs to be kept away from political confliction at any time. This situation will cause staff's attention away from work. (Robinson and Hackett, 1997) study this issue from different aspect. They supposed that the first step for organizations to support creative action is to understand the field which creative action is. Then it should connect the field's structure with the real operation work. The organization needs to regards efficient change as daily procedure in business management. <heading>1.2 Key barriers for implementation of creative organization</heading>The first section discussed about six key factors of creative organization based on Amabile's theory. Meantime, some other authors' perspective are compared and analyzed for broad horizon of this issue. Nevertheless, there are many barriers when organizations implement those factors in practical environment. It is a crucial problem for successful implementation that how to overcome these barriers. Corporate group How to match suitable staff to suitable job? It's the problem which managers pay most attention to. Managers need to know their employees and tasks very well. The barrier is that this process to understand employees and tasks takes long time. (Amabile,1998) In addition, managers encourage staffs cooperate in harmony. (Meyer, 2000) Managers should communicate with staffs in daily work rather than when they begin to allocate jobs. Meanwhile, they introduce the task clearly to staffs for execution. Freedom The precondition of giving staff freedom in creative process is that managers set up a clear goal. Amabile illustrated two misconduct way of freedom. One is that the managers change the target often and unclear defined target. The other is that managers give nominal autonomy to staff. In reality, the process is constrained and controlled by management. Dougherty mentioned that it was difficult to balance the pressure between freedom and responsibility. To solve these barriers, managers should set up clear target and explain it to staffs. Furthermore, they will make high commitment for innovation. (Meyer, 2000) pointed out that self management is also a necessary skill for freedom. This process can be improved by feedback from clients, which is an automatic learning tool. Resources Reasonable and suitable resource allocation is a tough task for managers again. More or less resources are both cause to decrease creativity. (Amabile,1998) Managers often make mistakes to tight time of project for pushing staff. That will lead to no time for creative thinking and motivation. The only way to reduce the failure possibility is that managers decide the time, money and other resources by their previous experience and general regulations. Work group features Various personalities of staffs encourage the possibility of creativity. But it may bring many problems to the organizations. (Sutton,2001) listed that different attitude and personalities staffs are easy to cause conflict and uncomfortable communications. (Amabile,1998) suggested that managers decision to organize a team with diverse staffs are just beginning, they need to consider more to avoid unnecessary conflict. For instance, the staffs' teamwork spirit, creative skills thinking approaches, and problem solving attitudes are all under the consideration by managers. Supervisory encouragement Generally, managers encourage creative process by individuals and team. But it is hard to master the measure that what kind of creative actions are valuable to be regarded and rewarded. (Amabile,1998) In addition, the form of reward is also a barrier for organizations. Money is not the only form to reward staffs' creative efforts. Managers will keep the sensitive sense by plenty of experience to judge the possible successful creative efforts. Another way for supervisors to support creativity is that managers act as a model like a person who are insist on difficult problems and want to communicate and cooperate with other team members. This will enforce other staffs to learn from his/her spirit and attitude for creative process. Organizational support Organizational support is fundamental and the most important support for creativity. Maybe one thing mentioned by (Amabile,1998) about political war is a barrier in some complex organizations. The management must have open mind and fluent communication with others. Sometimes the organizational structures are not suitable for creative process. (Robinson and Hackett, 1997) In that situation, organizations need to reorganize their structure. The following problem of this action is that people always resist changing. Measure and control are important in this process. In addition, fully communication helps people to adapt the change. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Although the above section mentioned key factors and possible barriers when implementing these factors in creative organizations, there are still many issues need to be researched. Based on the above authors' theory and views, creative organization is always a hot topic and have practical signification to develop in future. <heading>Part 2 Question 4</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>Product development processes are a series of activities which companies conceive, design, manufacturing and sale a product for business profit. Part 2 introduced three main kinds of product development processes and analyzed their similar and different features. <heading>2.1 Product development processes</heading>Companies make profits by finding customers' need and creating products with low price and high quality to satisfy the need. Achieving these targets is not just one department's responsibility, such as marketing, design and manufacturing. It is a whole product development process which involves all functions in a company. (Ulrich and Eppinger, 1995) defined product development as "a continuous activities start from forecasting and perception of potential marketing opportunities and finish with production, sales, delivery and after sale guaranty service." A product development process is a series of activities which companies conceive, design, manufacturing and sale a product for business profit. The processes are different between organizations, even different in diverse projects in an organization. Nevertheless, there is a generic product development process which has input of mission and output of product launch: <figure/>The five phases which consist of generic product development process are concept development, system level design, detail design, testing and refinement, and product ramp-up. At first step in concept development phase, the target market need has been identified. The product's concept which includes shape, function, features and specifications has been chosen for further steps. The system level design focus on the product system specifications like assembly layout. Then detail design includes whole product specifications of materials, components, and standard parts from suppliers. After that, testing and refinement is about test and evaluation all preproduction aspects of product. Finally, production ramp-up phase is for training the workforce and find any existing flaws in the whole process. This phase is often a continuous step. In fact, there are many different models used in product development processes. All of them have advantages and disadvantages and are applied to different industries. This part will identify three main models: First generation process, Stage gate process and Third generation process. <heading>2.1.1 First generation process</heading>National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) introduced the first generation product development process called Phased Project Planning in 1960s. It often has exhaustive plan of working with suppliers and subcontractors and are applied in aerospace and military industrial projects. (Cooper, 1994) It usually mentioned as Phased Review Process because of its specification. PRP divided whole product development process into separate phases with review points. Every phase work should be done under the condition that the previous phase has been finished successful. The resources are also allocated under the rules. It assures that the project is carried out in conceived way. Meantime, it decreases technical risk. But it has more disadvantage than advantages. First of all, the process is complex because of the every inspection for each phase. Then it is time-consuming because that the management need time to check each review point. Foremost, it is always executed by engineering which causes barrier of communication with other functions. Based on the above features, it is suitable for aerospace industry to avoid technical risk rather than business risk. It can't be applied for the condition that market changes frequently. (Wheelwright and Clark, 1992) gave an example for this kind of functional based company called Kodak. Kodak's main project management process is referred to Manufacturability Assurance Process. It is functional based in project leadership and adopt a series of phases which are focused and operated in functions. This kind of process with apparent function orientation is suitable for companies that insist on technical depth and technical solution is the competitive advantage. <heading>2.1.2 Concurrent engineering</heading>During several decades' development and revolution, it is well know that multifunctional project team is effective and efficient for successful product development. Concurrent engineering is defined as a model which every function in company participate in the project team. (Cordero, 1991) The function delegates communicate and integrate well in the project and have the responsibility and control of the development process with wider targets and ambitions. Multi-disciplinal team members use their professional skills together and share information with others. This situation leads the team to know every aspect of whole process earlier and comprehensive than before. For example, market opportunities, design process, financial investment and manufacturing capacities and so on. Meanwhile, the team staffs have close contact with all kinds of business participants, such as customers, competitors, and suppliers for earlier preparation of new product development. The crucial point for execution of this process is to trade off the team members' professional skills and personalities. They need familiar with their own function skills and good teamwork spirit to cooperate with other functional staffs. The demerits are that the risk will increase by the concurrent simulation of design and manufacturing. In addition, the responsibility is easy to be shifted and transformed. Based on these features, the concurrent engineering process is suitable for increased production development which is in middle level of innovations, such as software, computer industries. <heading>2.1.3 Stage gate process</heading>Stage gate process is popular in business organizations, which is a combination model of conceptual and operational perspectives for efficient product development. (Cooper, 1990) The basic structure of this process model is as following: <figure/>The whole product development process is separate as sub processes called stages which process management skills can be used to. Gates means check points at the end of each sub process for consistent with whole process. Stages usually consist of similar or relative groups and activities and more costly than previous ones. Meanwhile, risk can be managed continuously by information purification at each stage. The gates have two functions: one is for the entrance for the next stage. The other is for control after previous stage. They bring input or output as features for different functions. For instance, the input maybe commutative items which project manager should bring to the gates or rules for evaluating project. They are different for vary situation and requirement. The output should be decisions for dealing with this stage, and admission for next stage. The gates are always kept by senior managers from different functions. Organization should change in two approaches for this process. One is that the project team are consist of multi-functional staffs and requires project manager understand every input and output of gates in the process. The other is that top management act as gate keeper. It leads to participation and commitment from them for product development. This process is advance in many aspects. For instance, it increase communication between different functions and enhance teamwork spirit. Meanwhile, it can reduce recycle rate and discover failure as soon as possible. Furthermore, marketing schedule joins the development process at the beginning for better launch. However, the implementation of this process is tough and relative difficult. Project progress is limited by each gate and it is impossible to overlap stages. It is time consuming for going through all stages and gates. None project is priority or more important than others which cause no connection with resource distribution. Motorola adopted this kind of process to build contract driven and cross-functional teams. (VVheelwright and Clark, 1992) illustrated that the team is selected and execute activities under the guidance of senior management, who is act as project leader. At the beginning of the project, the team signs a contract with detail work plan which includes resource demand and expect operations results. In case the senior management approval, the contract is admitted both by key team members and senior managers. Leadership at this kind of process play more important and stronger role than other processes. Generally, these product development processes last eighteen to thirty months. Motorola's framework process emphasis on integration and is suitable for the situation where system solution is the main factor. In this environment, this process is applied for platform projects which product innovation is the central of company. Meanwhile, it is efficient applied when the market atmosphere changes dramatically and sensitive responses are needed. <heading>2.2 Analysis of three product development processes</heading><heading>2.2.1 Similarity between three processes</heading>In the above section, three models of product development process have been identified and introduced. First generation process, Concurrent engineering, and Stage gate process are all used for new product development. All of them are not perfect and have their advantages and disadvantages. They have their own unique features to apply in different situation and business. Nevertheless, as models of product development process, they have several similar issues as following. First of all, all of these three processes are customers' orientation and begin with the perception of potential market opportunities and customer needs. Then they are separated into individual phases or stages from whole process. They all target at developing good quality product and assure outcomes' quality by some checkpoint. For instance, first generation process has review points behind each phases and stage gate process has constraint gate with each stage. Meanwhile, all of them have testing or prototype steps to ensure final product quality. (Ulrich and Eppinger, 1995) concluded that coordination is also a common element of these processes. They act as comprehensive plan which define every participator's role and responsibilities. Cooperation and teamwork need to be implemented during the project. All of them need to be planned and schemed before start. Landmark timing of each phases or stages should be designed in the schedule. Foremost, good management is the common successful precondition for three processes. Outstanding management skills and open viewpoint and communication skills is essential for every process whether the management from functional managers or senior managers of organizations. Finally, all of the processes give the companies opportunities to improve existing systems and procedures. <heading>2.2.2 Differences between three processes</heading>Although the mentioned three processes have similarities, they have their own unique characteristics for different applications. Concurrent engineering is more different from stage gate process than first generation process for project time and execution sequences. It has several multi-functional teams to effort in the same time. None stages or phases depend on the previous ones. This process causes that concurrent engineering process use shortest time to develop products than two others. Compare to the simultaneity activities of concurrent engineering processes, first generation process and stage gate process have strict sequences of each steps. Project maybe be delayed or hold by one stage's problem. On the contrary, concurrent engineering process maybe departure its original schedule because of none gates or review points in it. It may increases risk for low quality or responsibility transformation. At team ingredient aspect, first generation process is functional orientation and the other two are multi-functional teams. First generation process is lack of communication by the functional orientation team structure. Meanwhile, the review point often checked by functional managers while stage gate process's gate keepers are always senior managers. Stage gate process has the highest control level because of the input and output constraints of gates. The three processes are applied in different industries and situations. First generation process is often applied in aerospace or military industries because of its low technical risk and slow response for market changing. Concurrent engineering process is more appreciate for increasing product innovation and process innovations. Finally, stage gate process is used in most of business environment and efficient for fast market transformation situation. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This part introduced three mainstream product development processes: first generation process, concurrent engineering and stage gate process. All of them have been analyzed from advantage to disadvantage. Then the contrast of similar and different features of them is explained for better understanding of them. Product development process is never perfect and will be improved continuously. <heading>Part 3 Post-project review</heading>The case study game of PDDM module is a good practice and understanding approach for whole process of product design and development. The team worked from a brainstorming of market to find the gaps/ needs. Then we needed to select one of five alternative designs as final design with material and process selection. After that, the establish costs should be calculated and product specification was confirmed. Finally, the detail project definition with rough time scale up to launch was defined. Our team identified the gap between customer's need of security of laptop and lack of this kind of products. We brainstormed five possible solutions for this gap, such as locker, alarm, cases, tracking device and anti-theft device. After using the tool called concept convergence to analyze, we decided to design lockers finally. Then we considered the capital cost, revenue costs, production cost together to estimate total cost and return on investment time. We used the project management knowledge from this module to constitute the whole project process. Our team's strengths are that we found a good product and adopted scientific management skills of product design and development process. Our potential market for laptop locker is huge and less competitors at the moment. This is the precondition for profitable product development. Many management and analysis tools have been used in the whole process, such as brainstorm for finding the gaps, concept convergence for deciding the final design, project management skills for project definition, marketing mix for production launch program and so on. The weaknesses of our team are that we estimate cost roughly and it was imprecisely. We didn't consider that promotion cost was a big part of cost for new product development process. Meanwhile, our product is low techniques and easy to be replicated by other new enter competitors. We should pay more attention to product patent protection to prevent this situation happening. From this case study, we learnt that every product design and development process need meticulous and detail plan from business mission to cost and profit calculation. Many skills from the PDDM modules can be applied in the practical product development process, such as project management, concept convergence, lean product introduction, investment appraisal and so on. 