<heading>Question 1</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>Accounting word has two main branches: financial accounting and management accounting. Financial accounting is used for external decision maker such as shareholders, customers, banks and the like. It is an accounting progress which obeys the accounting standard and ends with preparation of profit and loss account, balance sheet and cash flow statement. Management accounting is the application of the principles of accounting and financial management and used for internal management of an organization. [1] It is important for non accountants especially managers because of it help managers planning, control and decision making. This assignment refers to these two branches of accounting while pay more attention to financial accounting analysis. Question I analyzes VT group plc's latest annual report & account 2005 and 2004 to get deep understand of its business and financial performance. It includes several steps; first of all, the general VT group plc background and business including products and market will be described. Then all the relevant information will be collected such as annual report, press releases, corporation governance and the like. The next step is to review three main financial statements sheets and relevant key ratios with core management statements for general financial performance analysis. Then the detail analysis of different ratios will give deep understanding of the company corporation performance. Finally, the future prospects will be represented based on the analysis result. Question 2 is based on the "Winning Margin" game in module and explains the importance of cash management. Finally, two techniques of management accounting are demonstrated and explained during the game and real world. <heading>1.1 Description of VT group plc</heading>VT group plc is a worldwide company which business is shipbuilding and support service as a leader. Its employees are motive and committed to provide word class solutions for customer's requirement and gain the trust from customers. Its turnover is £744 million in 2005 and has 11,000 employees worldwide. Its business comprises of support service and shipbuilding. VT support service contributed £591 million turnover in 2005 and gained £46 million operating profit. It includes four main parts: Defense, US Defense, Communication and Education and Skills. Its main market is in UK which businesses are technical service, logistics and training for all armed services, critical communication and broadcast services, services to the education sector, careers guidance and vocational training. [2] It also provides technical services, logistics and training for armed forces around world. <figure/>VT Shipbuilding business is divided into warships, marine products which include small crafts and sell £152.5 million in 2005. It is a leader of exporting warships and world class company for designing and construction of different kinds of vessels. Meanwhile, it also manufactures marine, offshore and aerospace industries. <heading>1.2 Interpretation of Annual Report</heading>The Interpretation of annual report is divided into two sections. Firstly, the three statements are reviewed by horizontal analysis method for general financial information of VT group to find the main changes during latest two years. Then ratio analysis will be used for deep analysis. The annual accounts statements are important because they indicated users what assets the company owns, the cash flow process, the profit or loss in specific years and helps users to gain the company's general performance knowledge and financial situation.[3] These financial statements are required by laws, business and financial communities, and authorities. <heading>1.2.1 Review of Profit and Loss Account</heading>VT group plc uses vertical format which defined by "The Companies Act 1985" to prepare the profit and loss account which displays income and expenditure on line by line basis, and operational format for expenditure representation. <table/><figure/>VT group plc had really bright year in 2005 with all key index increased from the profit and loss account. Turnover increased from £671 m to £744m by 11 % in 2005, while profit before tax raised from £26.3m to £42.9 by 63%. Earning per share also increased to 20.8p by 15%. This good performance was contributed by huge order book valued at £ 2.7bn this year compared to £2.4bn in 2004. The notable huge orders are that the contract to run Royal New Zealand Navy's main dockyard valued £1 00m, fire training activities in South Wales valued £70m. Meanwhile the new shipyard in Portsmouth increased capacity by 20% compared to old Woolston shipyard which improved productivity and added more profit in 2005. Meanwhile, the retain profit for group was about £1 0m and increased dramatically (2004, £0.11 5m) mainly because of the company purchasing other two companies in education and skills sector and in the US defense sector for support services business. This activity increased US Defense and Education and Skills business in size by 57% and 22% separately. (Annual report, 2005, p2) Another point contributed to the profit and earnings was that VT group was identified as preferred bidder as part of Air Tanker consortium on the Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft program which is the largest UK PFI project and valued £1 3bn totally. This developed a long term potential profit increase opportunities in the future. (Annual report, 2005 p7) <heading>1.2.2 Review of Balance Account</heading>According to the balance account from annual report 2005, the fixed assets, current assets, and creditors all decreased slightly while stocks, debtors, net assets increased. Meanwhile, the capital reserves and equity shareholders' fund went up by 0.7% and 7.4% separately. There were many reasons for these kinds of changes. Fixed assets decreased because of both the intangible assets like goodwill and tangible assets reduced. It caused by the reduction in deferred consideration on VT Plus Training plc, RTK Marine and VT Griffin Services Inc and amendments to fair value of VT Four S and JA Jones. (Annual report, 2005, p51) Stock increased dramatically because of the work in process increased by 82% to 10878 which result from the new shipyard Portsmouth's big order in process. Current assets increased by the stock and short term debtors. Since the funding for VT group of big projects are long term loans and no resource in the company, these non resource loan projects such as Fire Fighting Units PFI contract and three Offshore Patrol Vessels and a Fire Training Facility in AVonmouth led to net assets increased. (Annual report, 2005, p54) <table/><figure/>VT group plc has reasonable assets percentage between fixed assets and current assets by 65% and 35% respectively in 2005. The creditors in one within a year occupied 77% of whole liabilities which means the pressure to return money in short term is relatively high and maybe risky for the business. These will be discussed deeply later by ratios analysis methodology in next section. <figure/><heading>1.2.3 Review of Cash flow Account</heading>Cash flow statement works as supplement for profit and loss account and balance account. [4] It likes a link between the balance account at beginning and end of a period and profit and loss account during the period. <table/><figure/>VT group plc cash flow account indicated the movements' situation in assets, capitals and liabilities in 2005. VT group plc had poor cash flow in 2005 with -£ 1 5.8m compared to £30.1 m in 2004. Operating cash flow was £ 45.3m compared to £ 84m in 2004, which meant 104% of operating profit converted into cash in 2005. One notable reason for the enormous declined of cash flow from operating activities was that the movement on provisions includes £1 .5m about the exceptional Chester Street provision created in the prior year. Meanwhile, the increase of stock and debtors and reduction of creditor also led to the declined of cash. (Annual report, 2005, p58) The capital expenditure and financial investment increased by the huge declined of purchasing of tangible fixed assets about £ 38.3m. Another reason for the declined of cash is that the group moved about £ 1 7m in long term deposits. Anyway, the group now emphasis on improve their process to better cash generation, such as streamline the procurement process by FAST track initiative to make easier for customers and suppliers, provide work capital management courses to staffs and the like. (Annual report, 2005, p18) <heading>1.2.4 Ratios analysis</heading>The general comparison and analysis of the above three financial statements can't give real indication of the company's corporation financial performance unless by ratio analysis for deeper understanding. Ratio analysis are used to interpret performance trend year by year and compared to competitors' performance or as benchmarking to average level in industry. [1] The accounting ratios can be classified to four categories: the rate of profitability, liquidity, Activity/Efficiency and Investment/Shareholder return. The reason for this classification is for simple calculation, easy presentation and understanding. <figure/>However, the classifications of ratios vary and depend on different industries and circumstances. The above ratios are basic of any investigation in spite of the company's type. The calculations in the following sections refer to the VT group plc report from FAME database. <heading>Profitability Ratios </heading>The profitability ratios are used to check how much profit the company makes in specific period compared to other periods or other competitors. The data in the profit and loss account can't interpret correct because the profit should be related to the business size and capital investment amounts of the company. [5] Here are four ratios to be calculated:  FORMULA  These two ratios measures how successful the company has been at trading. Gross profit ratio indicates how much profit the company earned related to the sales turnover, while profit margin ratio compares the net profit before taxation with sales turnover. It looks like good trend if it increases year by year. [5]  FORMULA  Another trading ratio for supplement of Gross profit ratio is make up ratio, which indicates gross profit percentage of cost of goods sold. It's better to increase because of the cost of sold for each units reduced. [1]  FORMULA  This ROCE ratio is the best method to evaluate profitability of company. It measures what earned profit relate to what finance the company have totally. Due to the interest is a cost of borrowing money, it's better to use "profit before interest to calculate the ratio. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005)  FORMULA  The ROI and return on shareholders' fund ratios are used to identify shareholder' benefit. They compare the net profit before and after tax with shareholders' fund to find that if the business is valuable to invest and has financial risk. For long term business, they need to keep stable increasing for shareholder' confident and support. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) <figure/>From the above profitability ratios, the VT group did a good job to make profit by fully utilization of its assets and shareholders' funds in 2005. The gross profit and profit margin ratios increased from 12.37% to 16.39%, 4.87% to 7.12% respectively. Compared to the denominator (sales turnover) increase, the numerator's huge increase of gross profit and profit before tax contributed the rise. These caused by three reasons. One was that the sales turnover increased by strong order book (22.7bn), two acquisitions for Education and Skills sector and US Defense sector, and some big contracts such as Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft program, fire fighting training activities in South Wales, and Royal New Zealand Navy's dockyard and the like. Another reason was that the cost of sales increased relatively few compared to turnover by new productive Portsmouth's shipyard. This situation can be concluded from make-up ratio from 14.12% to 19.6%. Finally, the interests paid reduced because of the reduction of creditors and led to the profit before tax increase. (Chairman's statement, p2) Shareholders' funds and company's assets were used totally by VT group because of the ROCE, ROI and return to shareholder' funds all increased from 11.84%, 11.91%, 18.41% to 17.12%, 18.25%, and 28.03% respectively. These were mainly caused by the obvious increase of profit before interest, before tax and after tax. Both the total assets and current liabilities were reduced but the reduction degree of total assets was bigger. Shareholder's funds increased because of the total reserve and profit and loss account rose together by the increasing value of shares and dividends. The above ratios indicated the VT group used the finance investment from shareholders and total assets effectively to make maximum profit in 2005. <heading>Liquidity Ratios </heading>Liquidity ratios measure the ability of company's assets transform to cash, which means that how much cash company gather in short term (general twelve months). It related between current assets, stocks and current liabilities.  FORMULA  The current assets ratio is suggest to at least 1:1 which means the current assets exceed the current liabilities in most situation but not definitely. If it below 1:1, maybe the company doesn't have enough available liquid resources to meet immediate commitments, which means the current assets can't be quickly transformed to cash. [6]  FORMULA  It's better to measure the liquidity position than current assets ratio because of it is difficult to turn stocks into cash in short term. A business which has acid test ratio less than 100% may feel difficulty in paying its debts when they due. It maybe influenced by the strong negotiating positions with suppliers and customers of company. If the company promise longer payment period to supplier than payment time form customers, the current liabilities will increase to cause the acid test ratio less than 1:1. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) From the above calculation of VT group plc, both the current assets ratios and acid test ratios were below 1:1 and stable at about 75% and 70% in 2005 and 2004, while the percentage reduced slightly in 2005 compared to 2004. These don't indicate that the company is in trouble in liquidity position because of the industry's character. The VT group streamlined their procurement process by FAST track initiative for stronger negotiation position, which means longer payment promise to suppliers. Meanwhile, most projects of VT group were long term and still in operational phase. Funding for those projects are long term loans because of no resource to VT group. All the above reasons led to the acid test ratio less than 1:1. (Financial Review, 2005, p18) <heading>Efficiency Ratios </heading>These ratios display how efficient a company manages the resources. They are necessary because of the profit in accounting maybe not entirely correct and believable by adjustments. All the following ratios express as a number rather  FORMULA  The higher of the stock turnover ratio, the more efficiency of company's purchasing and selling goods by better inventory management. The meaning of the ratio is that companies have 365/ratio day's sales products in stock. For instance, the ratio is 2 means that the company have 6 months sales revenue's product in stock. [7]  FORMULA  Debtors turnover and debtors collection ratios measure the same index that how quick the company collects debtors from its customers' trading credit. The higher of debtors turnover ratio and lower of debtors collection ratio, the more help for company's cash flow increased. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005)  FORMULA  This ratio averages sales revenues to investment in the business and seems an improvement if it increases, which means more efficient use of total resources. It maybe caused by better working capital management, such as inventory, receivable, payables and the like or better use of existing fixed assets' capacity.  FORMULA  Another point of view of efficiency is related sales turnover to fixed assets, such as plant, machinery, land, vehicles and the like. The higher the ratio is, the greater the return on the investment in fixed assets. This ratio is just useful when comparing with previous time or other competitors. [8] The VT group had relative efficient management of its resources in 2005 compared to 2004, though the stock increased relative slower than the sales increase degree. The stock turnover decreased from 30.47 to 28.07, which means the company just prepared two weeks sales amount production for stock. It's better for the cash flow of company. This caused by good trading condition which VT group made with customers. Debtors increased from 8.12 to 8.57 align with debtors collection cut from 44.94 to 42.58 days in 2005. The group's vision is "to be recognized as the Number One International Government Services group" which means the government customers reduced the potential bad debt possibilities because of their credits and figures. (Chief executive's review, 2005, p4) Net assets turnover and fixed assets turnover increased from 1.81, 1.50 to 2.08, and 1.70 respectively in 2005, which indicated the better use of total assets and fixed assets of the group. Several activities influenced the above result. First of all, two main acquisition for support service business performed really well and high productivity in 2005. Then the shipbuilding business has completed restructuring and reorganizing processes in new shipyard Portsmouth which last 18 months and included the introduction of senior management development program, better targeting of sales activity and improvement efficiency of production processes. (Annual report, 2005, p14) Meantime, working capital management training courses were continuous invested in the group's staffs. <heading>Investment Ratios </heading>The above ratios are suitable for all the interested users of company, such as customers, bank, competitors, government, employees and managers, as well as shareholders. The following ratios are mainly from the perspective of shareholders and indicated whether there is financial risk in the company. [7]  FORMULA  Gearing ratio gives a look at if it high financial investment risk in a company. It displays the percentage of all forms of debt and borrowing as high risk finance resource with shareholders' fund as lower risk finance resource. The greater the ratio is, the higher risk to invest in the entity. This ratio maybe distorted by specific purpose and can be supplemented by the following interest cover ratio.  FORMULA  This ratio is influenced by profit as well as numbers of shares issued. It enables a fair comparison between different years' earnings by related profit to something  FORMULA  This ratio indicated the company's profit ability for covering the fixed finance charge like interest. It also solves the problem that the company maybe manipulate gearing ratio for better borrowing position and detect turn position. An increase seems like improvement for companies. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) From the above calculation of VT group data, it is obviously that VT group is valuable to invest and has relative lower risk in 2005 compared to 2004. The gearing ratio decreased from 124.51% to 103.57% while the interest cover increased almost double from 3.93 to 7.45 in 2005. Basic earning per share also increased from 9.09p to 15.56p by 71% which brought more profit and confidence for shareholders and gained more support from them. The reasons were that the profit before interest increased much while the loans of company reduced which caused to interest reduced. One side, the company set up good relationship with suppliers and customers for good trading condition of lower loans and more cash. They also implemented treasury policies to help them reduce financial risks, which included management of interest rate and foreign currency exposure, provide cash management and ensure the availability of facilities to finance new investment, working capital and guarantees. Meanwhile, the group has good relationship with banks as borrowing or to support performance bonds and advance payment guarantees. (Financial review, Annual report 2005, p19) <heading>Conclusion</heading>Although the company did pretty well in profitability, liquidity, efficiency and investment perspectives in 2005 compared to 2004, the performance was unstable during the latest five years. The following five years summary indicated the long term financial performance of VT group plc. Although turnover increased except 2003, the other indexes were all fluctuate clearly especially during 2002 to 2003. The main decrease performances happened in the liquidity ratio and gearing ratio, which means that the company became lack of ability to transform assets into cash in short term and higher risk because of the more loans compared with shareholders funds. These trends maybe caused by the enlargement of global business markets, organization scales increase and competitive market environment. <table/>It is still optimistic for the future of VT group because of the good foundation during the previous years. Due to the industry's particularity, most of the contracts and customer relationship are long term and stable, which bring potential turnover and profit in the future. For instance, the contacts for UK PFI projects are long term, and Royal New Zealand Navy's dockyard last 10 years. All the business sectors expand their market and enhance the capacity for productivities, such as the new shipyard Portsmouth's excellent performance, the successful development in US defense market. Meanwhile, the UK support services defense market are anticipated to increased next five years and shipbuilding has continuous growth opportunities both in domestic and global markets for at least ten years. (Chief Executive's review, annual report 2005, p4) VT group is the leader in these businesses and believed to grasp the opportunities for bright future. <heading>Question 2 Management Accounting</heading><heading>2.1 Part A: cash management</heading>In today's business environment, cash is the most primary key index for company's health and support it to survive and success as oxygen for human. Business could survive without sales or profit for a short time, but die without cash. Therefore, the cash inflow and outflow should be careful monitored and managed. For better management of cash flow, managers always create a plan to forecast cash inflow and outflow for avoiding lack of cash during the operation period. On contrary, too much idle cash indicates insufficient use of financial resources. So the key point of cash management is that keep effective liquid balance of cash for demand of business while don't idle too much resources. [6] As a role of commercial manager in the business simulation 'Winning Margin", the responsibility was make decision of new market development, new products and product support, which costs influenced cash flow and debtors collection time for cash inflow of company. The year 2 operation will be analyzed for explanation the detail affection. All the decision the commercial manager made were all at the beginning of the year. He analyzed the market demand trend all round the world and decided which markets and what kind of products will enter in. After discussion and communication with purchasing manager, production manager, and cash manager, he leant the general situation in the company about the equipment, production, and cash flow. Then he made the decision align with the company's capacity. At the beginning of year 2, the group decided to sale Terrier and Wolf in UK market and EU market. Due to the new market development cost for EU market has been paid at the beginning of year 1, he just need to decide how much should pay for engineering and quality for bidding more orders. This issue was the most influence for cash outflow of the company. It depended on the trend of market demand and the market strategy of the company. At this stage, group 2 emphasized on the main UK market and realized the EU market didn't have big order at initial period. Meanwhile, the main productions of products in the company were terrier and need to invest more for gaining enough orders for fully utilization of capacity. Another point need to be considered was that competitors investment situation were also need to be forecasted for avoiding waste investment. Based on the above analysis, the commercial manager invested $ 5m for Terrier and $ I m for Wolf in the market, and each $1 m for Terrier and Wolf in EU market. When selecting orders, the key point was that the manager should consider the capacity of production and the different payment time for different markets. Because the home market payment time was I quarter while the overseas' was 2 quarter, it would better to choose home orders and then overseas' orders. This factor decided debtors' collection period and influenced cash inflow extremely. In the real business, the commercial manager will impact the following items in cash flow statement: profit before interest, stock and debtors. The market development and order winner like engineering and quality cost influences the cost of sale, which indirectly impact the profit before interest. Then the promotion for specific products and order book decided the stock. Finally, the credit and payment condition for customer will affect the debtor of company. (FACS, WMG note, 2005) <heading>2.2 Part B</heading><heading>2.2.1 Absorption Costing</heading>Absorption costing is defined as a share of related fixed overheads to individual units of output and indicates a full view of output costs during the production phases, while marginal costing includes variable costs of production, such as materials. The common method to recover overhead to each unit is that identify cost centers and apportionment of total overhead costs, and then decides overhead recovery rates for each cost center. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) In Winning Margin simulation, the relative absorption costing were depreciation, fixed production costs, set up costs, factory rent and the like. The cost center was identified by different products like Terrier and Tiger, while the overhead recovery rate was direct wages cost. Finally the standard cost per units included the variable cost per unit and production cost per unit. This cost helped the commercial manager to make decision of most profitably price markets and orders. From production manager's perspective, it is easier to find which products were more profitable and how to optimize production facilities to reduce the production cost. Compared to the simulation, absorption costing in real business combines of more non-production costs together for full scale realization of cost. For instance, the cost of selling and distribution, administration, R&D investment should be recovered in the absorption costing. From this stage, it influences all management's decision of company. <heading>2.2.2 Budgeting</heading>Budgeting is a plan expressed money aspect term covering a future period, which based on business strategic objectives, level of activities, either capacity or sales turnover. [4] It provides abilities of implementing strategies by allocating total resources align with goals, corporative communication and activities between different departments of companies, motivate managers and evaluation of their performance. From manager's aspect, they need to know well the process of budgeting control, which helps them to achieve budget targets. They should prepare the different variances from sales, cost, materials usage and prices, labor rate and labor efficiency, variable overhead, fixed cost and reconcile them together for achieving budgeting targets and business objectives. All managers from different departments were influenced by the budgeting. The production manager planed the production budget, which included production schedule, labor, fixed cost and the like. After deep communication between all departments, commercial managers decided the sales budget based on company's capacity and market trend. After the production and sales budgets, the purchasing manager needs to prepare a resource plan for how much and when materials should be ordered. Financial manager integrated all the budgets and controlled the overhead budgets of the whole company. This financial plan will ensure the financial evaluation of operation plans to achieve pre-defined profitability and cash flow. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) In the real world, the managers always plan more budget than practical demand for the low risk and uncertainty if variances happened. This will result in ineffective overall control and pressure to spend unnecessary budget to keep contingency in future. 