<heading>Introduction </heading>Pseudononas aeruginosa, a bacillus that acts as an opportunistic pathogen, can cause cystic fibrosis (CF), by possibly disrupting host defenses system with altering gene expression in host cells. P. aeruginosa strains are usually flagellated and therefore motile, and cause acute infections by producing flagellin. Another type of strain is mucoid, exopolysaccharide alginate phenotype, associated with chronic respiratory infections. Calu-3 human airway epithelial cells are used to investigate global genomic responses to infection with isogenic motile and mucoid P. aeruginosa strains in the experiment. Four kinds of P. aeruginosa strains are used in the experiment. FDR1 is a mucoid strain isolated from a CF patient, and produce exopolysaccharide alginate, but not flagellin. The isogenic FRD440 produces flagellin and not alginate. The strain FDR875 and FDR1234 are nonmotile and not produce alginate. (See table 1) The four different strains of P. aeruginosa: FDR1, FDR440, FDR875, and FDR1234 are exposed to total RNA extracted from Calu-3 human cells. Four independent infection-hybridization experiments were performed for each strain with the exception of FDR1234, which was subjected to three replicate experiments. Also, four independent control hybridization experiments were performed on noninfected Calu-3 cell samples. <table/><heading>Raw data analysis</heading>The dataset used here is GEO dataset GDS858, using Affymetrix HG-U133A Human chip, GPL96. We treat gene as rows of the data set and chips as columns. There are 22283 genes expression in total and 19 chips. The first four chips (observations) are for the control samples. There are also four chips (observations) for strain FDR1, FDR440, and FDR875, and three for FDR1234. Figure 1 shows the box plot of the raw data for each chip. The box plot provides a simple graphical comparison of several samples. The upper and lower lines of the box present the 75 th and 25 th quantile of each sample. The two lines above and below the box present the range of the whole sample values. Obviously, the sample data does not have the same range and pattern with each other, thus it is necessary to normalize it before doing any statistical tests, which will be discussed later. <figure/>Figure 2 shows the histogram of each chip. The histogram shows the frequency distribution of the gene expression level for each chip, by sorting the gene of each chip into the number of discrete bins. A scatter plot is a simple plot of one variable against another (figure 3). These give a measure of the actual expression levels, although since the data must first be normalized to remove spatial bias in the background. However, in this graph no normalization is performed. We should be able to see that it is much less spread at the low intensities at the left-bottom corner of each plot. In this four scatter plot, we take the mean of the four control chips against the mean of strain FDR1, FDR440, FDR875, and FDR1234, respectively. <figure/><figure/>Another informative graph is the spatial image ( or heatmap) for this microarray (figure 4). This spatial image creates a pseudocolor image of the data arranged in the same order as the spots on the array. Since the number of gene expression is 22283, which is too big to represent all of them in this paper, we only plotted the first 300 gene in the microarray as spatial image, from 1 st to 100 th, 101 st-200 th, and 201 st to 300 th, respectively, as each column of the graph shows. <figure/>Normalization is done for each data over chips to eliminate the non-biological variation to adjust each chip to the same spatial scale. All further statistical tests are done with the normalized microarray data. The normality is achieved by taking each gene expression level divided by the median of each chip. Figure 5 is an illustration of the box plot over normalized data. Figure 5 is similar with figure 3, only except that it is done with normalized data. Here, all the box plots scatter plots and histogram is done by the statistical software R, while the spatial image is plotted with Matlab 7.0. <figure/><figure/><heading>Statistical test</heading>In [1], a two-sample t test using empirical p-value was done to identify whether gene transcripts showed a significant relative change in expression between compared strain groups. We do the same two sample  t test with the help of R and Matlab to see whether we can obtain the same result as [1]. The significant level is set to be 0.05 for all the tests. To detect whether is significantly difference between the control chips and the four different strains, we do four t test for control samples and samples of strains FDR1, FDR440, FDR875, and FDR1234, respectively, for each gene. We firstly assume all data follows Normal distribution and every sample has the same variance. Take FDR1 for example, we use the t test with the null hypothesis:  FORMULA , versus the alternative hypothesis:  FORMULA  for each gene expression. Thus, we have 22283 t tests to do for every gene, and count how many gene actually have significant difference between the strain FDR1 and the control. It is the same to do for the strains FDR440, FDR875 and FDR1234. In total, we have 22283 times 4 t tests to do. From Matlab (see appendix for program code), we found there are 2254, 2493, 2363, and 2153 gene expression significantly different from the control for FDR1, FDR440, FDR875, and FDR1234, respectively, which mean that there is significant change of gene expression with the existence of these strains, compared with the noninfected cells. Besides, from those showing significant difference between infected cell and controls, we found there are 1225, 1304, 1391 and 1396 up-regulating gene and 1029, 1189, 972 and 757 down-regulating gene for FDR1, FDR440, FDR875 and FDR1234, respectively, by comparing the value of the mean of the control sample and the mean of the strains, for every single gene expression. However, one requirement for the t test is that the data must follow normal distribution, or at least follows the same distribution. Thus, we use Jarque-Bera test for goodness-of-fit to a normal distribution. The Jarque-Bera test statistic follows chi-square distribution with 2 degree of freedom. The null hypothesis is that the sample data follows a Normal distribution, while the alternative hypothesis states that the data doesn't follow Normal distribution. By Matlab, the result shows that every set of data follows Normal distribution. However, since there are only 3 to 4 observations in each comparison, it is impossible to tell whether those data follows Normal distribution or not. A suggestion is to take more observations, so that the test of normality would be possible. Quantile-Quantile (QQ) plot is a method to check whether the sample data follows normal distribution, or whether two samples have the same distribution. If there is only one sample, the QQ plot displays the sample quantiles versus theoretical quantiles from a normal distribution. For two samples, QQ plot would be linear if the two samples do come from the same distribution. However, in this case, we only got three or four data points, so it is impossible to tell whether these two samples have the same distributions or not. The following graph is a QQ plot for the first gene expression of the control against four infected strains, with Matlab 7.0. <figure/><heading>Discussion</heading>The number of observation for each sample is too small (only 3 to 4 observations), thus it is hard to get any conclusive result, either applying statistical tests or doing graph illustration. For example, when we were doing t test for comparison between the control and strains, the degree of freedom for the statistic t is only 3+3 (at most), which is not so informative compared with large sample comparison. Also, for test normality, 4 data is far from enough to show normality, since a theorem ([2]) states that there should be at least 8 data all being on one side of the normal distribution that could prove nonnormality of the data points. QQ plot is also not so conclusive with only three or four data points distributed around the straight line. A suggestion is to take more observations over each sample, even though it is very expensive to repeat the experiment many times. There is tradeoff anyway, so we should consider the marginal gain of the statistical information with respect to the marginal price of doing more experiment, and find an optimal number of repeating. An alternative way not to do so many t test for each pair of sample, we can do ANOVA to test the equality of all the mean of the control chip and the four strains for each gene, with F statistics. The general null hypothesis for F statistic is:  FORMULA , while the alternative hypothesis is  FORMULA . Only when F statistic shows significantly difference between those k variables, can we then apply t test to see which pair(s) of combination is(are) significantly different. Applying F test may save us a lot of time for our gene expression analysis, especially with multiple comparisons of different experiment results with the control. We don't know whether we can do t test for this microarray, since the requirement for a t test is equal variance and normally distributed. To test equal variance, F test can be applied. However, still because there are too few observations, this test cannot tell too much. So, we assume all data is sampled on a random basis and normally distributed, with equal variance for each sample. Comparing our results with what was obtained in the reference paper ([1]), the number of significantly different gene expression is smaller in our test than that in the paper. This may due to different statistical software we used and different and different values for the significant level. Overall, those two results agree. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Our basic analysis of the gene expression data showed the properties of the data. We have the box plots, scatter plot, histogram and spatial image to show the raw and normalized gene expression level for each chip. We used t test to see whether the infected cell strains (FDR) would have the same mean of gene expression level as uninfected cells (control). There are a total of 2493 statistically significant changes (1304 up-regulated, 1189 down-regulated) in gene expression in response to the motile strains, FDR440, while only 2135 statistically significant changes were observed in response to the isogenic mutant, FDR1234. Further the more, the conversion of P. aeruginosa to a mucoid phenotype, such as what takes place in CF (FDR1), resulted in only 2254 statistically significant changes( 1225 up-regulated, 1029 down-regulated) in gene expression. Remarkably, our transcriptional profile analysis shows that a nonmucoid and nonmotile strain (FDR875) regulates the expression of 2363 gene in airway epithelial cells. We also discussed the situation when t test is applicable. Since the number of observation is too limited to do the normality test, we can only assume that each sample follows the Normal. Finally, we use QQ plot to show whether each sample have the same distribution, and the result is not conclusive since the number of observation is too small. 