<heading>Introduction</heading>This report outlines the recommendations found by the Operations Development Group on the potential changes proposed by the Operations Director with regards to the future of CFS. A thorough analysis of the suggested changes, possible implementation strategies and effects on the relevant stakeholder groups has been conducted. The conclusions and recommendations are set out below. First those potentially affected by the project and it's aftermath are identified and management solutions established. The aims and objectives are listed, as are the evaluation methods throughout the project. The possible risks involved in the project (a crucial factor in the determination of success) are highlighted and feasible management strategies are then explored. The planning implementation strategy follows. Methods of planning and control of both progress and expenditure are then outlined. <heading>Stakeholders</heading>To facilitate the success of this project, the stakeholders involved need to be identified and, where necessary, appropriate management strategies should be sought to ensure the smooth running of the project. For transparency they shall be organised into internal and external stakeholders and the power/interest matrix will be utilised to assist with decisions regarding said management proposals. This information is summarised below in Figure 1(N.B. Internal Stakeholders in Blue, External Stakeholders in Red): <table/><heading>Project Aim: </heading>To restructure the insurance department into 10 multi-purpose teams, divided by geographical area, and create an internet link with High Street Agents to increase flexibility, enhance customer service and reduce associated costs. <heading>Objectives: </heading>Where feasible, all objectives are SMART <fnote>SMART- Specific, Measurable, Agreed, Realistic and Timed </fnote><heading>Implementation Objectives: </heading>Office space redesigned so that each of the 10 multi-purpose teams have their own open-plan offices by start of week 3. Evaluation: If office is workable in its new layout by start of week 3. Employees to be reorganised into 10 multi purpose teams, each covering one geographical area, for all insurance policies (except life insurance) by end of week one. Evaluation: If new teams have all been set-up by start of week 2. All insurance staff to be trained in all areas of insurance (except life insurance) by end date of project. Evaluation: Questionnaire to see if all employees would feel confident in handling any area of insurance. Possible plan to take a sample of employees and manually check staff competence with example queries from selection of insurance areas. Design and install new IT internet facilities to connect employees to High Street Agents to allow more direct contact and personalised service. Evaluation: assess by observation whether software is installed and to specifications required. Train IT staff, training staff and insurance staff on new IT internet system by end of the project term. Evaluation: Questionnaire on degree of confidence felt by employees when using the new system. <heading>Operational Objectives:</heading>Increase customer service and thus increase customer satisfaction levels to an average of 85%. Evaluation: issue customers (random sample from database of 50% of customers) with non-obligatory questionnaire in week one and 12months after week one. Assess if new satisfaction levels have increase to an average of 85% or more. Reduce current unit costs by 5% per unit in real terms. Evaluation: compare current unit costs with those in 12months from project start date. Increase number of policies undertaken by each staff member by 10%, 12 months after start of project. Evaluation: compare current average staff figures with those 12months after project start. Increased interaction with HiSA's through internet to increase strength of relationship. Evaluation: Questionnaire as to whether the HiSA's believe it is an improvement and focus group to discuss improvements/problems 3months after project end. General Note on evaluation: Evaluation is crucial throughout both for the success of this project and future activities. Therefore all relevant parties shall be informed of evaluation methods and timetable at start of project and shall keep this record throughout. The project team and steering committee will conduct both formal and informal evaluations on individual and overall performance throughout and provide feedback where applicable. This will be done through general observations and deeper discussions with supervisors. <heading>Risk and Risk Management</heading>All projects carry risk. As an area with which the board is particularly concerned, the risks associated with this project have been identified below, (using the FMEA Approach). These risks were analysed, using the risk significance table, to assess the importance to the progression and results of the project of said risks. The possible management options were then discussed utilising the risk strategies table and the optimum methods of control are also detailed below. A technical risk that it is impossible to produce computer programme to specifications required. Probability of Occurrence: Low as not an intricate/complicated software package required (probability decreased further if expert contractors utilised). Level of Impact: Low as CFS could still operate as before without the new technology in place (60% of sales conducted via telecommunications). Management Strategy: Ignore/Allow the risk as, if a problem, it will be identified early on and if not the new technology is not absolutely crucial to success of project. Internal risk of employee resistance to new team set up and training due to poor communication and lack of enthusiasm. E.g. refusal of overtime, non-receptive to new training, new teams do not gel and altercations with new Operations Director. These may all occur and lead to increased project length, and thus costs, and reduced effectiveness of changes. Thus the project objectives would not be completed on time or to the required standard. Probability of Occurrence: Medium as tight network of employees who generally have positive relations but can be resistant to change (as witnessed in previous project) and there is some residual hostility to Ops Manager. Level of Impact: High as employees cooperation and flexibility is crucial to the overall success of the project, therefore if they are unsatisfied and don't perform at their peak, the aim of the project will not be achieved. Management Strategy: Mitigate by empowering the employees. This can be accomplished in several ways. For example, dedicating the first week for new teams to spend time together and team leaders having influence in the makeup of each new team. Further workshops/meetings in a relaxed, open atmosphere with the Ops Manager would 'clear the air' and allow for the exchange of views. Internal risk of difficulties experienced with training on the new IT software. Probability of Occurrence: Due to the fact that general training staff are not strong on IT, there is a medium-high probability of problems arising at points in the project. Level of Impact: Depending on the level and number of staff who have difficulties with the new system, the impact is recognised as potentially being medium. Management Strategy: Mitigate the problem as, the risk can be easily mitigated by first having the IT staff learn the system, they then transfer their skills to the training team who can then pass on the knowledge to the general staff. Miscalculation of perceived benefit to existing and future customers. Probability of Occurrence: Medium occurrence determined as there will be upheaval during the project progress and disruptions to customer service may occur. Level of Impact: Medium impact level as customers key to business success and therefore if adversely affected could lead to decline in number of existing customers. Management Strategy: Mitigate the risk by sending out questionnaires to customers and inviting them to a focus group where they can present their opinions before commencement of the project. An external risk is that trade unions may disagree with management of project and interfere on employees behalf, causing increased costs and delays to project. This is especially true if legislation is passed favouring the increase of powers of the trade unions. Probability of Occurrence: Low as trade unions have lost power in the last 20yrs and are therefore less involved in workplace projects. Level of Impact: Medium as although political legislation has lead to a decrease in bargaining powers, if the TU's have support of the whole workforce, they still wield a degree of power. Management Strategy: Allow/Mitigate as this risk can be vastly decreased in likelihood and severity if the trade unions are informed of the project plans from the start. It is an acceptable risk as the TUs do not tend to be aggressive but do not appreciate 'surprises'! <heading>Project Implementation Strategy</heading>Pace of change-In some respects this project needs to have a fast pace in order to preserve the long term future of CFS by lowering prices and increasing customer service compared with competitors and allow minimum disruption to customers, HiSA's and staff. However, staff need to time to adjust to the new setup and absorb and assimilate the new training effectively. Therefore a balance between the business demand and the practical resources needs to be struck. Therefore a moderate to slow pace with the project lasting 9months in total seems optimal. Exploratory/Pilot phase- The possibility of a pilot study to see if the technology required for the new IT system is plausible; should be considered. Consultation with the IT department on the situation may suffice depending on their knowledge. Also the possibility of having one test group to train in each area of insurance as a tester was mooted. As this seems to be the only current viable option for the company and the possible negative impact on both the staff partaking and those not (high degree of pressure, rejection at not being in test group, office not set up in optimum layout etc), it seems sensible not to be burdened with a pilot study. Serial or Parallel Approach-The serial approach of only starting an activity once the preceding one has ended is both unnecessary and highly inefficient with regards to this project. There are some activities, however, which cannot be started until others are finished. Therefore a compromise has been achieved between the two. (For precise details see the Gantt chart, fig 3). Implementation pattern- In order to avoid problems which occurred with the last project between the staff and operations department, the decision to have simultaneous implementation for the ideas and timetable for change has been made. This means that all the staff will have a clear idea of where the project is going and the timeframe etc, therefore they will feel more ownership over the project compared with previous projects. The skills to be gained, for example the new IT skills, will have to be by progressive method as not everyone can be trained at once and the retention rate is significantly lowered the higher the volume of new information that is delivered. A combination of vertical and horizontal slice implementation styles will be adopted. The new IT skills will be done vertically by department as everybody will need the same, or similar, degree of training. Insurance training will be done horizontally with all the team leaders being trained first so that they can assist with the training of the rest of the employees. Degree of empowerment- There have been previous problems due to the apparent autocratic and non-consulting style of management. Therefore during the commencement of the project, especially before and throughout week 1, there will be many opportunities, both formal and informal, for employees to give their opinions and suggestions. There will be a more consulting rather than informing atmosphere and thus less suspicion and animosity and more personal involvement by staff in the project. With this increased degree of empowerment, employees will feel more directly connected to the project and therefore more invested in the potential outcome. As the project progresses, a more autocratic style should be adopted to ensure that progress is on schedule and within the budget constraints. Level of Employee Support- There will be a high level of employee support both emotionally and professionally. This will come from each other, their team leaders, the training department and the operations department. This high level of support is necessary because the whole project depends on these employees and they will be training in new areas and with new software. Therefore although it is relatively costly in both time and monetary terms, it is worth the investment as their enthusiasm, commitment and thus performance is paramount to the success of the project. Trade Union- Obviously as the Trade Unions are both shareholders and stakeholders in their own right they need to be informed and consulted on the plans of the project and the outline of the implementation strategy. It will be useful to receive their feedback in week 1 before the full project kicks into gear as they want 'no surprises' as much as CFS do. Therefore any negotiations that may need to occur with regards to overtime and increased wages, for example, need to be acknowledged and dealt with as soon as possible. Contractor Strategy- This project will primarily be DIY as all necessary expertise is in-house and it is easier to manage and cheaper to operate in this way. This will only differ if the IT department can not design the new IT system. Then, a turnkey contract with an IT firm would be necessary, with the IT department liaising with them and explaining the specifications required. The IT manager would be manager of this Work Package. Project Team and WBS- The project team, as discussed, will be made up of the operations development group as the core, backed by the IT manager, the training manager and at least two representatives (both team leaders) from the new insurance teams. (Other groups will be outlined in the later 'control' section.) The work breakdown structure will be as follows. In order to allocate responsibility to project members and also allow easier control mechanisms, who is in charge of which activity is clearly defined. The project will be broken down into three sections, IT, Insurance Training and Office Reorganisation. This will then be further divided into work packages and conveyed to the employees involved and those that need to be keep informed. (Figure 2 below displays the work packages and who has overall responsibility for each.) Strategic Control- The project manager will have day-to-day control over the project (who will delegate as he sees fit), reporting to the operations manager who will form a steering committee with the project team, relevant CFS managers, a Trade Union representative and one/a few of the new Team Leaders. A shareholder and HiSA rep will be invited to all meetings if they so wish to keep abreast of developments. This steering group will have overall control and assess where, and the criteria for, gateway markers. They will have the power to decide if at these gateways the project is able to continue as before or changes need to be made. At this point it will be useful to include the preliminary Gantt chart that shall be use throughout the project. It shall be distributed to all staff and also pinned on the project notice board to offer a visual resource for how the project should progress. The resources (in this instance the number of staff designated to work for the project) have been outlined below but do not include the operations staff as it is assumed that they will be employed in the project throughout. The control points are then set out in Fig 3 in order to check that the project is on schedule and if not set out solutions to rectify any problems and reduce the probability for future disruptions. The schedule performance index, which shall be calculated by the deputy project manager should be equal to or above 1 in order for the project to continue without discussion and possible changes to strategy. The key performance indicators are also located in the figure below. Throughout comments from all employees and the steering groups are welcomed and there shall be a notice board and a designated email address that shall be monitored by a member of the operations staff for any suggestions and queries. <heading>Financial planning and control :</heading>Financial planning of this project lends itself to a complex financial system defined by work packages and time milestones, as many fall naturally at the same juncture. The activities in each work package are outline in Fig 3 above. A cost based system will be used. Cost will be the primary parameter for financial management as this allows easy comparison with the 'earned value' of the project (that is the 'budget cost of the work performed') and thus the ability to assess whether the place the project is at is aligned with where the budget says it should be. The source of the primary costs is labour, including any applicable overtime (to be signed off by appropriate team leader), that will be billed to the appropriate work package. The overhead costs need also to be recorded and assessed by the finance representative of the operations department who is an integral part of the project team. There will be budget meetings every two weeks to coincide with the half-way point and final point of the work packages. A budget report, compiled by the finance representative will be published every four weeks. He will need the actual cost up to the end of each work package/time-span in order to compare it to the budget at that point. In conjunction to this, the earned value to that date and the budget earned value, needs to be calculated. Therefore the cost performance can be determined (needs to be equal or above 1) and any changes to keep to the budget can be proposed. It is a fixed budget to allow for stability but there is a buffer of £100,000 from projected costs and available budget to allow for any unforeseen occurrences. The overall performance measures will be a combination of costs and progress analysis. <heading>Report Conclusion:</heading>In conclusion this project is very much people based and therefore should be conducted with an open flow of ideas from management to employees because if they do not feel involved or ownership with the project, it will fail. A generous time scale has been set out to reflect the need to train properly and also to allow a 'business as usual' stance. Control both of progress and budget is essential and should be a constant priority to all involved. Although the project manager has overall accountability for the dissemination of tasks and information, a sense of individual responsibility should be encouraged so employees feel ownership of the project and thus vested in its success. Through scheduled meetings all stakeholders should be kept up-to-date with necessary information. This project has a high probability of success if these recommendations are adhered to. This report has been compiled with all the information that was available at the time, if there any comments or queries that need to be addressed please contact me in person or via d.brent@operations.cfs.com. 