<heading>Introduction</heading>Oticon, one of the world market leaders in hearing aids production and hearing care, is believed wining its success mainly because of two reasons. One is introducing the world's first knowledge-based "Spaghetti Organization" in 1991: a flat, dynamic structure well suited for the realization of ideas, while the other is focusing on people aspect. The essay is going to analyze how Oticon utilized HR policies to help it overcome business pressures, what happened when changing the culture and structure of the organization, and how to optimize motivational function of reward and recognition in Oticon. What is the most important is that through the in-depth analysis, we could learn how to apply various HR theories in the actual situation. <heading>Background of Oticon</heading>Denmark's Oticon initially founded in 1904, has its headquarter in Copenhagen and more than 50 subsidiary companies and research centers all over the world. As the most old-line professional Audition Group in the world, Oticon is famous for its advanced technology, excellent products, consummate after service system, especially the special Oticon characteristic hearing solution. Besides, it is also the only hearing instrument manufacturer in the industry supporting its own research facility. Oticon product range consists of hearing aids, iatrical diagnosis apparatus, aids audition facility, FM language training system, personal communication equipment, computer software and electronic cochlea, covering the whole audiology field. Currently, owning more than 2000 highly skilled employees around the world, Oticon's hearing aids are sold in more than 100 countries to thousands of hearing impaired every day to help them to live the life they want with the hearing they have. <heading>3. Oticon Strategic Framework Analysis</heading>Because of heavy competition and the changeable external and internal environment, nearly each company has tough period, Oticon also doesn't make an exception. What worth pursued is how does it thrive on chaos by applying suitable HR Practice to facilitate Business Strategy. <heading>3.1 Business Pressures</heading>The business pressure Oticon faced could be generally divided into six parts: Political Pressure: Government encourages Oticon to generate and convert both R&D and novel ideas into their products. Also welcome the products that could generate new jobs. Its digital aid Adapto wins European IST Prize is the best demonstration. Economic Pressure: Just cost cutting or productivity improving could not help Oticon to win over diversified giants, such as Sony, Siemens. Also, the world market for hearing aids has been flat for five years. Social Pressure: Employees especially knowledge workers nowadays like to do work more flexible and hope to spend more times with their families. For Oticon is a high technology industry, how to attract and retain skilled staffs is the core to the corporation, Also market requires Oticon to think much of costumer needs. Technology pressure: Besides its new product and new production methods/procedure require advanced technology, its new work style and shared creativity also need information and communications technology to support. Legal pressure: As Oticon is an international corporate, its activities like trading with other country's company or internal-trading with subsidiary company across the frontier should obtain relevant international legislation. HRM responses to a changing environmentStrategic framework <list><heading>Business Pressures</heading>Political:·government policy,·trade unions activitiesEconomic:·heavy competition·market growth·exchange rate & taxSocial:·lifestyle preference·labor mobility·skills availability·customer needsTechnological:·engineering innovation·new production methods& processesLegal:·export & import regulation·copyright and patent·specific law and standardEcological:· material friendly toenvironment·recycle</list><list><heading>Strategic Responses</heading>Project design:·combine differentfields·encourage creativityProject based:·idea based projectleader·each project feel like company·time efficientDis-organization· change of the worklogic·face-to-facecommunication·mixed working space·technology support·no proper designate open environment</list><list><heading>HRM factors</heading>Recruitment & Selection:multi-dimensionself-motivatedcommunication skillsinnovation spiritrespect to others workmanaging abilitiesPerformance Measurement:360°Appraisalmanagement by Objectivesself-assessmentrating & rankingTraining & Development:Kolb Learning Style: accommodatingHoney & Mumford Learning Style:the activistPsychological Contract:relationalReward:both extrinsic and intrinsic</list>Ecological pressure: According to government and customer expectation, both the material and finished product should be friendly to environment and as close to natural hearing as possible. <heading>3.2 Strategic Responses coherent to Business Strategies & Competitive Strategies </heading><heading>3.2.1 Business Strategies & Competitive Strategies analysis</heading>Business Strategies: Based on Miles and Snow (1984) typology, Oticon should be the "defender". It produces products or services for the specific expert audiology field market where it then defend by innovation and/or quality strategy. According to Rousseau (1995)'s exhaustive model, Oticon belongs to "Make Strategy". Organization tends to lead employees to develop organization and themselves by enhancing skills and so on, then to increase employee retention. Competitive Strategies: As to Poter (1985)'s description on competitive strategies, Oticon covers two strategies: innovation and quality enhancement. It always launches new advanced products to the market. Of course, it also pays much attention to improve their product and service quality. <heading>3.2.2 Strategic responses</heading>Then Oticon adopted some specific strategic responses to react on business pressures and support its business strategies and competitive strategies. According to Kolind (the leader of Oticon Holding A/S)'s opinion, Oticon needed breakthroughs and breakthroughs require combining technology with audiology, psychology and imagination. Staff should "think the unthinkable" and make it happen which means people need to be more creative, flexible and professional. Kolind changed the formal organization to be based on project. Teams form, dismiss and form again as the work requires. Project leaders with compellent idea to compete for resources and people to achieve the project. Besides, each project team looks like a company with a lot of freedom. The only matter is the deadline requires all the team members to be more time efficient. Now as a dis-organized organization, people's work logic is changed, Oticon headquarter becomes anti-paper anti-office with continue moving workstations. The communication here is always required to be face-to-face and people with different responsibility often work together. Most people are freely to work on several projects at one time. What worth mentioned is that Oticon utilize a number of technologies to support its dis-organization, including electronic scanner, mobile phone and computer-filled conference room etc. (LaBarre, 1996) <heading>3.3 Matching HR Practices</heading>Recruitment & Selection: Because of the work environment and work pressure in Oticon, people who what to participate in the organization should be multi-dimension and self-motivated for people could engage in several projects, maybe play different roles at once and each project has given deadline. In order to guarantee high efficiency and advanced products in Oticon, people had better to hold good communication skills, initiative spirit and respect to other's work. In addition, for everyone could be project leader, people those with managing abilities are more probably to be selected. Performance Measurement 360 0 appraisal systems have grown rapidly in recent years and maybe the most suitable method for Oticon. It uses multiple appraisers, containing project leader, colleagues, senior specialist and customers, to assess performance of an individual across the range of setting works. There are also several other kinds of performance measurement methods could be used, like self-assessment, management by objectives and rating & ranking. Training & Development: According to Business Strategy, Oticon is willing to offer people learning chance that improves both personal and organizational growth such that the people keep pace with the organization as it changes and grows. As to Kolb learning style (1984), people in Oticon belong to "Accommodating", like challenging and response quickly, preferring to work in teams to complete tasks under time pressure. On the other hand, as to Honey & Mumford learning style, people in Oticon should be "the Activist", like to be involved in new experiences, open minded and enthusiastic about new ideas, good at working with others in business games, team tasks, role-playing. Psychological Contract: PC in Oticon should be relational for people here are whole involvement, highly motivated with small turnover. In a word, they grow up with the organization. Reward Oticon's reward must contain both extrinsic and intrinsic which will be discussed in detail later. <heading>4. Changes in Oticon Organizational Structure and Culture</heading>Many commentators figured out that organizational change is a strategic imperative, which means that major or radical changes on organizational structure and culture, job contents, careers of workforce are required in order to deal with some predictable or unpredictable pressures happening in the wider social, economic, political and technological environment. (Buchanan, 2004) So when Kolind (CEO of Oticon) realized that cost-cutting and productivity-enhancing strategies would not be enough to make Oticon win over other strong competitors, he established famous "spaghetti organization", which also could be called as project-based organization or dis-organization, knowledge-based, networked, with no formal hierarchical structure, without traditional management positions, lack of formal grooming high-fliers program. <heading>4.1 Changes in Organizational Structure</heading>By the 1980s, Oticon had continued to use the functional structure. At that time, the organization had all the strongpoint and weakness of traditional hierarchical organizations, including formal process, conservative culture, employee loyalty and conflict-avoiding behaviors. Although by then, with cost-cutting strategy, company achieved a position of world hearing aids market leader, it still faced increasing sales, financial and organizational difficulties. In 1990-199 1 Oticon underwent extensive organizational changes, which among other things, introduced a project-oriented organization structure, an open office with mobile workstations, and a new paperless information system (Larsen, 2002). This de-layering project organization could be analyzed in six aspects: Reduce number of hierarchical levels: In the functional organization period, Oticon had the managing director, middle manger of every department, and other staffs in different department with different responsibilities and subordinates, the job structure was very complex. In "spaghetti organization", the situation is changed to a large extent. There are only three levels in the company: project sponsors (the former management team); project leaders; and project coworkers. The middle manager disappeared, turned out to be senior specialist, providing professional expertise in functional areas. Improves communication: In the past, each project was divided into several parts and distributed initially, every person was just charged with specific task, lack of communication across department. Only managing director sponsored and adjusted the project process. But in the dis-organization, staffs with different tasks work together, learning to communicate with each other, respecting others' work, which leads the project to be time efficient and high quality. What worth mentioned is that in Oticon, traditional communication way like written paper is replaced by electronic scanner and other information technology system. The whole organization now focuses on utilizing face-to-face communication, like oral communication, negotiation to ensure projects could be achieved before the deadline. Shortens decision-making: Come along with abolishing traditional hierarchical structure, decision-making is shortened. Before change, making a decision experienced long procedure. For instance, when the basic employee proposed suggestion to his mentor, then turned to department manager, after that turned to managing director to make decision. Also we can imagine this decision would deliver to basic staff through the same channel. It's really a waste of time. Now all the decision could be made though the discussing between project leader and coworkers. And the project owner (the former managing director) is only responsible for deciding who undertakes project. Decreases promotion opportunities: In the project-based organization, for transferring managerial authority to the project groups or individual employees, most of managing position disappears, means most of staffs work in Oticon have rare chances to be promoted. However, what people here really concerned is that they could work more flexible, broaden their horizons by working in diverse projects at the same time. Poor delegation gives high workload: Different from hierarchical job structure, Oticon's employees usually are involved in a number of projects at once, most of them are cross-organizational and cross-functional. At least one task in their core competency and one in which they feel they could add value based on their other competencies or interests. For example, Lars Kolind, the CEO, he did not only charge in administrant work but also be coworker in some projects in the mean time. Different HR policies are required: In traditional hierarchical organization, promotion is one of the most useful HR policies. In Oticon, people may be project leaders for several times, but they are seldom promoted. So the organization need to use other methods to compensate, like arranging tailored training program for excellent staffs, or giving them the freedom to choose suitable tasks, work hours, place of work and so on. <heading>4.2 Changes in Organizational Culture</heading>Organizational culture is the 'personality' of the organization, the mental programming of a group, and an emergent property (WMG, OPP module). Culture is specific, adaptable, but can't be copied though can be learned. An organization's culture focuses on the values, beliefs and meanings used by its members to grasp how its uniqueness originates, evolves and operates. It has often been considered within the context of corporate strategy and organization structure (Scholtz, cited in Buchanan, 2004). And strong culture also leads to better or even excellent organization performance, consequently managers definitely should control and change the culture when necessary. Through the following study of culture's four elements, we could see why culture is one of the reasons for Oticon's success. Thought (basic assumptions about the way of organization works in): Before reform, as a private company, all the departments in Oticon were controlled by a single powerful person, and don't have enough linkages with each other. In the light of Charles Handy's types of organization structure, Oticon during that period should belong to Power type, and have the Power culture. Staffs just followed boss's prescription, focusing on cost-cutting and quality enhancing. After revolution, Oticon changes from Power type to Task type. The dominant culture also turned out to be Task culture. Everything is project oriented. At that time, Oticon began to concern about the way people perceive work and give people the freedom to do what they want and decide how to do according to their own competencies and interests, which is believed to be the key for Oticon's success. Action (the pattern of behaviors, communications, customer relationships...): Staffs in Oticon now not charge in certain position but could choose to co-work in several projects at one time freely. They abolish written paper communication, and mainly adopt electronic information system and face-to-face communication. Another significant change is that Oticon shifted its focus from products to customers, from medical hearing impairments to hearing and quality of life improvement, which is obviously reflected by its vision and famous new product Adapto. Speech (written statements, management philosophy...): <quote>"On New year's day 1990 I sat down and tried to think the unthinkable: a vision for the company of tomorrow... shaping jobs to fit the person instead of the other way around. Each person would be given more functions and a "job" would be developed by the individual's accumulating a portfolio of functions... One thing is sure: Oticon will have changed. We have created a flexible organization, where everyone realizes that the only certain thing is change." (Extracts from interview with CEO Lars Kolind, cited in Larsen, 2002)</quote><quote>"We believe that it takes more than technology to create the best hearing care solution. Because hearing care professionals are the key to ensuring that the optimum solution reaches those who need it, they are also the key to our success. Whether it's hearing instruments or fitting systems, audiology or technology, or our relations with hearing care professionals, our starting point remains the same: we put people first." (Oticon [Online])</quote>• Artefacts (what is seen, including architecture, office, facilities...): Hierarchical job structure has totally disappeared. Oticon's three-story headquarter is an anti-paper anti-office with uniform mobile workstations including desks without drawers and advanced networked computers. People are always on the move, changing their desks several times a year. "Office" is just where they choose to park their caddie for the duration of a project. It's an environment filling with walking, talking and acting. (LaBarre, 1996) <heading>5. Reward and Recognition in Oticon</heading>A reward system is designed to attract, retain employees, and motivate them to improve their contributions to the whole organizational performance. When the reward system is applied within an organization, it usually expresses information about what is crucial to the organization, thus it should be compatible with the organization's culture and its designed way of working. Generally speaking, re-designing an organization's structure would result in changing its culture, people's behaviors, attitudes and values to the work. Therefore, in order to guarantee the organization would operate with high efficiency as expected, CEO or HR department definitely should make sure that the reward system could support these changes. (WMG, OPP module, 2005) As to Oticon, it has changed from a traditional functional organization to "spaghetti organization". Hence, its new reward scheme should be compatible with this kind of rather flat and flexible structure (see table 1). <table/><heading>5.1 Obeying Motivational Principles</heading>In order to establish an effective reward system, organization need to refer to divers motivational principles: Satisfy individual needs: According to Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, organization should give the basic earnings to employees to satisfy people's fundamental physiological need. Then, people will spontaneously way up the hierarchy. However, the degree of these needs is different from people to people, so even the same reward will have different values to individuals, which means there is no One-size-fits-all' solution. Therefore, Oticon need to vary its reward package. Appear equitable: Moreover, reward system should comply with Equity theory. If not, individual will be annoyed (Somebody else is paid more than me for the same effort), or feel guilty (I'm paid more than somebody else for the same effort), which should be avoided to keep people working happily in Oticon. Relate reward to an objective (goal) to be achieved: An effective reward system should be obviously linked to organization's goal, which ideally expected to be SMART (specific, measurable, accepted, realistic, time-based). This principle is pivotal to Oticon. For in Oticon, people are given freedom to control the project process, they are mostly judged by the output, and what else really matters is the project deadline. Act as a reward for effort or performance It's absolutely correct that people are rewarded mainly based on their outputs, for which contributed to organization's profit directly. Nevertheless, sometimes staffs efforts or performances should also be taken into account, especially to High-tech corporation like Oticon. Because generating a wonderful idea and making it come true might take them a rather long period and no one could guarantee every effort will lead to success. Keep the amount received & amount individual expects to receive in balance: Organization Perspective: Pay (the amount received) = Benefit to the organization/Cost to the organization Employee Perspective: Work (amount individual expects to receive) = Benefit to the individual/Cost to the individual A meaningful reward system would ensure both organization and individual receive more than what they put in (WMG, OPP module). And if the distance between the actual situation and expectation is too large, employee will be de-motivated. Also an economic reward system should offer individual high value rewards at a comparatively low cost to the organization. Recognize the relationship between satisfaction and performance: Job satisfaction is based on perspective of extrinsic and intrinsic rewards, combining with equity theory. In addition, it also reacts on the perceived value of rewards (See figure 1) <figure/>This model illustrates that performance influences satisfaction, and not the other way round. Satisfaction relies on need fulfillment. Need fulfillment comes from intrinsic and extrinsic rewards generated by job performance. Job satisfaction is just one feeling, or a set of attitudes, potentially linked with performance. Generally speaking, with appropriate rewards, good performance is mostly likely to lead to job satisfaction, but not consequentially. (Buchanan, 2004) <heading>5.2 Taking Psychological Contract into Account</heading>It has long been generally accepted that psychological contract has two forms, relational and transactional. The former refers to an open-ended relationship based on trust and mutual respect. The employee gives loyalty and commitment to meet their employer's requirements and goals, and believes their employer will treat them fairly and consistently. In return, the organization potentially offered job security, promotion opportunities, training and development programs, supportive leadership and other maneuverability depending on employee's demands (Beardwell, 2004). And now it's believed that psychological contract could be utilized to underpin and replenish reward system. Oticon give its high levels knowledge workers maximum freedom as reward of finishing projects before promissory deadline. As response, employees are willing to try their best to contribute to the corporate profit regardless extra pay. Also in Oticon, for there is no place to go in the flat organization, professional development will not be rewarded with promotion which is one of the most useful traditional reward method. However, the corporation still operates with little turnover, because their staffs trust they will be cultivated to be multi-functional after few years work here. <heading>5.3 Designing reward system for Oticon</heading>In the real world, almost every employee receives two types rewards: intrinsic and extrinsic, So Oticon's new reward system should also include these two parts. The key question is, as one of the most useful motivation methods, how to optimize its function, balance it between individual attractiveness and Oticon's identity. <heading>5.3.1 Extrinsic Reward System</heading>As extrinsic reward system is the main part of the whole reward systems, and is the first element employees consider when they choose to attend or retain in Oticon, so it should be optimized and enriched as much as possible. Basic Salary: The basic salary is confirmed in the formal employment contract in order to guarantee staffs necessary life level. Generally speaking, it's based on time attended and different to individuals. When decide it in Oticon, staff's main competence and special skill or experience, length of service time, market average level of pay and other relevant elements should all be considered. Incentive Schemes: Wining incentives may be the core motivation for individuals to improve their performances. As to Oticon's employees, the basic salary is similar for people with same main competence, but their amount of pay may have large distance. Why? The main difference comes from here. When decide the amount of individual's incentives schemes in Oticon, we mainly use individual PBR (Payment By Results) combining with group PBR, also considering PRP (Performance related Pay): (1) Individual PBR: Because of Oticon's identity, people working here receive high risk-high reward, which means low base pay, high incentive pay. We could improve Manchester Plan for applying in Oticon. Since people are required to work on at least two projects in the mean time, and encouraged to do as much projects as they can, the first two projects then could be calculated as the basic earnings on time based, and the extra projects could be calculated by rate per piece. Earnings=(hours worked*hourly rate) + (number of extra projects*rate per piece) (2) Group PBR: As for group PBR, Profit sharing (Gain-sharing) is a good choice. Oticon could refine The Scanlon Plan to suit its companies all over the world, and The Rucker Share of Production Plan to be compatible with its subsidiary factories. (3) PRP: PRP is also one of the considering elements. When adjusting individual incentives schemes, Oticon refers to the evaluations of relevant project leaders and technical specialists to achieve a fair assessment. Competence-Based Pay: As in Otincon, multi-functional is required, competence-based pay offers a more flexible reward system whereby people are paid for learning and changing in line with the business objectives. The more skills employee develops and uses, the higher pay he/she receives. By rewarding people who multi-skill themselves, Oticon could save money, for people cover more work now, thereupon it almost doesn't need external recruiting. Share Options: Similar with gain-sharing, instead of giving monetary rewards, Oticon uses share options to attract and retain employees. In the share option plan, employees are given the option to buy Oticon shares in a preferred rate. This strategy is now being demonstrated successfully, for employees will pay more attentions to the corporate performance than before, also will work harder to achieve corporate goal. Cafeteria Style Fringe Benefits (Flexible benefits): This strategy is now very popular all over the world, for it maximizes the value of limited monetary amount of fringe benefits and gives the employees some controls over their own rewards. When applying it in Oticon, employees are given the chances to pick and choose a set of rewards from a wide range on offer, like medical benefits, insurance cover, training programs, petrol allowances etc., and always including gift vouchers as an option for which is very practical. Banking time off (Holidays/Training): Most people like having holidays from time to time, especially to those who work in high-tech research and innovation organizations. According to Oticon's tensional wok environment, as a reward for performance or achievements, extra holidays entitlement definitely will be very popular. Also, this could be used as a method of training program, e.g., one day per week is given off to project leaders for training courses in project management. Commissions (Marketing and Sales teams) Oticon used to use this type of individual reward in its marketing & sales teams in order to encourage them to win more business. Whereas, it now has new content, for salesman who could maintain stable relationship with certain customers will also obtain extra pay. <heading>5.3.2 Intrinsic Reward Scheme</heading>According to high-tech research and innovation organizations' identity, intrinsic reward scheme is the "spark point" of Oticon's whole reward systems. Interesting work: Besides the main projects, which allocated to employees according to their main competence, they also could compete to do the projects they are really interested in. Autonomy: Employees in Oticon are given almost the maximum freedom. They could decide what to do, how to do, when to do, where to do, even whom they would like to woke with depending on their own thoughts. And the corporation only has the requirements on the output and the project deadline. Challenge & Variety: People working here face challenges every day. They try to extend the knowledge and skill fields all the time both for the demand of Oticon and their intrinsic expectation to themselves. So sometimes they work on the projects with the different responsibilities to enhance new skills. Recognition: Recognition is as important as the actual reward. Increasing staffs' monetary incomes alone doesn't have sufficient power to motivate on a long-term basis. The best way to motivate employees is to enhance their level of personal and professional confidence. A pay increase will not achieve this, but public recognition will. It's a fact of human nature that people will definitely try their best to achieve the accolades of an individual or group that they are certain truly praised on their work. (Dawson, 1990) So Oticon's project leaders should be suggested to adopt a policy of recognizing project members' outstanding contributions in front of colleagues or corporation's management team. Then, those who are commended will respond by striving to achieve something important continually. In order to consummate the whole reward system, there are still some tips deserves to be noticed. Firstly, it should be ensured that rewards could be obtained by everyone, motivating all employees not just those who regularly turn up on top. Secondly, a reward system should also contain punishment to eliminate undesirable behaviors and the policies related to departure of staffs whose performance is below the acceptable standard (WMG, OPP module). One more, Noticing timing affection, which means to offer reward directly related to the action, and as close to it as possible will optimize the motivation function. What should also be considered is the economical aspect. Oticon's management team should try to offer staff high value rewards at a comparatively low cost to the organization. <heading>6. Conclusion</heading>After reform, Oticon's employees have more responsibilities to look forward to and not only think unthinkable but also make the new idea doable and deliverable. The new Oticon provides ample opportunities to highly involve its successful crux: People. All in all, Oticon is the typical representative who implemented successful transformation based on the optimum application of organizational behavior and human resource management theories. 