<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Following group consultation with FamRelief (item 1 in the appendix), this report will further analyse the organisation by evaluation of SSM Mode 1 components, and consideration of analyses 2 and 3 of SSM Mode 1. The group process will also be considered. <heading>CRITICAL REVIEW - SSM Mode 1 Components</heading>Acknowledging the limitations of Hard Systems Methodology, Checkland developed SSM that would operate as a tool to solve more ill-structured organisational problems. Figure 1 outlines the basis of SSM Mode 1. <figure/>Mingers and Taylor (1992) suggested that the strengths of SSM are backed by empirical support, and Jackson and Keys (1984) argued that SSM is better able to deal with and solve problems than other systems based techniques although an SSM approach involves considerable involvement at the beginning and later stages. The 7 stages are explained with references to FamRelief where appropriate, below. <heading>1. The problem situation: unstructured</heading>This occurs when someone inside or outside organisation recognises a situation that can be resolved e.g. through improvement or through utilising the advantages of a potential opportunity. <heading>2. Problem situation expressed</heading>Rich Picture Building (RPB) is creating an illustration of an organisation that includes information flow, relationships, actors in the organisation and any blockages. A rich picture of FamRelief has been included as item 3 in the appendix. Problem expression allows an organisation to be viewed in new ways but more specifically rich pictures are useful in that they present current conflicts visually and thus further aid understanding of these conflicts. They also clearly show how each department communicates and the creative nature of the illustrations encourages all ideas regarding an organisation, to be expressed. Also, a depiction of the current situation is useful in furthering the understanding of how an organisation operates. The FamRelief rich picture was important in showing the communication breakdowns and the conflict areas with particular relationships e.g. between the District Manager and the Regional Administrator. However, rich pictures are limited as they only describe the present situation. There are several difficulties in conducting RPB exercises for example bias in thinking of the problem solver and nervousness on the part of the parties involved in providing information about the situation. Other methods for expressing the problems may also be considered such as brainstorming, cognitive mapping (Eden et al) and strategic assumption surfacing and testing (Mason and Mitroff). <heading>3. Root definition of relevant systems</heading>Production of a rich picture allows inferences for transformations from which a full system is identified by considering the influences (Transformations) and the Worldview it's taken from. More specifically "A system to do X, by means Y, in order to achieve Z" but a root definition isn't a model of the real world problem situation. The root definition of FamRelief furthered the understanding of the real world problem situation. The root definition is also useful in making explicit each of the CATWOE elements and gives the basis on which a conceptual model is based. CATWOE is an acronym for the following <list>C: Customer - people affected by the system, beneficiaries or victimsA: Actor - people participating in the systemT: Transformation - the core of the root definitionW: Weltanschauung - the worldviewO: Ownership - the person with the authority to decide on the future of the systemE: Environment - the wider system</list>Transformations are important as they highlight processes that are fundamental to the success of the organisation, e.g. what the main function of the organisation is. For FamRelief this was the transformation of exploited and dependant individuals to self sufficient communities by FamRelief projects and schemes. A transformation aids an organisation to keep focus of the core business objective. <heading>4. Conceptual Models</heading>This is a model of the transformation required to progress to output taking input as the starting point. It is surrounded by a system boundary described by the world view (Weltanschauung) and is occupied by people affected by and who influence the transformation. A conceptual model has value as it measures the success of a transformation by asking 3 key questions of efficacy, efficiency and effectiveness. Specifically for FamRelief, the construction of a conceptual model, also aided in the understanding of how the information systems that we had recommended for implementation would work. The conceptual model also shows the user how the system sits within a boundary. The major limitation is that it is theoretical and not a tangible understanding of the real world. Some stages in the conceptual model do not currently exist e.g. they are planned stages. Thus a comparison must be made with the real world to keep the model in context. <heading>5. Comparison with the Real World</heading>This consists of comparing what the conceptual model describes and what actually occurs, how it is done and how well this is done. Real world comparison is important to realise what tasks are being performed well so that an organisation can exploit their strengths, but also what isn't being done currently so that the current situation can be improved upon. Comments and recommendations are also useful for future implementations and how new IS systems can help the organisation e.g. Accounting Information Systems (AIS) to better manage budgets. <heading>6. Changes: systematically desirable; culturally feasible</heading>This stage sees a review of critical success factors (the tasks that must be achieved for an organisation to complete its primary objective) and their accompanying performance measures. The stage of review is important as it helps produce recommendations that can improve the problem situation. There are 3 changes that may occur; changes in structure, procedure and attitude. It is a commonly held belief that changing the latter is the most difficult. An important feature of SSM Mode 1 is that there is a strong emphasis on goal driven change. <heading>7. Action to improve the problem situation</heading>These are recommendations based on the previous 6 components of SSM Mode 1, which may affect the system or some actions within the system. Essentially the recommendations must give changes that are feasible and affordable to the organisation. The value of recommendations is that they are the output of the SSM process, and give an organisation a vision of where they can go and how they can improve performance. <heading>ANALYSIS 2 - Roles, Norms and Values</heading>Social Systems Analysis or Analysis 2 has developed from work by Vickers (1965) and further by Checkland and Casar (1986). <heading>Roles</heading>A role is a social position recognised as significant by people in the problem situation. Roles may be defined institutionally e.g. a teacher or behaviourally e.g. a good citizen. In FamRelief both the Regional Director and the District Manager occupy roles of information receivers and gatherers reporting to head office and Regional Administrator respectively. Thus recognition of this role in the organisation led to recommendations to implement systems to aid the information flow so that people occupying these roles could perform their jobs more effectively e.g. greater forecasting and analysis of sales data through the Point of Sale systems. <heading>Norms</heading>Norms are the expected behaviour associated with a particular role, behaviour resulting from social influence. Norms exist in FamRelief at the higher levels of the hierarchy e.g. to conform to business practices whereas at the lower levels of the hierarchy (shop level) the norm is to behave in a charitable fashion, acting as a volunteer. Another norm existing is a culture of informal communication channels. Acknowledging this is important in delivering methods to improve communication between divisions e.g. between the Regional Administrator and the District Manager. <heading>Values</heading>Values are essentially how the performance of someone in a role is judged e.g. the standards set for the role. Important are the beliefs about the performance by the role holder. Values held in FamRelief are a clear sense of purpose (helping those who are impoverished) but also an intrinsic reward for volunteer workers (a sense of doing good). The top of the organisation has a greater business focus than the bottom which is charity service focused. The importance of establishing the values held in an organisation is that values define an organisational culture, which can focus individuals toward the primary objective of the organisation. In the case of FamRelief, this is to improve the lives of the impoverished and the exploited. Analysis 2 guided constructions of recommendations as discovering roles within an organisation can aid the implementation of systems to improve how individuals perform their roles. Similarly establishing the value held by an organisation, focuses the recommendations to maintaining these values, thus achieving the primary objectives. Analysis 2 is useful assuming that the social state it leads to is never complete or stable. Clarifying roles is a useful way of generating ideas and understanding the rich mix of human relationships that are found in any organisation. <heading>ANALYSIS 3 - Politics and Power </heading>Also regarded as the "Political System", Analysis 3 considers the politics and power that exists in an organisation. Checkland (1986) said that any human situation will have a political dimension. <heading>Politics</heading>Politics can be considered in a SSM context as a process where differing interests reach accommodation, a convergence of opinion. Further, politics generates, modifies and dissolves accommodations through dispositions of power. From an organisational perspective Politics can be seen as the activities undertaken by an individual to obtain their personal preferences, Pfeffer (1981). Kotter (1985) and Yates (1985) also suggested that unwillingness to perform effectively the required political tasks in an organisation was a main reason for management failure. <heading>Power</heading>Power is considered to exhibit commodities through authority, charisma and reputation. For example, in FamRelief, the Regional Director has referent power over the Regional Administrator; the Regional Director has authority to influence the behaviour of the Regional Administrator. Work by Stowell (1989) discussed the dispositions of power; what are the commodities through which power is expressed, how are the commodities obtained and what are the mechanisms that allow these commodities to be retained and then passed on? Weber (1947) also defined power as possessing the ability to get others to do what you want them to do. Politics and power exists in all organisations from schools to multi billion pound businesses. In FamRelief specifically it was clear that politics existed between the Regional Administrator and the District Manager. The District Manager felt there was little support received from the Regional Administrator and as a result was less than forthcoming with sales data that the she needed to perform her role effectively. The Regional Director felt her role was inhibited by restrictions on trading and the restrictions of national targets, a use of power exerted by Head Office. However, although power and politics are exhibited at different levels of the organisation the recommendations made to FamRelief are more concerned with improving the availability and flow of information, and the communications in the organisation. <heading>THE GROUP PROCESS </heading>The main benefit of group work was the syndication of different views and individuals knowledge. It was also beneficial having students studying CBS and Management Science as we were able to combine knowledge of IT and IS, with more specific business skills such as report writing and organisational analysis. As a group we assigned individuals to the different tasks for interviewing the FamRelief individuals and then to work on particular sections of the assignment. We worked hard and the assignment was brought together and submitted on time. Important lessons were learnt: regular clear communication within the group, all members attended meetings, knowing what was required before and after meetings and creating a dynamic where all members felt at ease to contribute was all important. Away from the group, effective use of email and phone communication was vital. We also learned that we worked better in a group session when it was purely a case of syndication of work rather than commenting on the work. We squandered time trying to complete each stage of the assignment as a group. Belbin's 9 team roles framework (1996) shows that our 6 members displayed characteristics of these roles. Initially I occupied the role of a co-ordinator and then at the end a completer. Other members with greater IS experience took on the role of specialist, while one individual was good at averting friction and calming the waters, thus the role of a teamworker. A rich picture of the group process is attached which illustrates what we did well and poorly as a group. Clock faces indicate where time was note used efficiently, and crossed sword indicate conflict. 