<heading>Mini-case Overview"Survival of the biggest" - Telefónica acquires O2 </heading>Telefónica's £17.7 billion all cash offer for O 2 will create the second largest telecoms company by number of customers with 170 million mobile and landline users. Telefónica's strategic goal is "to provide the best combination of growth and cash returns in the industry" and the acquisition is a step to accomplish that. <fnote>China Mobile is the number 1 Telecoms company by customer numbers </fnote><fnote>From the Telefónica O 2 acquisition presentation, accessed from  URL  </fnote>Big European telecoms are jostling each other for fear of coming off worst in a continent wide wave of consolidation and Telefónica strives to move up league table of telecom companies (see figure 1). Acquiring O 2 will increase revenue growth for Telefónica (see figure 2) and will prevents others from buying it. <figure/><figure/>The acquisition comes at a time when wireless technology is increasingly a substitute for traditional landline calls (see figure 3), and mobile ownership is expected to rise from 1.3 billion today to 2 billion units by 2007. The biggest growth is expected in Africa (see figure 4). Mobiles are being increasingly used to do more than make phone calls, providing new opportunities for wireless operators and equipment makers. There is also the impending threat of Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) from companies such as Skype and KaZaA. Skype offers free calls to other Skype users and can add 150,000 users a day without spending anything on new equipment. It signals the intent that one day all voice calls will be free. <figure/><table/>Telefónica chairman César Alierta justifies the acquisitions as a way of broadening the firm's reach across different markets and technologies. At present the majority of Telefónica's sales come from Spain and Latin America and from traditional land lines. Acquiring O 2 will increase percentage of revenues from Europe from 5% to 21% and decrease the proportion of fixed-line revenues by ten percentage points (see figure 5). Although Investors believe the deal is expensive (a 25% premium is being paid). O 2's ability to translate its strategic objectives quickly and smoothly across its communications strategy makes it an attractive acquisition target. <fnote>Based on the average share price of O 2 during October </fnote><figure/>In many ways the deal represents a step back not forward. The recent trend has been for incumbent operators to spin off their wireless and internet divisions and concentrate on their core capabilities. Since the spin off of O 2 from BT four years ago every £1 held in the old BT group at the time of the split has delivered a return of more than 25p, assuming dividends were reinvested. Meanwhile, O 2 has delivered a return of 150 per cent and is now worth more than BT. Arguably the most significant change has been the transformation and re-engineering of the brand to give O 2 greater awareness among consumers. <fnote>That is far more than most other telecoms stocks have delivered. Telefónica has returned minus 7 per cent, Telecom Italia minus 13 per cent, and Deutsche Telekom minus 21 per cent. </fnote>Although no job losses are planned, Telefónica expects annual savings of £200m by 2008, mainly on handset and equipment buying. However analysts expressed caution at its leap into the northern Europe market. Analysts at Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein wrote: ''Strategically it seems questionable, and it is not in Telefónica's area of expertise: emerging markets.''. Chris Alliott, analyst at Nomura International believes O 2 represents a more attractive target for acquisition than other operators because it has a less diverse and less complicated footprint, making it a more 'cleaner' business to acquire and integrate. Their recently enhanced position in the business calls market also adds to the attraction. The deal could be beneficial for both Telefónica and O 2. In Germany, Telefónica could combine its fixed-line operation with O 2's mobile offering to create a "one-stop shop" however Telefónica's previous foray into Germany ended in failure. The offer also puts greater pressure on rivals to achieve growth outside of their current markets.  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL <heading>Question: Is the acquisition of O2 a strategy that will allow Telefónica to stay competitive in a Telecoms industry shifting from fixed line calls to wireless technology? Mini-case Analysis</heading>Telefónica is a global telecoms company whose success has been built on fixed line services with a strategy focused on emerging markets particularly in Latin America. It now faces challenges in an industry shifting towards mobile services. We define Telefónica's competitiveness as their ability to continue to make profit inline or greater than their rivals. Ansoff's matrix (figure 3) shows that acquiring O 2 is a strategy between product development and diversification; entering new markets (UK and Germany) and using products away from the landline service they offer. <fnote>This cannot be considered complete diversification as Telefónica offer mobile services in the Spanish and Latin American markets. However the deal represents a greater emphasis on mobile calls. </fnote><table/>This strategy will allow Telefónica to exploit the growing substitution of landline services for mobile / wireless services where margins on calls are higher. Entering lucrative markets with high mobile phone ownership may provide Telefónica with a predictable source of revenue. The potential source of growth may come from Third Generation mobile phones for which O 2 have licences. However there are risks involved with diversification, particularly moving away from their core competencies; providing fixed line calls. The UK and German markets also show low growth opportunities as they approach saturation and this is also a move away from Telefónica's expertise of emerging markets. A previous failure in Germany indicates that Telefónica may have lessons to learn if they are to be successful. <fnote>UK Mobile Phone ownership is estimated at 115% (Financial Times, November 8th 2005) </fnote>The three goals of diversification are growth, risk reduction and profitability and Telefónica achieves these by acquiring O 2. Mobile subscriptions are growing strongly (see figure 2), decreasing their dependence on revenue from fixed line services reduces risk, and O 2 gives access to profitable mobile calls business. Overall they will be better placed to compete. <fnote>Grant, Robert. M, (2005), Contemporary Strategy Analysis Fifth Edition, Blackwell Publishing, pg 450 </fnote>Although this strategy shows benefits to Telefónica, an assessment of the industry attractiveness will help show if it will keep them competitive. Porters 5 Forces Model for industry analysis (figure 7) although providing only a static snapshot in time, is useful for this. <figure/>For Telefónica to stay competitive they must be able to counter the threat of new entrants. By acquiring O 2, Telefónica has greater economies of scale, resources and the strong O 2 brand, which makes it harder for new firms to enter the industry. Thus the threat of new entrants decreases, which is beneficial for Telefónica. O 2's strong capabilities providing data services may help reduce the threat of substitutes to Telefónica, but the threat of the internet and VOIP remains. However access to large mobile markets (UK and Germany) combined with the strong brand name of O 2, may enable Telefónica to cross sell internet / VOIP services in the future. The strong bargaining power of buyers is prevalent in mobile and fixed line markets. Acquiring O 2 gives Telefónica the economies of scale in the industry and enables them to retain and increase their supplier power. With greater firm concentration the intensity of rivalry between the remaining big players will amplify. Using Porter's framework and looking at the growth of the market (figure 2), the mobile telecoms industry appears attractive and furthering their presence seems logical. For more complete analysis we should also consider the 6 th force of the model, complements. Telefónica must be responsive to the position held by mobile phone manufacturers who offer the complements to the service they provide. There are drawbacks to the deal; the high premium paid on the share price, the addition to Telefónica debt and a focus on markets showing slower growth than emerging markets (see figure 3). In conclusion, acquiring O 2 and increasing its presence in a growing mobile calls sector will keep Telefónica competitive as the telecoms industry consolidates. The strength of the O 2 brand and the increased revenue growth of the combined entity are key drivers. The ease at which O 2 may be integrated makes it more attractive than rivals but Telefónica must be aware of the future threat of VOIP. Successfully integrating O 2 will keep Telefónica competitive now, and in the foreseeable future. 