<heading>PROBLEM INDENTIFICATION</heading>Some problems within Pluto Telecommunications stem from the rapid growth experienced by the company over the last year. As a result communication has deteriorated between the three departments and as Ms Tsang says "they are actually working against each other". The manifestations of these problems are lost orders and an increased number of complaints. Ms Tsang is faced by 3 department subcultures which show few signs of integration and operate more as individual groups within the company. This has led to inefficient inter-department communication. Each department has its own aims, time scales and motivations which do not coincide with the other departments. Another problem facing Ms Tsang is the behaviour of her department directors and their inability to voice their honest opinions. Ms Tsang's leadership is also an issue for her to address as she has failed to coordinate her three departments and directors effectively. <heading>ANALYSIS</heading>Pluto Telecommunications can be analysed using the SOGI model for levels of analysis; Societal, Organisational, Group and Individual. Pluto will be analysed at all but Societal level. <heading>Organisational Level of Analysis</heading><heading>1. Organisation Culture</heading><quote>"Organisational culture can be thought of as the glue that holds an organisation together through a sharing of patterns of meaning. The culture focuses on the values, beliefs, and expectations that members come to share" (Siehl and Martin, 1984, p227 cited by MJ Hatch, 1997). </quote>A strong culture may provide members with a sense of organisation identity. Ms Tsang had promoted a unitary culture within Pluto but the divergence of the 3 departments, all with different sub-cultures has made it more difficult for a strong organisational culture to exist. Culture can serve two important roles in an organisation. Firstly internally integrating members by which they develop a sense of what is and isn't acceptable, how members communicate and work together. Secondly external adaptation, which describes how an organisation meets its goals and deals with outsiders (R.L Daft, 1995). A strong culture doesn't necessarily ensure success. IBM had a strong culture but suffered huge losses in the early 1990s partly due a culture that restricted adaptation to environmental changes. Hewlett Packard developed a strong quality based culture where employee recognition was established and this helped them stay innovative and profitable. Pluto Telecommunication's culture has not been integrated enough through the year of rapid change. In a customer needs based industry, Pluto's adaptability culture can keep them flexible to customer needs but it has meant that departments have developed their own sub cultures. <fnote>It is important to recognise that there are other important factors in any companies success, but HP's strong culture has encouraged member commitment and innovation. </fnote><heading>2. Organisation Structure</heading>There is a distinct hierarchy within the company which can be described as departmentalized. Each department reports to each department head who in turn report to Ms Tsang. Matthew Craven suggests that "differentiation may be indeed being appropriate for the turbulent and uncertain telecommunications environment" and this accords with theories of structure-environment 'fit' (Lawrence and Lorsch). Having distinct groups within the company allows Pluto to be flexible and reactive to changes in technology. The lack of integration between departments suggests that Pluto may be viewed from a differentiation perspective, especially concerning the differences between departments. Ms Tsang's notion of company unity appears to be an action inconsistency (Smircich and Morgan, 1982), where one notion is proposed and another implemented. This lack of integration may explain the poor communication between departments e.g. marketing launching a new product without talking to Sales or Service. The weak interdependencies between departments fits with Weick's (1976) term of a system "loosely coupled". The organisation is underestimating the interdependencies of the 3 departments. The company appears to have pooled interdependence (Thomson, 1967 cited by Daft 1995) between departments and as a result communication levels are low. Grouping by function (Mintzberg, 1979) puts emphasis on narrow specialty and not on the broader picture and this makes it hard to establish role responsibility in certain situations (e.g. who is responsible for a drop in sales). The inability of the directors to voice their recommendations in front of each other suggests that the department directors are displaying symptoms of Group Think. This is supported by work from Irving Janis, that members of groups (in this case departments) will often not voice their opinions in a drive for unanimity. This problem was also faced by Sir Richard Greenbury, the CEO of Marks and Spencer in 1998 when his directors and subordinates were reluctant to voice opinions in a group environment. <heading>Group Level of Analysis</heading><heading>1. Group structure</heading>Each department displays characteristics of a different structure which as the organisation as a whole has expanded, has made it more difficult for departments to communicate effectively. Sales show some characteristics of a Homogenised Group (Allcorn, 1989) as members of the group act individually to achieve their aims. Sales display features of an Intentional Group (Allcorn, 1989) as work is a member responsibility. This structure can discourage team work and may explain why sales members do not interact effectively with other departments. Customer Services display a more bureaucratic structure, with a formal authority based on rules and procedures (Weber, cited by M.J.Hatch, 1997). As the department includes engineering (installation and maintenance of equipment), the bureaucratic structure is suitable. The written communication style is familiar with the engineering departmental technology framework (Perrow). This Institutionalised Group (Allcorn, 1989) may get work done but may struggle adjusting to new circumstance e.g. company expansion. The Marketing department places emphasis on team work but it is difficult to identify a clear structure. A strong group identity suggests an Intentional Group structure (Allcorn, 1989) and this allows all members within the group to participate. <heading>2. Group Culture </heading>The nature of Sales has produced an elitist, performance based culture. As rewards are performance based Sales staff work individually and competitively. Symbols such as company cars and mobiles phones define the Sales culture Culture developed from an institutionalised group may lead to members feeling safety from following rules but also fear at speaking out unless it's done in the correct manner (Allcorn, 1989). This describes the culture of Customer Services. Authority is defined clearly and the formal work style although perhaps suitable for engineering work, may hinder the department in communicating with other departments where the style is less formal. This Role Culture (Handy, 1986) means that resources can be tightly controlled but it is also resistant to change. The Marketing culture suggests a reluctance of staff to get involved with other departments due to the nature of other departments work. This has a detrimental effect on interdepartmental communications. The contrasting sub-cultures of each department reduce the likelihood of 3 integrated departments as the individuals in each department relate to their own department culture. <heading>Individual Level of Analysis</heading><heading>1. Leadership Style</heading>Although Howell et al (1990) argued that no strong consistent relationship has been found between leader behaviours and organisation effectiveness; it is widely acknowledged that leadership plays a role in the success of a company. For the highly trained and qualified members of an organisation (perhaps the Marketing workforce as they are all MBA graduates) little supervision may be required for them to complete their work. Ms Tsang's leadership problems perhaps concern guiding the less highly trained and educated, and getting her department directors to get the best out of their respective teams. Ms Tsang's sarcastic response from the case study suggests that she feels like she is being blamed and that the others see her at fault for the problems. As a woman around male directors she may feel like she must show confidence as part of her impression management (Rosenfeld et al, 1995), but outbursts of anger suggest she is having problems managing her impression, thus giving her less control. Leadership has been defined as "the creation of a vision about a desired future state which seeks to enmesh all members of an organisation in its net" (Bryman, 1986 cited by Buchanan and Huczynski, 1997). However Ms Tsang does not appear to have active and constructive participation from her directors or conveyed her vision of the company to them. By combing transactional and transformational styles of leadership, she may be able to develop subordinates to their highest potential (Bass and Avolio, 1990). <heading>2. Individuals and Motivation</heading>A major problem facing Pluto and Ms Tsang is the differences in motivation and individuals in each department. Sales are motivated by financial rewards dependant on the amount of sales they achieve. This extrinsic reward system although promoting a competitive environment, has impacted on the relationships between Sales staff. As each Sales staff is using the system for individual gain, there is less focus on team gain and as a result Sales staff operates as individuals. Theories by W.Edward Deming have also suggested that pay is not a motivator. Although the Customer Services department also have a bonus system in place, some motivation for staff appears to come from fear of failure e.g. the formal warnings and recriminations. Studies suggest that a "stick over carrot" style of reward system has a detrimental long term effect on the motivation of staff. Herzberg's observation (1968) that "a kick in the pants may product movement but never motivation" supports this idea. The lack of clear performance targets for the Marketing department may result in some members not feeling valued or clear about how their performance is measured. Work by Locke (1968) on Goal Setting Theory suggests that in some cases setting specific goals leads to higher performance, than general goals. The lack of individual goals may lead to members of the group feeling undervalued if their input is greater than others. Equity Theory (Adams, 1963) suggests that feelings of anger and being underpaid may develop, but this inequity may also be a motivating factor for marketing staff. <fnote>It must be acknowledged that workers must accept the goals for any higher performance to be achieved. Resistance to goals my lead to a lower performance of workers. </fnote>Bonuses and merit pay exists throughout each department, to varying degrees. Each department is motivated differently; Sales extrinsically, Customer Services partly through fear and Marketing through vague team goals. The reward systems may have some benefit in the short run, but some studies (Pearce and Porter, 1985) show that merit pay systems have significant and long lasting detrimental effects on organisational commitment. The different time orientation of individuals in Sales and in Marketing, may lead to conflicting interests and make it hard for the departments to interact effectively. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The existence of 3 sub-cultures is key source of problems facing Ms Tsang and the company, a result of rapid company expansion. In the short run it may help workers in each department fit in and complete short term tasks, however long term the lack of integration has caused a break down in communications. There is no system in place to ensure interdepartmental communication (e.g. meetings) and the time orientation of each department has lead to a lack of understanding of the other department's needs. <heading>ALTERNATIVES</heading><heading>Do Nothing</heading>Although confrontation would be avoided, the existing problems would remain throughout the company. This may lead to further loss of sales and further breakdown in interdepartmental relations. <heading>Openly Confront Ms Tsang</heading>It is important for the other directors to voice their honest opinions in front of Ms Tsang but to avoid confrontation this must be done in a tactful and appropriate way. Once the other directors have made their suggestions it might help the company become more integrated and each department might understand the others needs. There is a risk that each director may feel that others comment are a personal attack. <heading>Change the Organisational Structure</heading>Some evidence suggests that grouping the company by market instead of process (3 Departments) may increase the organisational flexibility and allow the company to change tasks more easily (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967). For each market that Pluto supplied a product to, there would be Sales, Customer Service and Marketing staff assigned. Goals become shared (Walker and Lorsch, 1969) but there is a risk that communications may decrease and the lack of specialised work may alienate specialise workers within the company (Kover, 1964). Restructuring the company would cost money. <heading>Introduce an Involvement Culture</heading>An involvement culture focuses the company on participation of the company's members and on the changing expectations of the external environment (R.L Daft, 1995). Changing the organisational culture may integrate the departments more effectively and lead to an increase commitment from the workers to the company. A successful example of a company with this culture is Ben & Jerry's Homemade, Inc. However aspects of an adaptability culture may make Pluto more responsive to customer needs and any company growth in the long term. An adaptability culture has worked well for Detroit Edison. <heading>Change the Company Reward Systems to Improve Motivation</heading>Although rewards buy compliance in the short run, harm may be caused to long term motivation. Emphasis should be placed on intrinsic motivation by defining clear, challenging and attainable goals for individuals (Foster, 1999). A Flexible Benefit Program (Fragner, 1975 and Lawler, 1981) whereby individuals can tailor their own reward packages to fit their needs (extended holidays, flexible hours, leaving early, praise etc) may get the best value for money for the company. Showing an interest in worker needs through feedback is an important motivation factor. Introducing company wide rewards may help the departments work together and increase communication. However completely removing an individual bonus system may alienate members who value position and power and need high levels of visible reinforcement (e.g. Sales). <heading>Appoint New Department Directors</heading>The current department directors show a lack of understanding for each others time scales and a willingness to communicate with each other. Appointing new directors may alleviate these problems and in the short run new energy may be injected into the company as the new directors seek to do well. However, new directors would take time to settle in, learn the ropes and build relationships with their subordinates. There would be no guarantee that long term any problems would be solved and substantial compensation and headhunting costs would be involved. <heading>Introduce Regular Company Meetings</heading>Regular meetings between departments and Ms Tsang (e.g. once a week) combined with quarterly reviews of progress would increase communications and let each department director know how the other departments where getting on. There would be no cost involved although it would take up time of the directors and there would be no guarantee that they would voice their honest opinions. <heading>Move all the Departments to the Same Location</heading>If all departments were based at the same location, it would be easier for them to communicate in person and resolve any conflicts. However there would be a substantial cost in relocating departments and with video conferencing and internet communications it may not prove cost effective. <heading>RECOMMENDATIONS</heading>In the short run it is important for the 3 department directors to voice their concerns about the corrective action required, albeit in a constructive and appropriate way (alternative 2). Short term it would be possible to introduce regular meetings to facilitate communications between departments and resolve conflicts (alternative 7). Long term the culture of the organisation should become more involvement orientated with the view to integrate the 3 departments more effectively (alternative 4) resulting in more effective communications and better working relations. Over a length of time a greater emphasis should be placed on intrinsic motivation of employees, making sure there is greater feedback and that clear achievable goals are set for everyone (alternative 5). The introduction of organisation wide rewards may encourage greater team work. The current organisational structure should remain and combined with the recommended actions should become more effective. The issue of different time motivations stems from the nature of the work that each department does and would be difficult to change. It is therefore important that Pluto concentrates on making sure each department understand the other departments' time constraints. Ideally all departments would be based at the same location but the financial implications should be considered before any decision was made. <heading>PLAN OF ACTION</heading>Company directors meeting to voice concerns and recommendations. This may take days. Implement weekly meetings and quarterly reviews involving directors and company managers. This may take a couple of weeks. Introduce an involvement culture. Use interdepartmental social events, team building exercises etc to encourage interaction. This may take several months and in involve a small cost. Alter the reward systems and provide more feedback. This may take several months but costs may be cut due to tailor made rewards. 