<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>The following report provides a critical evaluation of the project management performance in construction of the Millau Viaduct (France). The report includes a detailed evaluation of the management approach adopted for the project as well as a critical review of overall project performance. The construction of the Millau Viaduct was primarily motivated by increasing volumes of traffic passing through the Tarn Valley on the way to Southern France and Spain during holiday periods. The choice of a high-level means of traversing the Tarn Valley resulted in a number of technical difficulties and thus necessitated the need for effective and well monitored project management. The project presented a number of challenges from a management perspective. These challenges included satisfying a variety of shareholders, coordination of a number of contractors and sub-contractors, reducing resource bottlenecks brought about by this multitude of contractors and suppliers, and effectively utilising a range of new technologies. The main contractors, Eiffage TP, managed to deal with these complexities through a process of meticulous planning in early stages of the project, and appropriate selection of tools and methodologies. Ensuring efficient communication channels were in place also allowed the contractors to effectively co-ordinate all of the companies involved in the Viaduct's construction. The flexibility provided by Eiffage's "short command chain" also allowed for rapid modification of plans - necessary to deal with setbacks brought about as a result of environmental and other external influences. Overall, the project can be seen as a remarkable success. Despite the short, 39-month timescale, Eiffage were able to complete construction both under budget and ahead of schedule, demonstrating that effective planning and project management can result in success, even in the largest and most complex of projects. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Le Viaduc de Millau (Millau Viaduct) represents the outcome of a government project, commissioned in order to complete an important section of the A75 autoroute, providing a link from Paris to Béziers. Prior to construction of the viaduct, traffic travelling along this route had to descend to the Tarn Valley and travel along the Route National N9, passing through Millau - a city of only 22,000 residents. This caused particular problems (especially in terms of congestion) in the summer holiday season due to the vast number of tourists travelling to Southern France and Spain along this route. The government reacted to increasing traffic along this route in the mid-1980s, quickly recognising the necessity for a method of traversing the Tarn valley, and commissioning initial studies into four available options in 1988. Each of these initial options is outlined below. "The Eastern Option" - Requiring two major bridges. Shorter and better for through traffic, but providing poor access to Millau. "The RN9 Option" - Following the original path of Route Nationale 9 providing good access to Millau but at the cost of technical difficulties and intrusion on the town "The Western Option" - Requiring four major bridges, technically easier but expensive and providing poor access to Millau. "The Median Option" - Traverse the middle of the valley. [Interdepartmental Division of Civil Engineering Structures, (2001)] The fourth of these options was selected by the government on June 28, 1989. However, further studies necessitated the evaluation of two sub-groups of alternatives along this route. The "high level" group, required a 2,500m viaduct crossing the Tarn at a height over 200m, and the "low level" group, lower in the valley using a 2,300m viaduct extended by a tunnel. After in-depth analysis in the Aix en Provence Centre for Technical Design Studies, the high-level solution was selected as the better option, for example, its lower overall cost reduced impact on the urban development and no need for a tunnel avoided intersection with the water table. To give some idea of the scale of the project, its final completion in December 2005 resulted in a structure more than 19 meters taller than the Eiffel Tower, rising above New York's Chrysler Building, and only 40 meters shorter than the Empire State Building at its tallest point. <heading>The Project Challenge</heading>The selection of the high-level median route across the Tarn valley brought with it a substantial number of technical and other difficulties, ultimately resulting in an incredibly complex project requiring a detailed and highly organised level of project management. As an Engineering Project, the Millau Viaduct did have the benefit of well defined methods and goals, especially in comparison to many other projects in areas such as Research or Software Application Development. [ Manufacturing Group, (2005)] The project did present challenges in many other areas however, particularly in terms of overall project complexity. For example, the Millau Viaduct project had a number of shareholders with different goals. The government who had initially commissioned the project simply wanted a means of bridging the gap in the A75 while alleviating traffic flow through the Tarn Valley and city of Millau. Eiffage, the group commissioned to construct the viaduct, wanted toll collection rights in order to profit on their efforts in terms of financing and building of the span. The designers and architects also approached the project from a different angle, with their objective being, "to ensure that the structure's huge proportions would be elegant and harmonize with the dramatic landscape setting." [Bullivant, (2005)] The project also involved a multitude of contractors and sub-contractors - necessary as a result of the immense technical challenge of the project. This challenge was evident even in the early design phase of the project. While the majority of architectural design was completed by British firm, Foster and Partners (headed by Lord Norman Foster), additional design work was conducted in conjunction with two French companies - SOGELERG and EEG Simecsol (both with extensive previous bridge building history). Perhaps a better example of this complexity is evident during the actual construction of the bridge. The bridge's structural engineering work was completed by SETEC (a German company) headed by Michel Virlogeux (appointed as Chief Engineer on the project), and in conjunction with Dutch engineering firm ARCADIS for the technical design. Other sub-contractors included Eiffel Construction Metallique (responsible for Steel Construction), Greisch (responsible for deck construction), Munch (responsible for pylons) and PERI (responsible for Formwork and Scaffholding). All of these entities had to be coordinated under direction from the Main Contractor, Eiffage TP - a Paris-based private-sector consortium (also responsible for building the Eiffel Tower). As part of winning such a prestigious contract, Eiffage also agreed to complete construction of the crossing in what seemed like an initially ambitious 39 months. With such a short schedule considering the size of the project, this placed a huge responsibility on them to provide appropriate communication channels between the separate construction groups. Thus, one of the main challenges in terms of project management was the co-ordination and integration of a variety of multi-national groups. Project complexity also stemmed from a number of resource bottlenecks. As a result of the multi-national partnership, resources had to be transported from far afield on a numerous occasions. For instance, for the hydraulic positioning of the deck on top of the piers, Dutch company Enerpac were responsible for transporting hydraulic telescopic equipment from Madrid to the site. Delays in transportation of these and other resources would lead to the entire construction operation grinding to a halt, without effective planning and organisation. The required use of a number of new technologies also contributed to an increasingly complex project - a fact emphasised by Form Setter, José Barbosa Amorim who states, "I had to get used to new techniques, and to new material. Along with my team, we really had to keep the pace going: a layer of concrete every three days." [(2006)] Other revolutionary technologies from a bridge-building perspective included the use of laser tracking, GPS, and self-raising forms for precise placement of components, as well as high performance concretes and a number of other innovative materials to deal with the stress and extreme weather conditions to which the viaduct would inevitably be exposed. On the positive side however, as a government commissioned project, Eiffage did have the government's full support, thus minimising the risk of government intervention during the project (a major concern for many such large-scale projects). <heading>Critical Overview</heading>The table in Appendix A gives a brief overview of the project timescale from conception to completion. During early bidding for the opportunity to carry out the project, Eiffage had to beat formidable opposition in the form of Sweden's Skanska A.B., Spain's Dragados S.A. and a large Paris-based consortium. According to Marc Legrand, director general of Compagnie Eiffage du Viaduc du Millau (CEVM), "by bidding singly, Eiffage avoided having to make decisions by committee, inherent in joint ventures, and eliminated potential conflicts of interest." [Reina, (2004)] By financing the project within its own balance sheet, Eiffage also managed to cut delays and costs associated with more conventionally raised bank loans secured by the projects predicted revenue. This strategy was not without its risks however. Had the company lost the bid, they would have faced the worrying prospect of losing all of this investment. Thus, during 2000, "Eiffage's bidding team was under strict instruction to eliminate all important uncertainties and ensure the bid price would be accurate ... trawling through every engineering detail raised Eiffage's engineering cost to nearly $4 million." [Reina, (2004)] Including commercial and legal issues, the final bid cost was actually nearer to $6.5 million. The fact that all of these factors were extensively scrutinised before bidding for the project serves only to highlight the effective risk management process employed by Eiffage. The project also provides an interesting study due to the unique financial nature of the project. That is, in return for agreeing to finance and build the bridge, the French government granted Eiffage collection rights on the toll booth. As such, 'the group's CEVM division has a build-operate-transfer contract for the viaduct, with 75 years to run.' [Reina, (2004)] Environmental factors presented an enormous challenge to designers and engineers alike, with the bridge, "exposed to crackling summer sun and winter winds of nearly 100 miles (160 kilometres) per hour." [Lynn, (2005)] A lot of these technical problems were overcome through use of a large-amount of cutting-edge design technology. Advanced CAD (Computer Aided Design) technologies allowed for precise stress tolerance calculations across the entirety of the 226,000 ton structure. Flexibility was one of the major concerns in terms of weather exposure. This was mainly due to the viaduct consisting of six continuous stayed deck sections and only two distant anchor spans. Virlogeux's cure was, "to split the pier tops into two arms ... providing a wide base to counter the pylon's rotational tendency." [Reina, (2004)] This reduction in flexibility allows them to flex as the deck expands in the sun, thus allowing the highway to expand or contract by up to three metres. Another technical challenge facing the project development team was the issue of protecting vehicles from these extreme weather conditions, particularly the high winds suffered in the Aveyron region. With such an immense structure, safety was of uttermost importance. This particular challenge was overcome with the introduction of 3m tall screens along the length of the viaduct. In keeping with the designer's and architect's goal of creating an elegant structure, the decision was also made to make these screens transparent. Despite completion of the viaduct on time and within budget, the project did not go completely without hitch. "Miserable weather hit soon after Eiffage started construction on Oct. 10, 2001, suspending work." [Lynn, (2005)] Fortunately, as a result of this, the government agreed a new completion date of January 10 th 2005 - the opening day for vehicular traffic. External environmental factors again put the project slightly behind schedule in 2003. According to BBC News, "The heat wave over last year's summer meant some of the welding could not be done, and over the previous winter it was so cold some work had to be halted." [BBC, (2004)] Weather also led to delays in the later stages of the project. By March 2004, the deck had progressed to the third pier of the bridge, however, the operation of shifting the deck again to the second pier was, "somewhat delayed by weather conditions, which interfered with the equipment's laser guidance system." [Reed, (2005)] This could possibly have been avoided through effective risk mitigation and ensuring that an appropriate backup strategy was in place. This may be considered as a particularly bad point in terms of overall project management. It could be considered a management oversight that no such system was in place - especially after the weather conditions causing similar problems in the initial stages of construction. It appears however that these weather related incidents could have been more severe without appropriate tool selection by the construction team. According to one surveyor, "using the GPS has revolutionised our way of working. Reliability, precision and ease of use: 15 minutes is long enough to "position" a mould, instead of an hour and half without this system. It has also put an end to the hazards caused by bad weather conditions. Fog, rain and wind have never prevented communication with the satellites." [Nottin, (2006)] It is also obvious that safety was an overriding factor in many of these weather related delays, with checking deck safety in windy conditions accountable for occupying most of Chief Engineer, Michel Virlogeux's time during review of the contractor's deck launching proposals. Elaborating on this, Virlogeux explains that, "For launching to proceed, Eiffel must have wind speed forecasts of under 72km per hour for three successive days. If wind exceeds 85km per hour in mid-launch, the operation must stop." [Reina, (2004)] Such weather monitoring and prediction allowed the management team to make effective use of resources and ensured that money was not wasted trying to setup a launching that was unlikely to be given the go-ahead. To further emphasise the effort put into safety aspects of the project by the management team, it is claimed that the deck was almost as safe as the final structure when it needed to be parked and temporarily tied down. Human Resource management was also critical for such a large-scale project. With somewhere between 350 and 480 workers on site for the duration of the project [SPG Media, (2006)], it was crucial that coordination and communication remained in place for the whole of the three year construction project. In terms of this HR management, one of the key organisational factors leading to the rapid construction of the bridge was the separation of construction of the abutments and the piers into 9 separate projects, each with a unique team and foreman. With a deadline of just 16 months to complete the seven piers, each was treated as a separate worksite with its own crane. The effectiveness of this is emphasised by reports from staff working on the site with one site foreman referring to this strategy as "an incredible source of motivation." [Laporte, (2006)] Another effective feature of project management was utilisation of a number of key features of effective project team mobilisation to ensure a hard working and effective team dynamic. [Nicholls, (2005)] Particularly in the construction phase, Effiage applied a principle of leadership rotation where possible, as highlighted by Site Foreman, Dominique Laporte who states that, "On the Viaduct, I led the team on P2, the highest pier, from April 2002 until March 2003, then I moved to P4 for a few months and finally I was put in charge of building the toll barrier." [Laporte, (2006)] By rotating management in this way, the company were able to both challenge and motivate staff, while at the same time ensuring that leaders in different areas of the bridge's construction could fully appreciate the importance of each sub-project. A large majority of the project's success can also be attributed to the effective choice of tools and methodologies used in the construction phase. One of the main technical challenges concerned the positioning of the 36,000 ton steel decking on top of the piers. After a great deal of functional analysis from this perspective, Dutch company Enerpac came up with a solution involving "pushing the deck over seven temporary steel piers ... erected by hydraulic telescopic equipment designed and built by it Construction Center of Excellence in Madrid, Spain." One problem with this approach stemmed from the immense weight of the deck. As it was pushed further out, it began to point downwards. Again, a functional analysis approach was used to decide on a method to combat this. The end result was that, "the launching system also included an additional independent nose recovery device placed on the end of the deck, allowing it to be pulled upwards or pivoted during operations." [Reed, (2005)] The choice to use steel for the superstructure and pylons also provided a number of benefits, especially in terms of human resource management. By using steel, "of the total number of man hours required for fabrication and assembly, only about 4% were expended in the air." [DYWIDAG, (2006)]. Prefabrication of pylons offsite, and assembly behind the abutments also helped to shield workers from, "inclement weather and potentially dangerous heights," [Kren, (2002)] according to Project Director, Mark Buonomo. Buonomo also claims that effective use of computer technology was a key factor influencing the overall success of the project - particularly in terms of creating and raising the deck. "We needed perfect synchronisation of all the traversers, those indispensable machines that lift and push the steel "ocean liner" from the pier to the pile work until it reaches its final position, above the Tarn." [Buonomo, (2006)] The joining of the two parts of the decking was completed in May 2004, and thanks to this computing technology, was accurate to the nearest and centimetre and well within the given timescale. The use of GPS was also praised by Eiffage's director of works, Thomas Tieberghien, who claims to be delighted with the 4-mm accuracy recorded. He goes on to state, "I think it's the beginning of this kind of precision. Ten years ago, it was 10 cm." [Reina, (2004)] It is obvious that a great deal of research and planning during project specification was the primary enabling factor behind such effective analysis and selection of tools. Buonomo states that, while Eiffage engineers found both steel and concrete possibilities for the bridge to be of a similar cost, "the steel option was more slender and allowed faster construction. A concrete deck would have been greatly heavier, over 0.5m deeper and needing three times as many cables." [Reina, (2004)] Other key strengths of the project included the Environmental Protection Plan developed at the beginning of the project and remaining in place during the entirety of the bridge's construction. "It identifies the project's different pollution risks, lays down preventative arrangements, organises checks and provides measures to handle any pollution that may arise. A specially dedicated environmental protection team has drawn up a rigorous plan to ensure that nature is respected in all events." [Gimmig, (2005)] Over the course of the 39 month construction period, water, air and noise issues were all checked on a regular basis. Unfortunately, despite enormous success on the whole, there is evidence of poor planning and management oversight in some areas of the project. One unforeseen problem was the increase of prestressing at the pier tops as a result of the concrete casting process. Pier top modifications to the tune of $2 million were thus required, demanding another set of formwork to account for the longer casting. Tiberghien claims however that this simply demonstrates Eiffage's effective communication mechanism, stating that "Eiffage's short command chain made the decision a fast one." [Reina, (2004)] One advantage of the large number of entities involved in construction of the viaduct was a certain element of Diversity of Competence, allowing for rapid response to such unforeseen events, while this necessary rework serves to emphasise the uncertainty associated with such a large-scale engineering project. <heading>Project Performance</heading>Overall, construction of the Millau Viaduct can lay claim to be a shining example of project success in recent years. It is an enormous achievement that a project of such complexity was completed both on schedule and within budget. Despite a number of setbacks (including a number of weather-related incidents), Eiffage managed to beat the contract schedule by a month. It is testimony to the effective management of the project that the company finished just 36 months after laying the first stone. This fact is even more impressive in light of claims that, "the track record of projects is fundamentally poor, particularly for the larger and more difficult ones. Overruns are common ... Many projects appear as failures." [Morris and Hough, (1987)] Another key success of the project was the company's final expenditure of only $470 million - approximately half of the originally allocated budget. This is indicative of effective cost planning on Eiffage's behalf. The low final expenditure also suggests the company may have had a rather large Risk Budget in place to deal with uncertainty. The fact that Eiffage were able to outbid the other three competing parties to build the bridge while maintaining such a sizeable budget demonstrates both effective cost planning analysis and risk identification and assessment. From a government perspective, the project also appears to be a huge success in terms of meeting the original goal of cutting congestion in Millau, and cutting journey time for those travelling south along the A75. To really emphasise the success of the project in this light, it is worth considering the statement that, "it is estimated that the bridge will cut journey times between 30 minutes and four hours, depending on the time of year." [Reed (2005)] The viaduct can also be viewed as a cultural success, with many, including President Jacques Chirac claiming it as a work of immense national pride. Chirac states that, "The Millau Viaduct takes its place among our most shining works of civil engineering ... [It] is a magnificent example in the long and great French tradition of audacious works of art." [Lynn, (2005)] One major advantage of the project's early completion was that the temporary piers could be dismantled in November, allowing greater time for load testing prior to opening to general vehicular traffic. It is a credit to Eiffage's management of the project that this was possible, with testing often being cut short rather than lengthened in many major engineering projects. We can also gain some measure of the significance of the project's performance when considering that the Millau Viaduct was awarded gold in the prestigious D&AD awards in 2005 - a competition dedicated to recognising well conceived and executed ideas. Aside from the on-budget performance and rapid construction pace, another key success of the project was the significant amount of time spent ensuring that the end result was a structural solution that "didn't detract from an area highly prized for its natural beauty." [Lynn, (2005)] In the same article, Foster praises the bridge as having "the delicacy of a butterfly," with piers that looked, "almost organic, like they had grown from the earth," thus satisfying the designer's and architect's goals of an elegant structure in harmony with the landscape. At this point, it is perhaps worth considering a report conducted by The Standish Group in 1994, which states that, "One of the biggest reasons bridges come in on-time, on-budget and do not fall down is because of the extreme detail of design." It is clear from the 20-year period from conception to the beginning of construction, that the Millau Viaduct was a well-conceived and well-planned project. This, in conjunction with the involvement of prestigious and experienced companies such as Foster & Partners and Eiffage TP was always likely to be a recipe for success. <heading>Analysis</heading>On the whole, there is very little I would change in order to improve project management performance on similar projects in the future. The project appears to have been particularly well managed - clearly evident when considering the final product in light of the short, 39-month timescale. A large majority of the Millau Viaduct's success can be attributed to meticulous planning, particularly on the part of Eiffage during the initial bidding procedure. The company carried out extensive analysis, down to the finest engineering detail in order to reduce uncertainty before bidding. This clearly had a bearing on the relatively smooth progress of the project over its lifecycle. The nature of the contract can also be attributed for effective project performance. Eiffage's "build-operate-transfer" contract certainly provided the company with a major incentive to finish the project as early as possible to begin collecting vehicular tolls. Again, extensive design and planning in the early stages of the project led to success in terms of dealing with the multitude of environmental problems posed by the venture. The project team demonstrated creativity in their ability to formulate a variety of novel techniques to combat issues surrounding exposure of both vehicles and the bridge itself to high winds and intense summer sun. Early analysis and development of an efficient approach to construction also played a large part in the project's success. As mentioned in the previous section, the project was effectively broken into 9 sub-projects, thus ensuring that each of the piers were completed in a timely fashion and that the project didn't suffer delays as a result of unfinished piers when it came to laying the deck. Choice of tools and use of a number of new technologies also played a part, with hydraulic telescopic equipment, GPS and laser guidance systems all deployed effectively to deal with a variety of technical challenges. One possible suggestion for future projects in a similar field would be to try and reduce the number of entities involved in the project, at least ensuring that all suppliers and contractors are as local as possible to the project. While Eiffage did solve this problem to some degree, demonstrating economy in use of material and ensuring that the majority of steelwork passed to its subsidiary, Eiffel Construction, transportation and co-ordination became a real issue in some areas, with deck sections arriving from Marseilles and Lauterbourg (near Germany) prior to complete assembly. The exact method used for project structuring is unclear from the information available. For this type of project however, I would certainly recommend some form of Work Breakdown Structure, both due to the overall complexity of the project and the fact that such a project can easily be broken down into subtasks as identified by Laporte. [(2006)] Aside from these minor modifications, the majority of the project management process appears to have been conducted effectively and efficiently. Eiffage can be praised on many successful project management aspects, with structuring, time and cost planning, risk, team and lifecycle management all proving to be highly effective. <heading>Conclusion</heading>In conclusion, the Millau Viaduct project provides an encouraging example of how effective planning and project management can result in phenomenal success, even in the largest and most complex of scenarios. Despite the immense technical challenge posed by such a bold venture, Eiffage were able to demonstrate the competency and attention to detail necessary to facilitate effective project management. Precise co-ordination of numerous contractors and other entities, as well as appropriate selection of cutting edge tools and methodologies paved the way for a highly successful project. Extensive planning in the early stages of the project, as well as consideration of the risks and uncertainties associated with such a large-scale project all helped to ensure the management team were able to easily respond to any difficulties or change in circumstances over the course of the project. Of particular note, the communication channels and "short command chain" both increased flexibility, response times to changes in specification and general awareness between the different entities involved in the project. The end result is an astonishing feat, both from a technical and a managerial standpoint, and it is likely that the Millau Viaduct will stand as one of our greatest technical achievements for quite some time. 