<heading>Patient Background</heading> is a 55 year old woman. She has a stoma from a total colectomy and iliostomy performed in 1976 to treat serious ulcerative colitis. This stoma is well managed by  and needs little attention from healthcare professionals. Her main current health presentations are bronchiectasis and recurrent bouts of depression. The depression first developed in 1993 following her son's suicide. She is divorced, lives alone in a well-maintained and well looked after council property and receives the lower rate of Disability Living Allowance (DLA) as she was forced to give up her work as a school dinner lady because of her bronchiectasis. Her elderly parents live nearby and she visits them daily. Her daughters also live locally and visit regularly with grandchildren and great-grandchildren. In addition,  has a large network of friends, three of whom she goes on regular overseas trips with. These holidays are much cherished and are important goals that are worked towards during the intervening periods.  doesn't drive. She began to take lessons but her initial bout of ulcerative colitis made it impractical for her to continue at that time. She has subsequently developed Dupuytren's contracture 1 (requiring two operations on her right hand) which she feels, combined with her other conditions, would make it impossible for her to take lessons again now. <heading>Interviews</heading><heading>Interview I - </heading>The development of 's ulcerative colitis coincided with her second pregnancy. Six weeks after the birth of her second child she was admitted to hospital with suspected bowel cancer. Ulcerative colitis was diagnosed but a "very arrogant doctor" failed to adequately explain the issues surrounding the proposed colectomy and so  declined treatment. She now feels this "was very silly". Some years later the condition returned and surgery was performed, but the inflammation had become so severe and widespread that an iliostomy was also needed. Following surgery  was offered, and undertook counselling within a group of patients who had also undergone iliostomies. She found this a great help and the group still meet annually. Her husband was also offered counselling, but declined. She discovered 'stoma care' following a severe infection of the stoma that required antibiotic treatment and was impressed by the care she received at that time, and by the ongoing stoma care provisions. However she still very much feels that when meeting new people, at least on first impressions, "people look at the bag, not me". In 2002  suffered a hernia under the stoma that she was initially told was inoperable. Two years later a second, "younger" doctor told her it was operable and the operation was a great success.  feels that by some margin her worst condition is the bronchiectasis. It can be very debilitating and limit her freedom considerably. On bad days she has difficulty getting up the stairs in her house. She tries to manage the bronchiectasis as effectively as possible by not over-exerting herself and using steroids when the condition is particularly severe.  found the coughing fits associated with the bronchiectasis initially very frightening and self-perpetuating, but now understands the aetiologies of the attacks and consequently feels better able to cope with them. It was these episodes that caused her to give up her work. Similarly, she has suffered from depression for long enough to recognise the first symptoms of its recurrence and tends to be pro-active when seeking help. She generally prefers counselling to drugs as her younger sister "has been on anti-depressants since she was 18 and I've seen what that did to her. I don't want that to happen to me".  is very happy with the care and support she receives from both her GP practice and the stoma care team. <heading>Interview II - Stoma Nurse,  Hospital</heading>The stoma care team operate on a 'drop-in' basis. The stoma nurse has an important role in helping patients with stomas adjust their diet to their changed circumstances, particularly regulating fluid intake in patients whose colon has been removed. Individual patients have individual dietary needs and there can be substantive changes in diets pre- and post-operatively. They also provide information on new technologies/devices, updated stoma care advice and play a key role in adapting to the psychological changes caused by the operation.  visits the stoma care team about once a year, mainly to keep abreast of new devices and up to date stoma advice. The stoma nurse thinks that  copes "remarkably well". <heading>Interview III - General Practitioner,  Medical Centre</heading> attends the GP surgery regularly, generally for treatment of secondary lung infections exacerbated by the bronchiectasis. The GP's main concern is her depression and he tries to actively maintain a continuity of care with patients with psychiatric illnesses. He feels this enables him to better monitor a patient's mental health and intervene at the earliest possible opportunity. He suspects  will probably decline gradually over the next 10 years as her lung function continues to deteriorate. <heading>Interview IV - Practice Nurse,  Medical Centre</heading>The Practice Nurse was not available for interview. <heading>Management Plan</heading>From a psychological perspective it will remain very important to keep  as physically healthy as possible to enable her to continue going on the trips abroad that are of such importance to her and which are greatly looked forward to. They give her a feeling of independence and enable her to feel in control of her health, rather than vice versa. The social capital derived from these interactions can not be underestimated and is of great significance to her current level of well-being. The impression of the treatment her sister undertakes to counter her depression is negative and  is very clear that she wants to avoid anti-depressant use wherever possible. Therefore she is more likely to confront the re-emergence of the depression and actively seek the counselling she feels is the best solution for her. The variable experience  has had with doctors illustrates the importance of effective doctor-patient communication. "Good doctors identify patients' problems more accurately, and patients are more satisfied with the care they receive."2 If we look at 's initial consultation for ulcerative colitis she was left ill-informed and possibly inadequately treated. It may be that a colectomy after the first consultation could have negated the need for the subsequent iliostomy. In this instance the paternalistic approach clearly let  down whereas later care strategies based on the shared model of doctor/patient interactions have been of significant benefit in both the short and long term.3, 4 However, an interesting feature of this interaction is her GP's prognosis that she will probably die in the next 10 years. He felt it was unnecessary and probably counter-productive to share this prognosis with . This is a clear example of the need to be flexible in one's approach to one's patients and to change the nature of the doctor-patient dynamic where necessary.4 Both psychological and psychosexual implications of the stoma 5, 6 were identified by . Her desire not to be defined by 'the bag' is a common reaction to the operation, and her determination to continue pursuing an active a life as possible is testament to her determination that this be the case. She in part contributes the breakdown of her marriage to the psychosexual effects of the stoma and bag; she said her husband "couldn't cope" with the changes to her body.  receives the lower rate of DLA, but as her condition deteriorates she will need to be reassessed for the higher rate of DLA and/or additional benefits. The local Citizen's Advice Bureau would be able to help her explore her entitlements. In addition, over the coming years she is likely to need home help and given her bronchiectasis makes climbing stairs difficult, alternative accommodation will eventually need to be considered. She identified her inability to drive as a considerable restriction upon her. On days when her bronchiectasis is particularly severe she finds it impossible to visit her parents without the help of friends or family who can drive her there. Coupled with inadequate public transport she is reliant on these people, but uncomfortably so. In conclusion, the management of 's care should continue along current lines. Her conditions are well-managed and she is happy with the level of care provided. Routine communication is open and effective, not only between  and the healthcare professionals, but equally importantly within the healthcare team. It is vital for her continued well-being for her depression to be managed effectively. In this case it is clear that both the healthcare team and the patient are working towards the same goals. In somewhat of an aside, we felt that  would make a good candidate for inclusion in the Expert Patient Programme 7, 8. She is articulate and enthusiastic and already has a good understanding of her conditions and the impact they have on her daily life. Involvement in this programme could  other social and intellectual opportunities. 