<abstract><heading>Abstract. </heading>Universal human freedom and equality based on universal truths are at the core of cosmopolitanism. The revival of cosmopolitan ideas is connected to the fall of the Berlin Wall and the globalisation of world politics. Globalisation is said to transform loyalties, identities and communities. However, globalisation is a contested phenomenon. The feasibility of the cosmopolitan ideas is seriously questioned if one adopts a more sceptical position. Globalisation may be just a buzzword used by the powerful states to hide selfish interests. In addition, the promotion of a moral universalism is very often criticised as a veil of Westernisation. Whose morality are we to promote globally? Moreover, the cosmopolitan democracy advocated by authors like Held may seem wishful thinking since there is no global 'demos'. First the essay will make a description of the main cosmopolitan ideas and of globalisation's transformative power. The paper will argue that the ethical dilemmas inherent in moral universalism (advocated by cosmopolitanism) are difficult to overcome. The essay will conclude that cosmopolitanism seems to have developed the institutional dimension (cosmopolitan democracy's features) but has neglected its ethical dimension. </abstract>Is there a genuine necessity to rethink the concepts of political community and democracy? Since globalisation has contradictory effects leading to, both fragmentation and integration, how is moral pluralism reconciled with universalism? The first section of the essay will look at the main cosmopolitan ideas and the context in which scholars speak of their revival. The second part will argue that the transformative capacity of globalisation assumed by cosmopolitans, and taken as the impetus for political change, is not universally accepted as such. Realists or leftists would reject globalisation and highlight that the great powers still dictate while international relations continue to be a struggle for power. In the third section, the essay will point out to the dilemmas inherent in moral universalism advocated in cosmopolitan thought. Whose morality are we to promote globally? In line with the Ancient Socratic debate with the sophists, a realist would argue that might makes right. In a world of moral pluralism how is cosmopolitanism going to promote universalism? As Gray mentions there may be the case that "No single way of life exhausts the possibilities of human flourishing". Finally, the paper will question the feasibility of the cosmopolitan democracy project on the basis of the lack of a global 'demos'. The essay will conclude that cosmopolitanism seems to have developed the institutional dimension but has neglected its ethical and cultural dimension. <fnote>Plato. The Republic of Plato, translation by Allan Bloom (New York: Basic Books, 1968). </fnote><fnote>John Gray. "Pluralism and Toleration in Contemporary Political Philosophy", Political Studies Association (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000), Vol. 48, pp. 323-333. </fnote>What is cosmopolitanism? Briefly, cosmopolitanism is a normative liberal theory advocating universal freedom and equality. Irrespective of culture, nation or citizenship, people all over the world should enjoy the same opportunities to basic rights as well as have the same duties to humanity simply because there is a universal human essence and certain universal truths. Any rational person under a 'veil of ignorance' would agree that life, freedom, security or the pursuit of happiness, are human universal goods that must be protected and promoted. Cosmopolitanism as an appeal to humanity can be traced back to Stoicism and the Enlightenment's ideas of philosophers like Rousseau and Kant. For instance, Kant has pointed out to humanity's inclination towards constant moral improvement (perceived, as the disinterested sympathy of the beholders to the French Revolution, which gave birth to a feeling of solidarity). Kant also considered that the spread of commerce and republicanism would eventually foster cosmopolitan feelings and the laws of nations would be extended to include transnational rights of individuals on the basis of universal human freedom. Nowadays, scholars believe that we witness a revival of cosmopolitan ideas and feelings as a result of the fall of the Berlin Wall (which seemed to have confirmed liberal democracy as a dominant ideology) and the globalisation of world politics. These factors have urged a re-conceptualisation of state-sovereignty (in post-Westphalian terms) and of political community. Enthusiasts have seen globalisation as the political challenge that gives impetus for the expansion of liberal democracy, and the creation of cosmopolitan citizenship. The emergence of various other governing actors in the arena of world politics avoids a monopoly of power so detrimental to democracy. State sovereignty is undermined since states are sandwiched between local (sub-national) and supra-state actors empowered through the processes of globalisation. Political power is being diffused downwards and upwards while state power appears now only one dimension of political power and not the single relevant one as realists have argued.  <fnote>Charles Beitz makes an interesting distinction between social and cosmopolitan liberalism and between institutional, individual cosmopolitanism on the one side and cosmopolitan liberalism on the other. While social liberalism is about fairness of states, cosmopolitan liberalism is about fairness of individuals. For more see Charles R. Beitz, "Social and Cosmopolitan Liberalism", International Affairs, vol. 75, no. 3, 1999, pp. 515-529. </fnote><fnote>John, Rawls. A Theory of Justice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973). </fnote><fnote>For more see Richard Devetak, "Signs of a New Enlightenment? Concepts of Community and Humanity after the Cold War", in Stephanie Lawson (ed.) The New Agenda for International Relations (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2002). </fnote><fnote>The Peace of Westphalia is viewed as the origin of the modern system of sovereign states, consisting of an agreement among European powers at the end of the Thirty-Years War (1648), to accept the idea of the continent as divided into independently governed states that should not interfere in each other's domestic affairs. </fnote><fnote>For more see Andrew Linklater. The Transformation of Political Community: Ethical Foundations of the Post-Westphalian Era, (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998). </fnote><fnote>On the impact of globalisation on world politics see Jan Aart Scholte, Globalization: A Critical Introduction (London: Palgrave, 2000). </fnote>But is there any agreement that we live in an age of globalisation? Realism, for instance, views the transformative power of globalisation with more scepticism in what is essentially still an inter-national (as opposed to a transnational) environment. States are still the main sovereign actors, struggling for power. Many commentators argue that globalisation is just internationalisation of global trade and financial markets, having as its main actors the great powers and especially the U.S.A. The latter's hegemony is in fact the "hidden fist" that controls the whole global capitalist system. There is no "invisible hand" to regulate the global market, but rather an obvious fist that pressures the weaker to imitate and thus serve the stronger. <fnote>Neo- Marxists and other leftist critics see globalisation as just another stage in the pathological expansion of market capitalism, mainly beneficial for core states and detrimental for poorer ones (in the periphery). On the debate between sceptics and globalists see, for example, David Held and Anthony McGrew (eds.), The Global Transformations Reader: An Introduction to the Globalization Debate (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000). </fnote><fnote>See Alejandro Bendana, Power Lines: US Domination in the New Global Order Order (New York: Olive Branch Press, 1996). </fnote><fnote>Kenneth N. Waltz., "Globalization and Governance", James Madison Lecture, PS: Political Science and Politics, Vol. 32, No. 4, December 1999, pp. 693-700. </fnote><fnote>In line with the realist outlook, even the so-called altruism of foreign aid (or international assistance) is only the ideological Cold War product of self-interest, which continues to be used in disguise as altruism. In reality, national interest will always prevail. Moreover, unilateral action is back or maybe has always been in fashion. The recent naked display of American unilateral action undermines the respect for international law by creating a precedent of taking the law into its own hands. For instance, Archibugi was criticising the US politics of rejecting an International Criminal Court and preferring ad-hoc military tribunals. The arms of laws and institutions instead of leaders should judge on crimes against humanity. See Daniele Archibugi, "Terrorism and Cosmopolitanism", Social Science Research Council website,  URL  accessed 06.01.2004. </fnote><quote>"Realism assumes that states are all locked into their own survival and into the pursuit of their own interests, (...) because there is no overarching government in the system, then the use of force is always a possibility (...)."</quote><fnote>Barry Buzan, David Held and Anthony McGrew, "Realism vs. cosmopolitanism: a Debate", Review of International Studies, Vol. 24, no. 3, 1998, p. 388. </fnote>Buzan also emphasised that there cannot be any politics without states. However, as Archibugi mentions, the cosmopolitan theory does not intend to put an end to the state as a holder of legitimate political power nor does it accept the exaggerated arguments of some scholars who predicted the demise of the state. State powers are relevant for their citizens and for international relations and "The perspective of cosmopolitan democracy require us, in the first instance, to recognise the state as the central figure in international relations. (...) there can be no politics without a polis" What is important and new in world politics today is that there are problems today, which escape national borders and evade states' control. How is AIDS or transnational terrorism going to be approached? In this context, is realism still capable of arguing that national interest is the only 'reason' of state and can be fulfilled in isolation? Cosmopolitans are right to accept that national interests often coincide and hence interdependence requires transnational co-operation and global regulatory frameworks where the voice of the citizens of the world can be heard. As even Buzan acknowledges, "realists are not all that well equipped to think about" the new challenges in international relations. <fnote>Daniele Archibugi. "From the UN to Cosmopolitan Democracy", in Daniele Archibugi and David Held (eds.) Cosmopolitan Democracy, An Agenda for a New World Order (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1995), p. 128. </fnote><fnote>Daniele Archibugi, "Cosmopolitan Democracy" in Daniele Archibugi (ed.). Debating Cosmopolitics ( London:Verso, 2003). </fnote><fnote>Buzan, Held and McGrew , "Realism vs. cosmopolitanism: a Debate", p. 390. </fnote>Consequently, if one uses sceptical realist lenses, the contemporary challenges are not so challenging. States, and especially the great powers, are the only true decision-making actors in international relations and most of all, 'might' makes right. While cosmopolitanism is essentially a normative theory concerned with the promotion of morality among states, realism considers that morality does not find any home in international relations since anarchy (the lack of a central authority) renders any norm futile. As Hoffman specifies, "Not only is there no moral code, but there are no effective substitutes. International law and international organisations certainly are not. What limits the role of the latter is precisely the conflicts of values and interests among the members."  <fnote>Interestingly, the debate on whether states or individuals are to be the moral subjects in international relations is also made within the liberal framework as well. The difficulties inherent in making a deep distinction between international and domestic realms made Beitz conclude that states have an ethical privilege over individuals. Cosmopolitanism may seem like a global extension of Rawls' theory of justice (and the difference principle), an extension to which Rawls himself would be very reticent. Hence, even Rawls as a prominent liberal thinker influenced by Kant's cosmopolitan idea, is accused of communitarian tendencies since he speaks about the laws of 'peoples' (as societies) and not of the laws of people. Moreover, one can also notice that even for Kant, the state, as a legitimate sovereign actor is a sine qua non condition for individual freedom. Consequently, the tension between sovereignty of states and individual freedom has always been present in liberalism, and is 'inherited' by cosmopolitanism. For more, see Charles R. Beitz, "Social and Cosmopolitan Liberalism", International Affairs, Vol. 75, no. 3, 1999, pp. 515-529 and Chris Brown, "The Construction of a 'Realist' utopia: John Rawls and International Political Theory", Review of International Studies, Vol. 28, no. 1, 2002, pp. 5-21 and Antonion Franceschet, "Popular sovereignty or cosmopolitan democracy? Liberalism, Kant, and international reform", European Journal of International Relations, Vol. 6, no. 2, 2000, pp. 277-302. </fnote><fnote>Stanley Hoffman. Duties Beyond Borders: on the Limits and Possibilities of Ethical International Politics (New York: Syracuse University Press), p. 20. </fnote>But if states are the only subjects of international relations how do we explain humanitarian interventionism? Cosmopolitanism considers that the individuals, and not only the states, are the moral subjects in international relations. As Ignatieff pointed out "Modern universalism is built upon the experience of a new kind of crime: the crime against humanity". Moreover, today's world is faced with problems that affect or may affect all human beings and not only the citizens of some states. Global warming, ozone depletion, transnational terrorism are real problems that cannot be dealt with by states in isolation and require a rethinking of the means and goals of co-operation. Not only that there are duties for intervention beyond borders but also these collective actions are actually required by the globalised world politics since something that happens in one place affects other places too. <fnote>Michael Ignatieff, The Warrior's Honour: Ethnic War and the Modern Conscience (London: Vintage, 1998), p. 19 quoted in Devetak, "Signs of a New Enlightenment? Concepts of Community and Humanity after the Cold War", p. 175. </fnote>Nevertheless, promoting duties to humanity is sometimes accused of Westernisation. Whose morality is promoted globally? The humanitarian discourse of our days has established some rules and norms that are taken for granted. Is this morally correct? But who decides on universal truths? In assessing the moral complexity of international relations, Fiona Robertsone states that "certain values, although absolutely contingent, ought to be upheld, not because they are "true" or "natural" or even "morally superior", but because they are the best so far developed." More bluntly, Held was declaring that democracy is the " the only grand or meta-narrative", which implicitly states the prevalence of Western understanding of morality: <fnote>Fiona Robertsone-Snape, "Moral Complexity and the International Society", Global Society, Vol. 14, No. 4, 2000, p. 521. </fnote><fnote>David Held, "Democracy and the International Order", in Daniele Archibugi and David Held. (eds.) Cosmopolitan Democracy, An Agenda for a New World Order, (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1995). </fnote><quote>There are people who think that the arguments for cosmopolitanism (...) are very Eurocentric and very Western, tied to the cultural legacy of liberalism and the Enlightenment. Let me say straightaway, guilty as charged! However, just because certain ideas have particular origins in certain locales and places (could it be otherwise?) doesn't invalidate them.</quote><fnote>David Held, "Globalisation, Cosmopolitanism and Democracy: an Interview", by Montserrat Guibernau, Global Transformation website,  URL , accessed 06.01.2004. </fnote>Democracy seems to be the best form of government so far developed since it establishes checks and balances that protect the people from any kind of tyranny, even their own tyranny. However, Linklater emphasised that humanity is not a given community and that people should avoid establishing moral hierarchies. Moral progress should be a result of dialogue and consent in a wider framework with the participation of all stakeholders. In addition, even Archibugi criticises interventionism since it may hide other interests and it seems paradoxical to protect human rights through military force. World politics should be reformed by identifying alternative peaceful means of interference, promoting diversity of cultures and rights so that an increase in democracy would not be a loss in diversity and by identifying the spheres in which people may have rights and duties as citizens of the world.  <fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community, Ethical Foundations of the Post-Westphalian Era. </fnote><fnote>Archibugi was expressing his sorrow that the interventions after 1989 will actually be "remembered in the black book of military history rather than in the pink book of humanitarian altruism". See Daniele Archibugi, "Terrorism and Cosmopolitanism", Social Science Research Council website,  URL , accessed 06.01.2004. </fnote><fnote>Archibugi, "Cosmopolitan Democracy", and Archibugi, "Principles of Cosmopolitan Democracy", in Daniele Archibugi, David Held, Martin Kohler, (eds.) Re-imagining Political Community, Studies in Cosmopolitan Democracy (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998) </fnote>Finally, the cosmopolitan democracy project may seem wishful thinking since there is no global 'demos'. Even at the regional level, as in the European Union, the construction of a 'demos' is extremely problematic. "Cosmopolitan democracy is an ambitious project, whose aim is to achieve a world order based on the rule of law and democracy". Cosmopolitan democracy urges for a three-folded content of democracy: inside nations, among nations and globally. Democracy should be envisaged for all these levels as distinct yet complementary. Moreover, citizens must be politically represented in global affairs, as there are global issues that might affect them. The idea of cosmopolitan democracy represents "a normatively desirable political future rather than simply an intriguing empirical possibility". It requires a loosening in the boundaries of communities, an increase in the influence of minority nations and local regions, extension of the ideas of global citizenship, transnational democratic structures, and equality of participation. <fnote>For more see Anthony McGrew, "Transnational Democracy: Theories and Prospects",  URL , accessed 17.01.2003). </fnote><fnote>Daniele Archibugi, "Principles of Cosmopolitan Democracy", p. 198. </fnote><fnote>Andrew Linklater, " Citizenship and Sovereignty in the Post-Westphalian European State", in Daniele Archibugi, David Held and Martin Kohler (eds.), Re-imagining Political Community: Studies in Cosmopolitan Democracy (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998), p. 121. </fnote>However, democracy among nations is not something easily accepted. Cosmopolitan thinkers emphasise that possibilities for democracy should be analysed comparatively. The Ancient "polls" is no longer democratic enough for us today, just as Plato or Rousseau could not have imagined democracy in vast regions. Moreover, the construction of identity is a long-term extremely difficult endeavour, which is now experienced by the European Union (as a supra-state institution, which resembles the model of cosmopolitan democracy). The challenges faced by the EU in terms of identity construction offer good lessons for the proponents of cosmopolitan democracy. <fnote>Daniele Archibugi, "Principles of Cosmopolitan Democracy". </fnote>The cosmopolitan democracy mainly refers to reforms of institutions like UN or creation and consolidation of other global institutions, but it does not give substantial consideration to more fragile and subtle issues like ethics or identity. "Cosmopolitanism will only become a substantial ethical vision if it is able to interrelate a number of questions related to politics and society, culture and the self. (...) Cosmopolitan moral progress can be accounted for when 'they' become 'us'" As Stevenson argues, cosmopolitanism needs to focus more on the civil society dimension rather than on institutional building. Otherwise it will probably face the same democratic deficits as the EU is facing now, being more of a technocracy rather than democracy. How are cosmopolitan feelings going to be nurtured? <fnote>Nick Stevenson, "Cosmopolitanism and the Future of Democracy: Politics, Culture and the Self", New Political Economy, Vol. 7, No. 2, 200, pp. 251-256. </fnote>In conclusion, a cosmopolitan democracy faces many difficulties as well as resistance on the part of political actors. Interestingly, the same states that call themselves the advocates of democracy world-wide are extremely reticent to a more democratic decision-making in global regulatory frameworks and choose to act more or less unilaterally. Unfortunately, in reality the realist discourse has not been replaced by a cosmopolitan discourse. Faced with political pressures, a cold realist politician may demolish in one second the whole fragile temple of democracy built in decades. The paper has shown that cosmopolitanism is based on the assumption that globalisation is transforming the system of governance and the political loyalties of people. Sceptics of globalisation can easily reject the cosmopolitan urge for change. Secondly, the moral universalism advocated faces serious controversies since the Western values may not be morally superior. In addition, the paper exemplifies with the EU experience the difficulties inherent in forging transnational 'imagined' communities. Cosmopolitans should focus more on moral cosmopolitanism and not only on institutional cosmopolitanism. 