<list>MNC = Multinational CompanyFDI = Foreign Direct Investment</list>A company incurs additional costs when it operates across national boundaries (e.g. the costs of complying with local regulation). Hence, there must be some offsetting advantage to the MNC to produce abroad to overcome these costs and also to have some advantage over competitors already operating in the foreign economy (as suggested by S. Hymer). Dunning's 'eclectic paradigm' (1988) gives us the O+L+I framework of why MNCs might have such an advantage. <heading>Ownership-specific Advantages (O)</heading>These firm-specific advantages address the why question: why go abroad? The answer should be because the MNC's core competencies allow the firm to overcome the foreign competition and costs of operating abroad. Such advantages could be tangible assets like size and market power or intangible like brand names and knowledge that can be spread in a non-rival way across many plants. <heading>Location-specific advantages (L)</heading>Locate where? Gaining access to a large market is likely to raise the potential profitability for the MNC but will also do so for local firms. Local production may incur high costs of imported inputs and diseconomies of scale (especially communicating and coordinating difficulties), which can be caused by cultural differences. These lead to higher average unit costs. However, the trade costs in supplying remote markets will be reduced. Many other location-specific advantages include: political, social and economic stability, culture, language, and infrastructure of the host country. <heading>Internalisation Advantages (I) </heading>How should the MNC go abroad? If a firm decides to operate abroad, it can do this in a number of different ways, for example by opening a subsidiary or by licensing to local firms in foreign countries. Internalisation is when the company establishes a foreign subsidiary to preserve its ownership advantages and to maintain closer control over the company's operations (e.g. knowledge, price, quality). The internalisation decision that a MNC faces investigates the costs and benefits of retaining activities internal to the firm rather than dealing with them through market transactions. Without the incentive to reduce these transaction costs between markets, the motivation to engage in FDI would be of a lesser amount. Given that markets are not perfect (i.e. with no entry barriers, perfect knowledge and homogeneous goods) the market imperfections that exist create uneven competition and uneven profits, which drive MNCs to internalise its market transactions via vertical (controlling supplies or retailing) or horizontal integration (expanding at the same level of production). The distinctiveness of Dunning's paradigm suggests that if the O and L advantages exist, then that company should internalise these advantages and set up a foreign subsidiary. <heading>Weaknesses of the Paradigm</heading>The paradigm is simply a list of variables without examples or analysis. It has no predictive validity of the activities that firms may engage in. It assumes that MNCs are fully informed, rational decision makers. In reality politics intrudes within the firm. Internal organisational difficulties may lead to the failure of a particular firm to open a foreign subsidiary, so the behaviour of individual firms is not addressed. In China, owning the rights of a process or technology would not give a firm an ownership advantage because the Chinese culture does not give much importance to patents or copyrights. So the environment is a function of ownership advantages, which disqualifies the Paradigm. <heading>Why do MNCs Become Multinational in Scope? </heading>Three broad categories explain why: <heading>Asset-oriented Production </heading>MNCs seek resources that are either not available (e.g. flowers), of low quality (e.g. R&D) or expensive (e.g. labour) in their home countries. Production must locate where there is a high resource quantity and quality, and where it can be easily accessed at a low-cost. For example, Shell set up a subsidiary in Nigeria in search for their large oil reserves in the 1960s. Even though Saudi Arabia has larger oil reserves, they were apt to limit oil supplies while Nigeria was eager to offer low-cost petroleum extraction. Hence, political influences (as given under Dunning's L advantages) merge with other factors before a decision is made. Another motivation could be based purely on cost cutting grounds, like Hugo Boss manufacturing in Kiev where labour costs are $50/month compared to $1,000/month in their home country, Germany. Labour wages are an important L advantage, especially in labour-intensive industries such as the clothing industry where labour costs are on average 33% of total costs. Labour wages are not the only element of labour that varies across the globe. MNCs may open a foreign subsidiary to gain the benefits and cost savings of possessing either high labour productivity, highly malleable labour (in terms of trade unions) or high labour knowledge and skills. Since labour is such an immobile resource there is a strong basis for an MNC to do this. <heading>Market-oriented Production </heading>A central element to the market seekers' decision to open a foreign subsidiary is the market's growth rate and size, in terms of GNP or population. The size of the foreign market may justify local production, while momentous deviations in GNP across the globe effects demand structure, as in the types and quantities of goods bought. An MNC's market development strategy could entail horizontal integration to gain access to markets abroad and/ or to serve adjacent countries, particularly when the MNC's home market is saturated. For example, Gerber opened a foreign subsidiary in Poland as a response to flattening birth rates in the US. This strategy was also a response to the opening of Eastern Europe. As well as market structure, one of the most important reasons is the home and host governments' approach to FDI. By imposing import controls, eliminating barriers to entry, etc the host country attracts FDI. <heading>Strategic Advantages</heading>The following examples demonstrate how an MNC can benefit from the common governance of global activities. These motivations are mainly appropriate for large and diversified MNCs. For rapid, inorganic growth by acquisition. This gains immediate economies of scale such as bulk-buying, finance, marketing, risk and specialisation economies, which reduces average production costs. A risk diversification strategy to minimise the risk of relying on one or few locations. To access and combine knowledge. For example, a MNC owning an exclusive technology may fear that a licensing contract could lead to a dissipation of its proprietary knowledge and therefore internalise and set up a foreign subsidiary, because the alternative options, although cheaper, are unviable. Such as Nokia owning R&D subsidiaries across the globe. To escape or exploit geographical differences in legislation, political conditions and economic policies, such as funding and tax subsidies by host countries, trade barriers and quota export restrictions in home countries and unstable political elections. For example, some Japanese firms produce in Asia to overcome the import quotas on Japanese produced goods levied by EC countries. Furthermore, Sheraton Hotels closed their Vietnamese operations due to an overdose of red tape. The three categories are not sharp; they overlap. A balance must be made between market proximity and production costs. The size, experience and industry of the MNC affects the strategy it uses. <heading>Conclusion</heading>FDI can be seen under many lights, one being as the result of governments who use MNCs as strategic instruments. Evidence of this can be found during the 1990s when the Eastern European governments attracted FDI by their own MNCs while the liberalisation of markets and privatisation broke down communism. In general however, MNC subsidiary motivations can be seen as capitalist movements due to market imperfections. The drive is increasingly for global profits as MNCs are in search of more revenue (the market seekers) and lower costs (the resource seekers). In conclusion, differences among MNCs' characteristics and dynamic environmental conditions mirror the variety of different reasons why firms set up foreign subsidiaries. Nevertheless, a strong ability and desire of an MNC to internalise its possessed O and L advantages, matched with market imperfections and high uncertainty, creates a complete atmosphere for an MNC to set up a foreign subsidiary. 