<heading>Introduction</heading>The increased competition in the marketplace is a looming danger to CFS's competitive advantage and long-term survival. Therefore, a reorganisation in aim of financial and customer service enhancement has been proposed. The project will have significant, long-term changes to the structure and daily operation of CFS. It necessitates the adoption of a new business model because it requires flexible working rather than the current rigid specialisation of the insurance sectors. Internet links to high street agents will also be utilized and a project team will be adopted to manage the already approved changes. This report discusses the key considerations and gives recommendations for the implementation of the project in question. <heading>The Key Project Stakeholders</heading>It is particularly recommended that the complex and conflicting project stakeholder needs are considered and managed. This is because certain stakeholders who have a high interest and/or influence over the project's activities can affect the implementation, operation and eventual project outcome. Therefore, it is important that the key project stakeholders are identified and classified according to their interest and project influence so those with a high interest and/or influence can be managed suitably. This helps to efficiently prioritise management's time over the stakeholder groups. The analysis starts with the essential internal stakeholders: <heading>1. Key Employee Groups: </heading>(I.e. HR Department, IT Department, Section Managers, ODG*, project team & all insurance sector employees.) These have a high interest in the project since it will affect their daily working lives. They are likely to react strongly to the project because it will change their amount of responsibility, enrichment, training, flexibility and potentially their workload and overtime. Financial merit and non-financial recognition can improve employee motivation (this was not arranged in the 2001 restructure, resulting in discontent). Additionally, employees have a substantial influence over the project's success. For example, an accumulation of resistance to change, low morale and motivation can lead to low labour productivity and poor customer service. (N.B. The employees are prone to resisting the project.) This increases costs and customer dissatisfaction, damaging CFS's competitive edge. Thus, employees must accept and effectively operate the new working practices so gain their cooperation and seriously involve them via meetings, emails, suggestion boxes and more. Also, trade union satisfaction arises from overall employee satisfaction. <heading>3. Trade Unions: </heading>There're 2 unions which both exert a strong influence over the project because they own 40% of CFS shares and 60% of CFS employees are trade union members. Since the project will impact on the employees, the trade unions have a high  stake in it. Trade unions dislike being kept unaware of changes. So, to prevent conflict, invite both trade unions to participate in the project and use the formal procedure agreements in place to inform and collectively bargain with trade union representatives and shop stewards in the Works Committee. Throughout the project, keep them informed via reports & meetings to cover issues such as training, working hours, pay matters, job content and job security. <heading>4. Service suppliers: </heading>The external high-street agents will be highly interested in increasing their efficiency through using a more simple communications procedure and dealing with fewer employees at CFS. However, the agents will sell CFS insurance regardless of the project outcome so their influence is low. It is important to consult, cooperate and communicate the benefits of the project to agents via meetings and progress reports. <heading>5. Shareholders:</heading>The large, external shareholders are more likely to have a high interest in their investment and high influence in internal decision-making concerning the project. Shareholders who disagree with the project can sell their shares. Such shareholders, potential investors and funding agencies must be kept informed of the project via several reports. <heading>6. Customers:</heading>Customers have no authority over the project and are generally only interested in service changes rather than the internal operating process. This makes them a low interest and low influence external stakeholder. However, it is beneficial to communicate the new service improvements to them especially the timesaving and relationship-building upgrades. <heading>The Project Aim & Objectives </heading>Defining the project is key to its success because it makes evaluation much easier and gives a clear focus to all those involved, which prevents employees from working against each other. <heading>Project Aim: </heading>To achieve better financial & competitive performance by improving customer service & the long-term efficiency & effectiveness of operations. This will be achieved via the adoption of Internet links to agents and the reorganisation of operations into multi-purpose teams covering all five insurance sectors except life insurance. Do not change this statement or the vision will be lost, so ensure that all key stakeholders accept it, before implementing the operation and implementation objectives. <heading>Implementation Objective 1: </heading>Within 7 months, Internet communication with agents will be fully installed and operational. Evaluation: Get a yes or no answer from the IT Manager & the project team. Check: Have all users been trained? Is it working well? Are there any problems? <heading>Operational Objective 2: </heading>Within 9 months 90% of agents and CFS employees will feel that the Internet links have made communication more efficient and effective. Evaluation: Give a questionnaire to all users with quantified responses. E.g. are working relations closer? 1 = no, 2=maybe & 3=yes. Total all scores & those above a specified number are classed as fulfilled. <heading>Implementation Objective 3: </heading>Within 9 months the whole Operations Department (except Life) must have been reorganised into 10 multi-purpose teams, each with a separate open-plan office. Evaluation: This statement requires a yes or no confirmation from the project team. <heading>Implementation Objective 4: </heading>Within 9 months 100% of insurance sector employees will be trained to deal with all five policies (except Life). Evaluation: Firstly, give all employees a checklist of tasks and questions where they rate how well they think they can now carry out each task. Use quantified responses with space for employees to justify their answers and keep the surveys anonymous to improve honesty. Further evaluation and/or training may be required if employees do not feel fully competent. Use 'mystery caller' tests, where a trainer randomly calls employees (who are unaware of this) to see how well they cope with specific queries. This removes employee bias but takes time since many calls are needed for accuracy. Alternatively, ask employees if they believe that they have been well trained via one-to-one interviews and/or focus groups. Conversely, this is time consuming and costly. <heading>Operational Objective 5: </heading>Within 12 months, customers will receive a more personal, efficient & effective service. Evaluation: Conduct many short, qualitative customer surveys and compare the average number of monthly complaints before and after the project. <heading>Operational Objective 6: </heading>Increase the range of products taken up by each customer by ~25% within 15 months. Evaluation: This evaluates the effectiveness of employees to use a more personal service and their new skills to sell more products to each customer. Compare the average number of products taken up by each customer before and after the project. <heading>Operational Objective 7: </heading>Increase the volume of products taken up by all customers by ~20% within 15 months. Evaluation: This evaluates operational efficiency because it assesses labour flexibility and productivity, which aids cost reduction. Quantitatively compare the total number of insurance policies taken up before and after the project. <heading>Operational Objective 8: </heading>Within 15 months total operational costs will reduce by ~20%. Evaluation: Quantitatively compare past and future profit and loss accounts to compute this. All key stakeholders must understand, accept and commit to these objectives. If absolutely necessary, the objectives can be revised provided that stakeholder commitment is maintained. What factors are critical to the project's success? There are several critical success factors but these two must act as motivational points at which key efforts should be directed: Employees are suitably trained & reorganised into motivated teams with group spirit. The special software for Internet communication is selected and installed carefully. <heading>Important Project Risks & Risk Management Strategies</heading>It is essential to evaluate the potential project risks in the Appraisal phase because it helps to indicate whether or not the project should be pursued before the strategy is defined. The following arbitrary scales have been used to classify each risk: To indicate the probability of an uncertainty occurring: improbable (1-3), likely (4-6) & highly likely (7-10). To indicate the impact of the variation on CFS's performance: minor (1-3, i.e. causes problems but no time or financial set backs to any objectives), significant (4-6, i.e. increases costs &/or delays to one or more objectives) and critical (7-10, i.e. causes failure of one or more objectives). <heading>Environmental Risk 1: The Marketplace Trend for Internet Selling</heading>In the "increasingly competitive" marketplace, CFS will lose business as a result of being reactive (as we were with telephone selling) and not proactive to market trends, in particular the Internet selling trend. This is an opportunity to increase our customer base because the Internet is much more accessible to customers who demand quotes and information online. I ask if CFS is pursuing the right project because loosing out on Internet sales is highly likely to occur (probability score of 8). It may be starting to happen now. This could eventually impact (impact score 5) on the long-tem profitability of CFS and the achievement of objectives 6, 7 and 8. Therefore, CFS should mitigate against this risk by either outsourcing the creation of a website now (if it is too ambitious for the IT Department to do both projects simultaneously) or gradually expand the IT Department's role. The latter option would be cheaper but slower. The website could just offer information online so customers still have to phone (& receive a personal service) to get their quote. Eventually, quotes can be sold online. <heading>Environmental Risk 2: A Large Competitor Enters the Marketplace</heading>If a well-established competitor with a "personal and effective service" decides to expand into the Midlands, CFS will have to look for new ways of gaining a competitive edge by making their service better or by differentiating. Furthermore, a large competitor could offer lower prices, through economies of scale, which would be difficult for CFS to beat. This could have a fatal impact (scoring 7-10) on all objectives, since the firm's entire strategy may have to change. I am unaware of the probability of a competitor entering, so I cannot state the significance of this risk. I therefore recommend mitigating against this risk by launching an investigation into the current & potential competition. If the investigation reports that the risk is low, then mitigate by retaining contingency funds for marketing and/or other necessary actions. If the risk is high, then reassess the whole project to match the firm's new strategy. <heading>Project Specific Risk 1: Failure when Installing & Operating Communications Software</heading>This implementation uncertainty is likely (probability score of 6) to significantly impact (impact score 6) on the full achievement of objectives 1, 2, 5 and 8. Communication problems with agents would vary the operating outcomes of the project by decreasing the productivity levels of agents & CFS employees. We can mitigate against this risk by regularly reviewing the IT Department's progress and allow for the risk by setting aside two months contingency time and funds. If necessary, hire an IT consultant as a contingency. The costs of running the new communications software should be estimated and all agents and CFS employees must be trained to use it. These recommendations will reduce this uncertainty from materialising. <heading>Project Specific Risk 2: Inadequate Employee Training</heading>This implementation uncertainty is likely (probability score 5) to prevent the full achievement of objectives 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. It would have a significant impact on CFS (impact score 6) if employees were ineffective and inefficient at giving information and/or a personal customer service. More seriously, poor training will increase the risk of insurance being miss-sold (could worsen reputation or set off a law suit), low customer satisfaction, low productivity and high absenteeism. Therefore, mitigate against this risk by involving and giving sufficient funds and time to the HR department to organise effective training sessions. Also, encourage employees to share their learning experiences and problems via team meetings and anonymous progress questionnaires to see how they are coping. Retraining may be required so ensure that sufficient buffers for time and funds are planned into the strategy. <table/>There are dozens of other implementation & operational uncertainties surrounding the project (see table above) such as management errors, reorganisation failures and stakeholders using their influence over the project in a negative way. For example, the agents may not train their employees effectively or an accumulation of employee resistance to change could lead to strikes and trade union action. These uncertainties could damage the cost, time & quality of the project so allow for these risks by setting aside contingency funds and time. <heading>The Project Implementation Strategy </heading>This is conducted before the appraisal in the feasibility phase so the strategic cost, time and quality implications can be reflected in the appraisal. The integrated strategic factors are: <heading>The Pace of Change</heading>There is no desperate urgency for the project and CFS is not particularly responsive to change (e.g. In 2001, there was employee resistance to the restructure). Although there are limited resources, a slow pace of change will decrease employee resistance to it by fostering participation and acceptance. It will also facilitate a robust communications system, thorough training, higher employee empowerment and it will enable CFS to remain functional during the change. I recommend a slow pace of change, of 7, where 0 = speed vital and 10 = no time pressure and a time scale of nine months to achieve all implementation objectives. <heading>Necessity for an Exploratory or "Pilot" Phase</heading>I recommend planning for a multi-purpose team to test the software on the basis of geographical area, providing that the cost and time implications of this stage are not too great. <table/><heading>Overall Pattern of Implementing the Main Project Activities</heading>I recommend using a compromise between a serial and a parallel approach to implementing activities. This will save time, enable more communication and interaction between activities but not be too hard to manage. This will help prevent situations such as the IT Department installing software that is too complex for employees to use efficiently. (Gantt chart, page 7.) <heading>Implementation Pattern in the Organisation</heading>Use a progressive, continuous approach to training due to the lack of resources to train almost 100 employees at once. Do this via a horizontal slice (i.e. two or more employees are taken from each different insurance sector to be trained. Take more employees from the larger sectors). This will minimise the disruption caused to the functionality of CFS because not all employees from one insurance section are trained at once. For obvious reasons, do not take any employees from say the travel sector when training employees on travel insurance. When installing the software use a simultaneous implementation pattern if the IT department has enough resources to do this. When reorganising the sectors, use a progressive approach so each team is moved one at a time (e.g. vertically). This minimises disruption. <heading>The Degree of Empowerment to Project Stakeholders</heading>I recommend giving the employee groups and trade unions the highest level of empowerment of all project stakeholders due to the reasons below. Adapt a participative approach rather than the current paternalistic leadership style that management appear to use with employees. The project relies on employee commitment and they are likely to resist the change The employees will experience the most change of all the project stakeholders Many employee and both trade unions have a high influence and interest in the project The pace of change is already relatively slow; high empowerment reinforces this Giving employees and unions discretion in decision-making makes use of their expertise The "cultural" involvement of employees should make reaching a compromise between senior staff and employees relatively straightforward. <heading>Level of Employee Support Throughout the Project</heading>A high level of employee support is necessary for the success of the project. The long-term cost and performance benefits will outweigh the short-term cost, time and lost capacity implications. I recommend giving employees three types of employee support: 1. Training: on customer service, teamwork, Internet and insurance sector training. 2. Emotional support: via suggestion boxes, personal contacts for employees to express their concerns to, job satisfaction surveys and give employees time to prepare for the change. 3. Informational support: via newsletters, company performance figures, goals for the future, reasons and effects of the change, time horizons and the pace of change. <heading>Trade Union Involvement in the Project</heading>After the appraisal phase both unions should be fully informed and then invited to participate on certain key decisions such as pay and training as mentioned on page 2. Plan time for this activity and follow the procedure agreements in place. Inform the unions shortly before informing employees, because the unions have more power and they may potentially 'sell' the project to their members, reducing resistance to change and improving our industrial relations. <heading>Contractor Strategy </heading>Assuming that there are no better alternative uses of the HR and IT departments, (who are available and capable), conduct the training, reorganisation and Internet communications in-house to maintain control, reduce costs and take advantage of core competencies. If these assumptions are not the case, then the project specific risks 1 and 2 will be high, so I would recommend outsourcing using a turnkey provider if the cost implications are manageable. <heading>The Project Team & Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)</heading>The Operations Director has overall control of the project team. The project team consists of the Project Manager for coordination of all work packages, IT Manager, Training Manager, Team Leaders & a trade union representative (if they wish). The WBS & responsibilities are: <table/><heading>Strategic Control</heading>I recommend a steering group to exercise 'stop-hold-select-go' strategic control before and after the following phases: Phase 1 - Develop software. Phase 2 - Test, install & train for software use. Phase 3 - Implement the restructure. See Gantt chart. A steering group is needed because the majority of the business will be affected by a large amount of change involving multiple stakeholders. The group should consist of the Operations Director, the Operations Manager and the Project Manger to allocate resources and monitor progress and costs. <heading>A Recommended System for Planning & Control of Progress: </heading><table/>The Project Manager and the project team should exercise all operational planning & control. This involves coordinating those responsible for the work packages and making tactical decisions. I recommend fortnightly review meetings to monitor and control operational progress. This prevents loosing control of the project while it is not too often to waste time. Standardised progress reports should be given to the Project Manager before each meeting and after every time phase. These should contain the percentage of the work package complete and any revised plans on a Gantt chart. Additionally, the earned value, CPI (see page 8) and time variations plus any concerns should be stated. For further analysis, network analysis can be used for each work package. Reports are beneficial preparation and give structure to meetings. For stakeholder involvement, give the stakeholder group representatives an invite to the review meetings. It is compulsory attendance for the Project Manager, those responsible for the work packages in progress and a financial representative. After the meetings, three levels of reporting should occur as explained below: <table/><heading>A Recommended System for Planning & Control of Expenditure </heading><heading>Parameters & Conventions: </heading>I recommend that cost is the key parameter used throughout the project because it is straightforward to plan and monitor it. Moreover, costs incurred can be easily compared at any time with earned value; the second parameter I suggest monitoring. Earned value is defined as the financial value of work performed in terms of its budget cost. Another parameter to control could be commitment. I would only use this if IT, training or reorganisation are going to be outsourced, otherwise all commitment costs will be internal to CFS and are therefore not indefinitely committed. No major cash flows are associated with the project so do not record a separate cash flow report, as it is not worth the effort. Usually costs are recognized upon delivery of a bill for materials and services. In this case recognize costs when the work package activity actually occurs because the majority of costs will be incurred by CFS so few bills will be received. The financial office is responsible for booking overtime, resources and anything that is outsourced to work packages & the project. <heading>Cost Origin Breakdown & Overheads: </heading>To understand costs, they can be broken down by work packages, time phases and by the origin of the cost. This project is for internal use and therefore is not concerned with overheads. Only incorporate the costs directly associated with the project such as any outsourced training costs, outsourced IT support costs and the capacity lost through training sessions and reorganisation that are compensated by overtime. <heading>Budget: </heading>I recommend the use of a fixed budget for each work package and for the total project. I am accountable for the costs directly incurred by the project. However, I cannot easily predict the results of the pilot phase. Therefore, there is a risk that the budget will have to be updated after the pilot phase because this is a learning curve period. I suggest that the pilot phase work package budget is revised if necessary at the pilot phase control point. <heading>Work Breakdown Structure: </heading>The budget is divided into work packages and time periods of three months (see Gantt chart) so a complex system of cost breakdown could be used for tight control. However, the cost of implementing this system is great so I would recommend using a work-based system to compare the total budget with the project's actual cost plus estimated future costs. To plan for a work-based system prepare nine budgets for each work package and one for the total project. Then allocate further responsibility for planning and control of costs to those responsible for each work package. I will be responsible for coordinating all budgets and for comparing actual costs with budgets for each work package. <heading>Cost Control Mechanisms: </heading>Earned value, actual cost, CPI, an estimation of future costs, potential problems and variances (budget - actual costs) must be reported at review meetings. For each work package and the total project compare the following to aid control: <list>The budget with [the actual cost + estimated future cost]Earned value with actual costThe budget with [cost commitments made so far + actual cost so far]. Only do this if the commitment parameter is used (i.e. if a lot of costs are committed due to outsourcing).</list>These comparisons will allow the project team to monitor all variances from the budget at each review meeting. We shall use the control data to judge the causes of these variances, take action to correct the variance and prevent such variances from repeating. When using earned value to control work packages, some work packages may not be finished at the review meetings. When this occurs, use the Gantt charts which express the percentage of the work package complete and estimate how much the remainder of the project will cost (this is explained on the previous page). For further control, a cost performance index (CPI) is easily calculated by dividing earned value by the actual cost of work performed. The CPI should be 1 or more to prevent an unfavourable variation from the budget. This is beneficial to do as it helps to spot trends when the total CPI for the project is plotted on a graph versus time. A falling CPI is a danger. I have not recommended the use of a schedule performance index (SPI) because progress Gantt charts are a visual representation of this and using both is overkill. <heading>Conclusion </heading>It is important that project expectations are an accepted, shared common vision to the key stakeholders. Progress reports will help manage perceptions and do not over-promise. I have recommended a relatively slow pace of change over nine months, a pilot phase, no outsourcing and a high level of: reporting, control, contingency funds, employee support and stakeholder involvement. These key decisions greatly depend on the current financial status of CFS, which may prevent many of these recommendations from being implemented. If this is the case, then removing the pilot phase will save time and costs but largely increase the project specific risk 1. The level of stakeholder involvement, reporting and contingency funds can also all be reduced by an amount that does not make the project too vulnerable to implement. It is worth spending time to control the costs directly associated with the project so if necessary, the project can be delayed or cancelled if the CPI spirals out of control. <heading>Annex - A Critical Appraisal of Planning & Control at an Operational Level</heading>Planning coordinates and builds commitment, but only if all those responsible for the work packages are involved in the process. I used a Gantt chart to visually display the project activities, the basic links between them and when they should start and finish. The disadvantage of using Gantt charts is the fact that no cost information is displayed. That is why it is important to calculated measures such as CPI. What's more, Gantt charts aid resource planning but do not optimise resource allocation over the project. For example, the insurance section training and the customer service training both occur over months eight and nine by the same training section. What the Gantt chart does not tell you is whether the training section resources can be shifted from insurance training to the customer service training or vice versa. Obviously this would slow down the insurance and speed up the customer service training, but would this extend the project's overall length? This depends on how much float time the insurance training work package has. If it has a lot, then some of its resources can be shifted to the customer service work package. Use network analysis to calculate the float time. However, if the insurance training work package has no float time (i.e. it is a critical activity) then the training section will not have enough resources to implement both activities simultaneously (assuming they have a constant level of resources). In this case, carry out the customer service training in months ten and eleven, which will delay the project by two months or expedite, as explained below. To help analyse the risk of the project going over time, predict the longest, shortest and most probable project durations along with their probabilities. If it is probable that the project will be too long, we can control the project's length by expediting before or during the project. Before the project, the assumptions that I have made about the resources available, the work packages, their durations, the integrations between work packages and the project length can be revised to ensure that they are accurate. If my assumptions are erroneous and result in an overestimation of the project length, then expedite by updating the assumptions to reduce the project length. If my assumptions are correct then expediting will incur costs because more resources (e.g. part time training staff or outsourcing) will have to be incurred. Only do this if the cost of reducing the project's duration is less than the cost of letting the project be too long, for example, this may occur if a new competitor enters the marketplace. <fnote>N.B.: the duration of all work packages depends on the amount of resources given to them. However, even if resources are available, do not speed up the training work packages too much because employees will be unmotivated if the training and workload is too intense. This would be ineffective. </fnote><heading>Recommendations for Using Network Analysis</heading>Network analysis identifies the critical activities that must be prioritised and given the most resources, because if they are delayed then the whole project is delayed. The exact length of work packages (in days) must be estimated in order to have effective analysis. Conduct network analysis on a software programme to allow quick recalculations and the production of Gantt charts from the networks. Communicate the network analysis results and the Gantt charts to those implementing the project. The earliest and latest times that work packages can start and finish, the critical work packages and those with float time must be reported at review meetings. This is useful sensitivity analysis. <heading>Further Recommendations</heading>My proposal for continuation is to adopt Kolb's learning cycle throughout the project on a day-to-day, operational and strategic basis. This is because everyone is responsible for evaluation so train all employees on the project that they have two jobs: one is to do the job and one is to evaluate what has been done and how it can be done better next time. Because evaluation identifies whether the objectives have been achieved and the causes of problems and successes, it is an essential process to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of future projects. Managing learning processes is key to becoming a learning organisation. 