<heading>1. Introduction to Cultural Dynamics </heading>I observed a presentation that analysed the elements of culture and how they influence how brands and products are communicated into different markets. One of the frameworks used to study culture was T.C. Melewar's 'five dimensions' (figure 1.1). <figure/>Culture is complex and dynamic with many definitions such as 'a collective programming of the mind which distinguishes the members of one category of people from another' (Hofstede 1994). This is why such frameworks seek to simplify culture's intricacy. <heading>2. Uses & Insights provided by the '5 Dimensions' </heading><heading>Studies Potential of Foreign Markets </heading>Some firms fail to recognise the importance of the external marketing environment when launching/repositioning brands/products internationally. Marketing analysis should be used to assess the market potential for their brand, e.g. political changes and demand structure. However, marketing analysis fails to consider the cultural dimensions of markets, e.g. social behaviour, traditions and how promotional messages are received. Hence, the 'five dimensions' can be used by firms alongside general marketing analysis to more accurately analyse the potential of the market they propose to enter to help ensure success of their brand/product. Hofstede's 'Cultural Typology' model (1980) describes 6 dimensions of culture that also studies foreign market potential by discovering the cultural differences between markets. <heading>Other Uses of the Framework </heading>Highlights the considerations needed before moving into a new, foreign market. E.g. 'Material Culture' highlights different countries' level of technological advancement and economic situation. 'Language', 'Aesthetics' and 'Humans & the Universe' are useful to help organisations communicate a product/brand successfully to new markets. It emphasises the need for market research (brand/ product perceptions, nature of foreign markets, etc.) Aids marketer's evaluation of the marketing mix (distribution, means of production, etc), target market, etc. I.e. evaluates the elements of the marketing plan. Acts as a frame of reference. <heading> 3. Disadvantages of the Framework as a Tool</heading>More 'prescriptive' models can be found that help the organisation adapt to cultural issues to have a successful brand and product in a foreign market. E.g. Dong and Helms brand-name translation model aids the 'Language' dimension. This extra guidance may be needed because of the difficulty in putting cultural understandings into actions effectively. E.g. difficult to put the 'Social Institutions' affect on brand communication into practice. Subjective nature of dimensions, much can be classified as interpretive knowledge. E.g. Aesthetics' is especially case sensitive and interpretive knowledge may create a barrier to entry. Marketers should be case sensitive when entering different markets and also be aware of existing sub-cultures. Models simplify culture by splitting it into dimensions. This made me consider: 'can culture be segregated into 5 dimensions?' Yes, but there's a risk of oversimplification, missing out elements and overlooking relationships between dimensions. Consequently, dimensions must be viewed together. E.g. 'Humans & the Universe' cannot be viewed alone as it is affected by other dimensions, such as 'Social Institutions', especially politics, which dramatically effects beliefs and perceptions. All dimensions are required for a cultural understanding. It's hard to put emphasis on any dimension, some are more important to some cultures. <heading> 4. Conclusion</heading>Cultural dynamics is highly important in international marketing, because cultures strongly influence the marketing plan and a lack of understanding of local markets often leads to brand failure. Not only must the firm understand the market, but it must adapt its strategy to the market's needs in coherence with its corporate strategy. Therefore, frameworks such as Hofstede's and T.C. Melewar's dimensions are beneficial as a preliminary point in the process of global brand building because they make you consider all elements of culture, which may not have been considered unaided. Cultural dimensions also change so the learning process should be continuously updated via research and strategies modified to match the changes. The 'five dimensions' is a beneficial way to aid cultural understanding. Why? By understanding cultural differences, the marketing mix will better match the target market, messages will be received well and communication improved, leading to more effective international marketing. Looking critically at my own learning process I judge that next time I plan to reflect on the lecture as well as the seminar and note how my learning evolved. I shall endeavour to reflect further go into more depth with my critique. This reflection has helped me clarify the overall use of the framework in reality and to consider who uses it. 5. Bibliography  URL   URL :8001/vcwsu/commons/topics/culture/culture-index  URL  E-resource: Academy of Management Executive, 2004, February, Vol. 18. No. 1 The following academic papers: Global corporate brand building: guidelines and case studies (2002). T.C. Melewar & C.M. Walker The influence of culture on brand building in the Chinese market: a brief insight. (2003) T.C. Melewar, M. Meadows, W. Zheng & R. Rickards The complexities of communicating to customers in emerging markets (2001). R. Fletcher & T.C. Melewar. 