<heading>Getting to the Core of Apple's Problem</heading>Apple Computer was founded in 1976 by Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak in a Californian garage. Within ten years, it ignited a revolution, bringing computers into homes and on office desks. The Apple II, launched in 1977 is generally credited to have created the market for home computers. In 1984, the Macintosh was introduced. It revolutionized personal computing with an easy to use graphical user interface. With this, users need not input complicated text commands. The Mac was more advanced than any of its competitors. Apple controlled the technology behind the Macintosh tightly, believing that its tightly integrated systems would result in better user experience. This brought many innovations to the Mac unavailable elsewhere such as built-in sound and networking. Unfortunately, this very same philosophy put the Macintosh at a disadvantage. This was unlike the IBM PC, the main PC system which was led by the troika of IBM, Microsoft and Intel which set the standards, while other companies produced and reverse engineered the computers (also known as clones). PCs proliferated faster than the Macintosh because they were cheaper and there was greater product variety. At the same time, due to the open nature of the platform, which encouraged software and hardware development, more products were produced for IBM PCs. Meanwhile, Microsoft's Windows, an imitation of the Macintosh operating system (OS), was being perfected. Although Apple had a better product at the beginning, it was losing market share to PCs that were getting better. Steve Jobs was sacked from Apple in 1986. Over the next decade, Apple focused on the production of Macintosh computers. Better features such as colour displays and computers targeted at different market segments were introduced, although Apple was slow to serve lower end users, a stranglehold of IBM PC users. By the mid-90s Apple was in the wilderness. It started making heavy losses in 1996. Its vertically integrated model was beginning to fail and it was losing its competitive advantage of making "insanely great" computers. Apple burnt a few fingers in failed ventures. The Newton, a personal digital assistant although ahead of its time with its handwriting recognition technology, was expensive and flopped. Its joint venture with Bandai to produce the Pippin, a multimedia player, failed. It had hardly any software titles available. Although a "cheap computer", it was more expensive than other consoles, like Sony's PlayStation. Meanwhile, Apple, in a desperate attempt, also risked licensing the Mac OS to other companies to produce Macintosh clones believing that it would increase the market share of the Mac platform, allowing it to increase its user base and collect licensing fees thus reversing its decline especially after the launch of Microsoft's Windows 95. Although Apple's Macintosh still had the chic factor that the clones didn't, the clones were cheaper and better featured, thus possibly cannibalizing Apple's own market share. One of Apple's worst blunders was its project to create a new OS, Copland. Essentially all upgrades up until then were superficial upgrades. Without Copland, the full potential of hardware advancements could not be realized. The task was initiated in 1989, and efforts to reach this target all ran aground. Apart from technical complexities, Copland failed because of ongoing division turf wars and the lack of vision in the platform's future. This was made worse by massive marketing efforts to hype the project and then failing to produce a working developer release to allow developers to write software. The platform's uncertain future discouraged potential software developers and users alike. Weaknesses in manufacturing were also encountered such as backlogged orders and defective products, such as exploding batteries. 1997 marked Apple's turnaround when Gilbert Amelio became CEO. He reintroduced financial discipline by downsizing the workforce, consolidated the product line and axed Copland. NeXT Computer was bought, bringing back Steve Jobs to Apple. NeXT's OpenStep OS was used as a ready-made OS that would do Copland's job. Shortly after, Jobs took over the helm of the company. In the next few years, he released the long awaited OS upgrade. Jobs reaffirmed Amelio's efforts to consolidate Apple's product line by replacing tired designs and introduced the radical iMac, iBook and Power Macintosh upgrades. A strategic partnership with Microsoft was formed guaranteeing continued development of products like Office and Internet Explorer. Apple also introduced an online store in addition to a line of retail stores, which were showrooms to show off their products. Apple's recent dabbling in non-computer ventures was also more successful this time. The iPod and iTunes Music Store have increased profitability and brand equity, while revolutionizing the music industry. Apple returned to profitability in 1998. How did Apple fall from grace, then managed to bounce back to success? <heading>Analyzing Apple's Resources and Capabilities</heading>In understanding how Apple's fall and rebound, it is interesting to appraise its key resources and capabilities based on the above case. <table/>Because most computers were expensive and difficult to use in the 80s, the key success factor in the industry at that time was the ability to produce computers that were easy to use, thus attracting first time users who were willing to pay for computers. The Macintosh's easy to use graphical interface, better technology and aesthetics gave Apple a competitive advantage over its competitors. The increasing power and technology of computers in general accompanied by the more wide-spread use meant that customers were demanding cheaper computers and more applications. Unfortunately, Apple's resources and capabilities weren't well positioned to satisfy the changing needs and expectations of its customers. Its vertically integrated model and non-existence of Macintosh clones made it impossible for Apple and the Macintosh to satisfy these needs. This was unlike the IBM PC industry where Microsoft, Intel and big-named manufacturers were developing their capabilities in product development, while the highly competitive clone-manufacturer and component makers had advantages in manufacturing and cost efficiencies. In fact, as painted by the Newton, Pippin and Copland, Apple's product development was becoming weaker. Loyal customers were running away as Apple failed to convince them about the platforms future. People were beginning to predict Apple's death. Amelio's employee redundancies, product range streamlining and terminating the costly OS upgrade were brave (although unpopular) efforts to manage these weaknesses. Amelio also oversaw the closing down of plants and outsourcing manufacturing capability. Acquiring NeXT brought in two things Apple badly needed - a new OS and a visionary. It was clear that Copland was going nowhere and acquiring NeXT would allowed Apple to avoid the painful process of building this new capability. Jobs would be Apple's perfect salesman. Steve Jobs further consolidated Apple's return success by forging a strategic alliance with Microsoft, guaranteeing important software product continuity. Efforts to make Macs more compatible with PC equipment were taken, such as the adoption of USB and Ethernet networking (as opposed to proprietary systems), thus encouraging PC users to 'switch'. Apple leveraged its strengths in innovation and marketing, through its new retail strategy and "cool" product line in further developing its other resources - enlarging its loyal customer-base while further strengthening the brand. Although Apple was almost doomed to failure, it managed to correct its weaknesses and exploit its strengths in an effective manner. 