Observing the images presented by other groups on the BA case by Sullivan-Taylor (2005), I couldn't help notice the similarities between my group's image, Orchestrating Knowledge (OK), with Process, Power and Change (PPC). <heading>Strategy at the Centre</heading>OK criticizes the simplistic tradition of looking at the HQ as a rational resource allocator that ignores how it conducts its relationships with its environment (McGee, 2003 p.147). The PPC image meanwhile analyzes the contexts, process and content of change and the iterative interaction between these spheres (Pettigrew, 2003 p.312). Both images constantly remind us that strategy doesn't always mysteriously appear out the minds of consultants and senior management. Consider BA, which had transformed itself from being a Lion Tamer to becoming a Leader and finally a Mentor (in OK-speak). A lot of this change was caused by BA's self-awareness of its position in the industry and by the realization of the role played by 'lower' employees in formulating strategy. Earlier in the case, BA was painted to be a bureaucratic, impersonal and with a commandeering centre. By the end of the case, BA was painted as a self-conscious, listening, honest and innovative airline. The evidence in this case supports the implications of both the OK and PPC images that recognize the usefulness of an emergent type of strategy. <heading>Context and process</heading>The dynamic and iterative interaction between context and process can be analysed using both images. <heading>Context drives process</heading>PPC focuses heavily on how strategy is made and put into effect. Pettigrew (2003, p.307) talks about how very often, strategists overlook the importance of history. In attempting to understand why BA undertook certain processes to achieve its goals, or in PPC-speak - content (being the undisputed leader in world travel), we can observe that the actions undertaken were influenced by context, the 'givens'. The inner context (world-view) - of how it considers the emergent-programmatic debate; and outer context - management's focus adopting either resource based or output/market targets - characterize BA and its given archetypes across time, and given these 'contexts' BA would be expected to behave and execute process in a certain way. For example, looking at why BA was an unresponsive, cold airline, not having much "process", in the pre-privatisation 80s, it could be because it was a Lion Tamer in a highly protective environment. <heading>Process drives context</heading>I consider the OK Image as one that is descriptive but not prescriptive. It doesn't explain how strategy should be conducted, but it describes why strategy is formulated in a particular way. It describes the contexts, the givens. Looking at the previous example, it could be said that BA's bureaucratic Lion Tamer attitude was caused by its lack of process. It wasn't until 1982 that any serious effort was taken to cause change in BA (and its internal context). By twisting and stretching the Images even further, it can be argued that there are certain "givens" that influence other "givens" over time. The interplay between content and process, which themselves are governed by "higher contexts" (ala PEST) can explain how context changes over time, despite it being a given in the short-term. These iterations between process, context and content that shape strategy formulation over time can be studied using PPC. For example, while forming alliances (process) because of increasing competition (context) increased profits (content), it had definitely caused competition to be more fierce (context) as others formed alliances too! It can be said that the PPC image offers a more wholesome, sophisticated and dynamic perspective of strategy, especially in BA's case. As a result of this reflection, I now appreciate that some images are better than others in providing insight. In BA's case, OK cannot explain dynamic contexts, and this makes it less preferable here. 