<heading>Key Learning Moments</heading>It was in preparing for my Intention & Anticipation presentation on Honda (B) when I first seriously considered Images. Briefly, this image describes strategy as a game played out by actors who have to consider their own actions and those of others. Prior to this, strategy to me has been primarily about the environment and market (competitors, customers etc.). The market was a flattening device and perfect knowledge was assumed. Strategy was the elixir used by firms to beat the market. It was a step-by-step instruction manual telling us how to achieve our desired destiny by planning and anticipating what others do. The image explained by Wensley 1 explains that it isn't as simple as that. Sometimes, it is difficult to foresee the plans of others. Grint (1997) describes the fuzziness of logic. The McNamara case 2 and video says that "rationality will not save us". In fact, sometimes, we don't even know what we want our destiny to be! An implication of this would be to give up on strategy. Why bother trying to control? This appears attractive. It seems that too much thinking and planning may be suboptimal. But isn't strategy all about thinking and planning - being the masters of our own fate? This has been difficult for me to swallow. Of course, Wensley points out that the Growth-Share Matrix can help managers decide which of the four modes in the M-Matrix to adopt. But this raises some ethical questions. Would shareholders view a Meandering management kindly? How would the Honda bosses back in Japan have reacted if they found out what was initially happening in the US? 1 In Images of Strategy (pp.105-135) edited by Cummings, S. & Wilson, D. 2 In The Fog of War: Lessons from the life of Robert S. McNamara (pp.61-73) by Blight, J. & Lang, J. This image was a key moment in my appreciation of Images. It managed to stir-up questions about my past understanding of strategy. Although it was dealing with rather intangible ideas just like other images, I felt that the lessons from this Image were practical and robust enough to challenge the rational view of strategy. Numbers was the next important moment. After facing the many nebulous ideas over the past weeks, it was a refreshing and re-orienteering experience. It served to remind me what the business of business was - making money. Reading the Dilbert cartoons in Numbers reminded me of my initial doubts about this course and the idea of strategy being an academic discipline - waffling about great paradigms and models without end and leaving it to someone else to execute. It was difficult not to be cynical. No doubt other bits of strategy (Term 1 especially and Term 2, to an extent) provide practical details about how to conduct strategy. But it has always felt that it (maximizing profits) was somewhat forgotten. It was always implicitly assumed that profits follow from strategy. But reading the text by Smith 3 and studying the Indo case, it isn't always clear that this is true. For example, the image of Ethos talks about telos. Suppose an organization's telos is being a 'slacker'. According to this image, it should act out its telos (being lazy). But how does a lazy slacker earn more profits than a hardworking slacker? Or is it its purpose to be eaten up by its competitors? This rather contrived example shows that some Images might be fundamentally un-sound, and a good test would be to identify its attitudes towards profits. This image thus reminds us that strategy can and should be appreciated through different lenses, but ultimately, strategy has to be driven and backed up by sound ideas. The bottom line of business is not doing good, not being great explorers or being great salesmen. It is just maximizing shareholder value. 3 In Images of Strategy (pp.356-382) edited by Cummings, S. & Wilson, D. I was also a little surprised to see Smith talk excitedly about EVA/SHV as if they were recently discovered magical formulae for success. It only goes to show how much this principle has been forgotten in strategy. It was while learning these two images that I did the most contemplating, and felt that I appreciated important philosophical attitudes that had supported my understanding of the rest of the course. My full learning progress is documented in the Appendix. <heading>Development of Knowledge and Understanding</heading>Prior to this part of the course, my understanding of business was one that was rationalistic. Strategy was a science of maximizing profits. Economics taught me about equilibrium and the benefits of competition. Strategy in Term 1 to me was about breaking the equilibrium and beating the competition. It was a good introduction to the hands-on, vocational methods. It showed me how to study businesses and rationally explain why certain decisions were undertaken and whether it was successful or not. To me, it was like the Old Testament law which details how we should live our lives and explained that if businesses failed to observe certain 'moral codes', they were doomed and would be punished. Term 2 was a shock to me. It was an intellectually confusing phase and it shook my beliefs and raised plenty of doubts as I appreciated the post-modern view on strategy. As useful as this revisionist paradigm was in raising up important issues and bringing about new ideas to me, I now have more questions to ask! The post-modern view applies different lenses to look at and deconstruct strategy. What's the purpose of doing so? Isn't business just about creating value? Being scholars and applying these lenses distracts us from business's true purpose - profit maximization! Why philosophize about a vocation? Over time, I have learnt the value of 'unlearning' and relearning strategy, as this paradigm requires. Strategy as presented in Term 1 was described as if it was an unambiguous moral code, a recipe-book for success. Unlearning and deconstructing ideas allows us to question assumptions and to appreciate the complexity of strategy not possible when applying the rationalistic lenses of Term 1. Grint illustrates a few examples of how our understanding and observation of the world is imperfect. With this in mind, what then for 'control', when we can't fully grasp the consequences of our own actions? Therefore, while allowing for subjectivity and plurality into strategy makes the study more complicated, the postmodern process of analyzing the purpose, structure and application of strategy only serves to make it 'fuller'. Just as the study of jurisprudence helps make better laws, understanding the images of strategy helps make better strategy. For example, the recurrent debates in Images, such as whether strategy ought to be programmatic or emergent; or whether profits automatically follow from strategy, are as abstract as ever, but there are practical lessons that can be learnt here. No doubt, not having a grasp of these issues doesn't make strategy-making impossible. It would only be less 'holistic' (for want of a better word) and less optimal. Undoubtedly, Images has been useful and it has added to my knowledge in the many ways described above. Thinking through Images is an interesting, illuminating and reflective yet uncomfortable, nettlesome and intellectually-exhausting activity. I also wonder whether it has distracted me and got me hooked on debates that would probably never be resolved, what more never really matter. The question that I ask myself should then be: where do I draw the line between being Reflective and Myopic? <heading>Diary prompts</heading><heading>Week 1 - Ethos and Orientation & Animation</heading>I was unable to attend today's lecture as I was away for the weekend. Therefore, I had to rely on reading the notes and the case on P&G and the University's strategy by myself with some discussion with friends. It looks like in the next few weeks strategy will be thought of as something that isn't clear-cut and prescriptive like how we did last term. I am expecting plenty of 'fogginess', but I guess it can't be that bad. It looks like tools (or "lenses") from other academic disciplines will be used this term. This is going to be interesting. With regards to the image Ethos, I now appreciate why and how the University has been so successful given its young age. Adopting an identity (to be a leader in research in teaching) and realizing it's own strengths (relationship with business),  understands and acts out its telos. In spite of this, I still have my doubts about the content of this course. It seems a bit wishy-washy and I will need to have a more open mind. Attending lectures and running through the cases by myself might also help. <heading>Week 2 - Creativity and Decision Making</heading>I thought that David's lecture about creativity was pretty interesting. But I do have doubts about the relevance of the debate of creatives vs. suits in the Creativity framework. This debate seems to be quite specific to the Creative Industry. No doubt there are lessons that can be learnt, irrespective of industry but considering that most of the lecture and more than half of the Chapter was devoted to this debate, I am a little ambivalent. Still I guess it might still be important, considering many firms these days like to claim to be in the business of "knowledge". I particularly enjoyed reading 'Creative Discussions' in the textbook. Revisiting the structure/shape of an organization can help management reconsider their raison d'etre and help break false perspectives that might limit management's ability to think. I also thought that the spending some time on the definition of creativity got me thinking a lot. <heading>Week 3 - Intention & Anticipation</heading>My group was one of those that presented today. I think that the comparison of Honda (B) and Honda (A) case was useful and insightful as it brought about the debate about formal planning vs. informal learning. After preparing for the case, I believe that the different modes in the M-Matrix have their own value and usefulness under different circumstances. As in the Honda (B) case, the Meandering period during Honda's entry to the U.S. enabled it to break the market. I am also beginning to see that strategy is not all about planning or contingency. There are instances when having everything thought out and having everything under control may not be such a good, as exampled by Honda in America. But I also encountered some scepticism. How do we know which mode to adopt under different circumstances? It was suggested in the text that models like BCG's Growth-Share Matrix be used as a guide. The arguments and explanation given was quite simplified and this doesn't make this puzzle less troublesome. Maybe the other Images to be learnt in the next few weeks will make this clearer. I am also beginning to see that by integrating and combining ideas learnt from other Images, many parallels that aid my understanding will appear. For example, I see some similarities between ethos and intention. Additionally, I am beginning to appreciate the theoretical usefulness of Images, which prior to this seemed a little useless to me. <heading>Week 4 - Exploration & Interconnection</heading>Today's lecture by Duncan described how the exploration view of M&A adds to our understanding of this topic. For example, in the spirit of post-modern Images, M&A is seen to be complex, not fully rational and uncertain. Although the traditional view of it being rational and financially benefits driven should be the primary assumptions of consultants and investment bankers, an understanding of this deeper and more complex perspective would be valuable. The parallels of M&A with that of explorers especially that with the South Pole explorers, demonstrated that winning the territory doesn't always imply victory. Similarly the Treasure Island also added to my appreciation of the difficulties and rewards waiting to be captured. Sometimes it is difficult to pick out opportunities from difficulties. I have never thought of M&A as being an exploration and I have never seen it from such a complex perspective. I had always thought of M&A being a verity of business, but I had never put much thought into the various motives of individuals in management. Similarly, I am reminded that in general, managers are human and might have different motives from the organizations they work for. This, no doubt is a problem. Recognizing this, I believe, can help us understand why sometimes things go wrong (or right). With regards to the whole Images framework, apart from the Image specific ideas and examples, I don't think I have really gained anything much. The recurring themes (bad may be good sometimes, observing cases through different dimensions etc.) have already been drilled into my head. I feel that I am somewhat already capable of seeing the big picture. Regardless, I will continue to keep an open mind and I am sure that learning the other cases will further strengthen my understanding of Images. <heading>Week 5 - Marketing and Numbers</heading>Adrian's lecture today was a shock to me. After learning strategy via Images over the past month, I am now accustomed to seeing things as being in shades of grey. Honestly, I also thought that the case presentations on Indo today were a little uninspiring. They appeared to be dissected and presented in the same way as in last term. I don't blame the groups that presented. Today's images were somewhat closer to the rational and modern view of strategy than the others. Despite the uncomfortable feeling at first, I understand the importance of these images. The other Images before this talk mainly about strategy as if being great strategists should be the aim of Management. Being the economist that I am, I have felt that the idea of profit maximization has always been neglected, forgotten or conveniently assumed to be a necessary implication of "great" strategy. I think that it was good that the authors spent some time discussing this. The language of business is frequently filled with words like 'market share', 'revenue' and 'growth'. But going back to first principles, businesses are in the business of maximizing profits. In other words, maximizing shareholders' value. This serves as a good reminder for me, as I begin to get 'soft' with all this post-modern mushiness. It's good to know that despite the main bulk of Images devoted to banging and questioning the rational and modern beliefs of strategy, it hasn't lost its senses by going out all the way to destroy it totally. It is comforting to know that despite Images frequently being ambiguous and wishy-washy, it is capable of verifying its fundamental soundness. By this time, I can safely say that Images isn't the reactionary, destructive, intellectually dangerous ideology that it may first appear to be. No doubt it enjoys being morally ambiguous and may be controversial in questioning some widely held beliefs. But it only does so because it believes that deconstructing assumptions can help strategy-makers understand what strategy really is in practice (messy). Hopefully this allows us to make better strategy. <heading>Week 6 - Process, Power & Change and Orchestrating Knowledge</heading>I was unable to attend today's lecture. There were no slides put on the website and reading through the AES case, I thought it to be rather dull. Anyway, I will be preparing for the BA case next week for Orchestrating Knowledge, so I will have an opportunity to practice this image then. I will try to understand the images by reading the textbook. Both images remind me that strategy doesn't necessarily appear out the minds of consultants and senior management. They are a result of complex histories and relationships embedded within an organization. Orchestrating Knowledge criticizes the simplistic tradition of looking at the corporate centre as a rational resource allocator that ignores how it conducts its relationships with its environment. Orchestrating Knowledge starts of by quoting the theory of the firm explaining why firms exist. Given the rapid "flattening" of the marketplace, due to many outside forces, firms have to re-question their position in the value chain as resource organizers. Firms that remain successful are those that become orchestrators of knowledge. The image then goes on to describe a few so called archetypes that firms fit into based on their characteristics. Falling into different archetypes have different strategic implications on the firm. Process, Power & Change meanwhile analyzes the contexts, process and content of change and the iterative interaction between these spheres. Nevertheless, I see Process, Power & Change as an almost exact equal of Orchestrating Knowledge. Although both do not explicitly use the same language as each other, they are closely tied together. In Process, Power & Change-speak, Orchestrating Knowledge is about how the strategy process influences particular outcomes. For example, a Mentor in Orchestrating Knowledge tries to bring about transformation. In Process, Power & Change, the process of empowering employees and the use of informal networking brings this transformation. In this, I again see parallels and overlap across different images. I think that spending some time by myself studying Images has its value. By attending the lecture, I doubt I would have spent enough time reading the text, appreciating. But maybe I should instead commit myself to spending more time preparing in advance and then attending the lecture. Then I would have gained even more. <heading>Weeks 7 onwards</heading>I have been preparing for my group presentation. In the meantime, I have spent some time re-reading the textbook and some of the cases. I still face some difficulties in understanding how certain parts fit in, but I believe that I now see the big picture of Images. I hope that the critical and reflective ideas that I have picked up here will be synthesised with the hands-on approach of strategy learnt in Term 1. 