There are several pieces of literature that discuss tenure choice and the costs involved. Megbolugbe and Linneman (1993 p.659) suggest that home ownership should be influenced only by household preferences, income, wealth and the relative costs of owning and renting. They also point out that home ownership is frequently assumed to have no intrinsic value (Linneman and Wachter, 1989). From these premises, I can crudely extrapolate that when individual choices of housing tenures are not distorted the costs of owning and renting would have to equalize at equilibrium. If they didn't, there would be unexhausted gains from trade. The cost of owning would refer to the annual pro-rated cost of the unit, net of all finance payments, taxes, purchase costs, anticipated appreciation (p.667). This is a very questionable extrapolation, and there are other considerations discussed later that would suggest systematic biases in favour of one type of tenure choice. Ex ante, at equilibrium in the real world, relative costs are expected differ. Therefore the one of the empirical focuses of my analysis could be on testing for differences in housing costs. If it could be established that there are cost differences at equilibrium, then the owner-occupying/renting premium could be measured. This paper also briefly talks about the role of inflation and expected inflation. Inflation lowers owning costs because of the tax-deductibility of mortgage payments. Meanwhile, expected inflation increases nominal prices and thus the real down-payment sizes, biasing tenure choice in favour of renting especially amongst the wealth-constrained. Krainer and Wei (2004) meanwhile discuss how housing markets adapt to changes in economic fundamentals, considering the fundamental value (ala finance literature) in determining equilibrium house price levels. The fundamental value of a house is the discounted sum of future payoffs to the owner. In a perfect market, rental values ought to match these housing service flows. Deviation of house prices from this fundamental value leads to bubbles. But like in finance theory, there are difficulties in observing fundamental value and bubbles are hard to detect. Price-rent ratios (like price-dividend ratios) are used to estimate this. Deviations from the long-run average are used as loose indicators of bubbles. But there is no reason to believe that this ratio is constant at equilibrium. There could be genuine change in expectations of future returns from owning houses. The Economist (3 March 2005) has pointed out that this ratio has almost doubled in some Western economies over the past 30 years. How much of this increase can we attribute to real improvement in fundamentals as opposed to just speculation? Krainer and Wei use Cochrane's (1991) exercise of explaining changes in the price-rent ratio by considering changes in returns from owning houses in the U.S. They discovered that by decomposing returns from owning into movements relative to future returns and rental growth rates, most movements in the ratio can be explained by the former. This appears to be bad news - investors believe that housing investment is good because they can realize one-off gains when disposing, rather than it being good because it is a productive investment in delivering a stream of revenues. The weakness of this literature is that although it can explain the source of variation in price-rent ratios, it doesn't explain why most of the variation is associated with movements in future returns (capital gains). Regardless, the conclusion of this paper suggests that I should expect to observe a difference in ownership and rent flows. Henderson and Ioannides (1983) study housing tenure choice by considering rental externality. A rental externality occurs when tenants do not face the social marginal costs of their utilization rates, in other words landlords unable to collect from tenants the full cost of maintenance. Unlike owning-occupying, landlords cannot perfectly observe and charge tenants the cost of fixing wear and tear. They maximize a non-stochastic multi-period consumer utility function. They establish that at equilibrium, interest foregone on the equity in housing must equal housing profits. Housing profits would usually be defined as the rental price of housing. But because of the rental externality, the extra cost of utilization due to the externality not recovered by the landlord has to be subtracted from the rent. Maximizing the utility function, they conclude that because of the externality, renters overutilize capacity. Landlords pass on this extra cost not directly recovered through higher rents, and thus leading to a price wedge in favour of owning. The reality is that a house is a risky asset. Even if capital gains from owning do not vary very much, landlords have to bear maintenance cost unpaid by tenants, which has a high variance. By considering uncertainty and looking at housing as an investment decision instead, Henderson and Ioannides propose that the optimal consumption and investment levels of housing are not equal. If investment demand exceeds consumption demand, the person owner-occupies. If his housing consumption demand exceeds investment demand, he would need to rent the excess housing demand over what he already owns. But because he can only be at one place at one time, he distorts his choices, suppressing this excess demand and only owner-occupies. This bias towards home-ownership, due to the housing externality and the indivisibility of housing units (and non-omnipresence of consumer) provides yet another way to look at the owning-occupying/renting premium that we would expect to encounter. Another result derived from this paper is that income paths affect tenure choice (pp.105-108). Individuals who have less wealth or receive more of their wealth now than in the future will be net lenders of housing. This suggests differences in individual bid functions of individuals, where low income earners tend to rent, and the opposite for the wealthier. Difference in rental and owner-occupying gradients would thus be expected. Leech and Campos (2003) study the effects of school admissions policies on housing prices. The hedonic approach used in this paper, originally developed by Rosen (1974), provides a way of controlling quality differences in housing attributes that are not explicitly traded on the market. By adopting hedonic regressions, the implicit marginal prices of housing quality can be revealed. It can be used to approximate consumers bid functions, meaning to see how much extra users are willing to pay for added quality (such as increase in floor area, number of rooms). Although these implicit prices are not the focus of my analysis, this framework controls for quality differences which are the reality of the housing market. Summarizing, the first three papers have suggested, through many ways, that I would expect a difference between owner-occupying and renting flows while the last explains a method of controlling housing quality difference through the hedonic approach. These results, along with those from elsewhere, will be further developed in seeking to understand tenure choice in terms of user cost. 