L'Oréal is currently undergoing a period of transformation and restructuring in order to implement its new strategic focus on the Chinese market. The firm entered the Chinese market in 1996, but consolidated its presence with the acquisition of Chinese cosmetics brand 'Yue-Sai' in 2004. The industries in which L'Oréal operates, call for a thorough awareness of the target's native environment, as well as an appreciation of local tastes, lifestyles and values. An understanding of this external operating environment is of crucial importance to ensure success in foreign markets. The most pressing aspects will be discussed in this study using a PESTLE Analysis, focusing mainly on the aspects L'Oréal needs to consider in furthering their presence in the Chinese cosmetics market. <fnote>The main areas being Hair Care, Cosmetics, Skin Care and Fragrances. </fnote><heading>POLITICAL:</heading>The political realm needs to be carefully considered when entering China, as business in the country can never be disentangled from politics. Despite past impediments, over the last few years the government has displayed a predisposition to change, and create an increasingly open economy. Nonetheless, it remains a communist regime, with the power to change regulations and restrictions without the need of consent from a democratic parliament. Furthermore, China's current leader, Hu Jintao, proved to be more authoritarian than was initially expected by the global market, often hampering reform and muffling the press. This unease present in the business environment was somewhat lessened with China's WTO entry in 2001, by restricting some of the business risk through the WTO's membership requirements. Amongst some of the measures are the reduction of import tariffs and other non-tariff barriers, as well as many others, which will help investment to take place in a more attractive, transparent and predictable business environment. It will also serve to accelerate China's own process of economic reform, hence further benefiting entering firms. <fnote>The new WTO Integration Program focuses on core elements of China's integration into the world trading system, namely: Customs and import/export regulatory system; Agriculture and Agro-food; Technical barriers to trade/Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures; Services; Legislative and legal aspects of domestic implementation, IPR enforcement; and Policy development, co-operation and transparency </fnote>Fears have been recently intensified by the upcoming annual plenary session of the National People's Congress. This year's party line has been announced to be inward-looking and conservative, possibly presaging unfavourable outcomes for foreign firms. <fnote>According to the 11th Five-Year Plan - to be approved by the NPC - the country's focus will be on "building a new socialist countryside". </fnote><heading>ECONOMIC: </heading>The economic outlook for China and for the cosmetic industry is very favourable. China has displayed impressive GDP growth as well as an overall increase in disposable income, which often translates into greater expenditure on luxuries like cosmetics; experts estimate an expansion of the Chinese cosmetics market of 56.5% until 2010, reaching a total value of $2.3bn. <fnote>China has displayed an average GDP growth of 8.05% per year since 2002, according to recently published official calculations. </fnote><fnote>DATAMONITOR (2005) Makeup in China: Industry Profile (Ref: 0099-0700) </fnote>The government has shown an important awareness of the need to 'manage' economic growth, in order to make it sustainable and to avoid the dangers of inflation - a common trap for nations who experience heavy growth in a short period of time. The government raised interest rates in October 2004 (the first increase since 1995), and unpegged the renminbi from the dollar in July 2005. However, one currency risk that the firm may experience is that of the artificially low value of the renminbi, despite foreign pressure for revaluation, meaning some 'real' value loss during currency conversion. Lastly, production costs, like labour and infrastructure are also significantly lower in China, making the establishment of production plants in the country economically appealing, while at the same time offering proximity to the growing Asian market. <heading>SOCIAL:</heading>Some of the most important considerations for L'Oréal's entry into China, are those regarding the very different social reality and local culture. L'Oréal will need to embrace local tastes, lifestyles and values not only in product developments, but also in its promotion efforts. It has already signed local star Zhang Ziyi, in order to encourage some identification on the part of the consumers. These adaptations should be discernible within the marketing mix, which will need revising to consider local preferences of distribution, branding and promotion. A recent example in China is the renaming of the Vichy line to 'Dr Vichy', to justify the premium pricing. This 'cultural' knowledge however, is not static in nature, a problem to which L'Oréal has responded to by establishing an R&D centre in Shanghai. This centre will encourage continuous improvement and monitoring of cultural developments. One of the first findings was that of the strong association of beauty with paleness, as it 'marks' out upmarket consumers from the country's sun burnt peasants. The market for face makeup embodies 62.6% of the entire makeup market value in China, hence emphasizing the value of this finding. <fnote>DATAMONITOR (2005) Makeup in China: Industry Profile (Ref: 0099-0700) </fnote>Another recent development at L'Oréal has been the creation of product lines for men, in response to the emergence of the 'metrosexual man', a recent social trend encouraging men to take care of their image and spend on beauty products previously considered for female-only use. This trend is deeply present in today's western culture, being witnessed in celebrities, TV shows and men's magazines - and signs of its diffusion into China's 'westernized trendsetters' segment have already emerged. This could possibly represent an opportunity for L'Oréal, seeing that its men's line has not yet been introduced into the Chinese market. <heading>TECHNOLOGICAL:</heading>The Chinese technological know-how is developing at an impressive rate, due to both heavy government and private investment. The government has bet on a strong higher education system, creating sought-after graduates, particularly by foreign firms entering the Chinese market. Not only do these candidates possess the technical skills needs, but also a deep understanding of local culture. As for the private sector, L'Oréal has taken advantage of this capable workforce, and funded a new scientific research centre in Shanghai, with the aim of furthering research on Asian hair and skin. This is very important for L'Oréal, given that their competitive advantage has always been based on a strong emphasis on R&D to ensure local sensitivity and adaptation. The cosmetic industry is a technology-heavy one, where research and improvement is of the essence to ensure an ongoing flow of new products and concepts, and in order to maintain an 'edge'. <heading>LEGAL:</heading>The legal sphere L'Oréal will face is very much influenced by the CCP governance, making their support crucial. Despite economic openness, the party maintains an iron grip in the running of the country and often dictates the law in an arbitrary manner. L'Oréal needs to acknowledge the importance of establishing and maintaining good relations with the government. One possible threat to sales for L'Oréal is the limited restriction and pinning-down of product piracy/copies, particularly relevant for L'Oréal's high-end cosmetic range and perfumes. This problem has already been identified by L'Oréal directors, who see it as "one of the biggest challenges facing consumer goods companies....because most of the investment is in the image", although action is yet to be taken. <fnote>Paolo Gasparrini, a manager for L'Oréal China, quoted in  URL  (accessed 02/03/2006) </fnote>L'Oréal managed in the past to circumvent a few restrictions during its entry into the Chinese market, though the skilful acquisition of 'Yue-Sai' in 2004, a Chinese brand with a strong market position. By adding 'Yue-Sai' to the current portfolio, it has benefited from local knowledge and expertise, as well as already established production facilities. <fnote>The current L'Oréal cosmetics brands which operate in the Chinese market are Lancôme, L'Oréal Paris, Maybelline New York and Yue-sai. </fnote><heading>ENVIRONMENTAL:</heading>Although limited attention is currently paid to the environment in China, as the country becomes further integrated into the global stage, it will certainly experience mounting pressure to adhere to developed world 'standards'. Pollution restrictions and animal testing bans are yet to be seen, but should soon be emerging as pressure groups recognize the need for these in China. L'Oréal will need to consider these possible developments in the future design of their products and operations. L'Oréal has also not yet acknowledged the growing environmental concerns of many consumers, and has not tapped into the emerging market for 'natural' and 'organic' products, being often perceived as more harmful and 'chemical-based'. These changing consumers preferences have been observed in many markets, and some firms have already seized the opportunity to close this gap (for example, L'Oréal has a relatively small share (9.8%) in the Brazilian make-up market, whose consumers favour 'Natura', with 25.9% market share). Although this in not yet the case in China, western tendencies rate high for L'Oréal's targeted urban consumers, and may soon be embraced. Despite the many strengths of the PESTLE model, like its applicability, adaptability and ease of use, and the help it can provide in matching the organization's activities to its environment, it lacks the mention of some significant factors. The framework loses some relevance in specific cases, by failing to identify or not giving enough emphasis to the most pressing factors. In the case of L'Oréal, a great deal more attention should have been given to the cultural adaptation issues, given the nature of the cosmetic industry. Furthermore, the model examines only external factors, whereas important internal factors like size, structure, resources and experience may need to be considered, as firms can fail in apparently perfect external conditions. The model also fails to discuss the competitive environment in which firms operate, a crucial part in defining firm strategy. The cosmetics industry in China is relatively consolidated, with the top 3 brands holding 46.1% of the market - L'Oréal however is not the market leader (this position is held by Shiseido with 18.2% of the market) and therefore should strategize accordingly. Competitive action is also not addressed, and may result in inaccurate expectation and forecasts for firms. Avon Products, the world's largest direct seller of cosmetics, has recently received China's first licence for direct selling after the government lifted a ban on the practice, albeit under strict rules. <fnote>DATAMONITOR (2005) Makeup in China: Industry Profile (Ref: 0099-0700) </fnote>Many also point out that this is a static model, and given that the factors under discussion are constantly changing, unless firm recognize the need for constant revision it can become quickly obsolete. Lastly, the model does not acknowledge the relative importance of different factors, thus possibly making more difficult the recognition of the most pressing issues and the development of a suitable strategy. Many of these weaknesses may be overcome by the combination of other frameworks/models, like the SWOT analysis (to consider internal strengths and weaknesses) or Porter's five forces (to consider the competitive environment), making it a more robust system of strategy design and analysis. 