Since the nineteenth century, motherhood has been seen as the prime reason for woman's existence (Morel. 1994, p140). Motherhood has been used as the yardstick to measure all other women to. Motherhood is thus seen as the ultimate destiny for women and as a goal to which all heterosexual women in a stable relationship aspire. The counter argument illustrates how motherhood may be considered as a woman's source of subordination as not only are women disadvantaged in the public sphere, but also undervalued in the private household structure. Chodorow provides an important starting point to the discussion of motherhood. In 1978, 'The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the sociology of Gender' was published. Chodorow analyses how mothering is replicated through generations of the family. To the female child, the mother is the object of personal identification that sets a role model. The desire to mother is not just part of a natural inheritance, but the skills that are needed are acquired throughout growing up. This leads children to replicate the sexual and familial division of labour (Chodorow, 1999, p7). The desire to mother is reproduced from mother to child; mothers produce daughters with mothering capacities and needs. It is evident that women are not only pulled into mothering through socialisation, but they are also pushed and forced into this direction by cultural representations of motherhood and childlessness (Morell, 1994, p145). The debate on mothering centres on the question of 'to what extent do women contest these cultural representations'? It is this issue of motherhood being a woman's destiny or source of subordination that I will turn my attention to. In this essay I will initially look at the idea of maternal instinct; the suggestion that every woman has an innate drive to motherhood and how this has been contested by feminists such as Badinter (1981). Motherhood as a woman's destiny will then be explored followed by the counter argument that motherhood is infact a source of subordination. Finally, I will propose various alternatives to the modern division of parenting and the assumptions that underlie it and attempt to illustrate how motherhood could be seen as not only an honour, but as a choice. Firstly is the idea of maternalism. Maternalism is the proposal that all women have an innate and natural drive to care for others. As Kestenberg suggests, 'our ideal picture of a truly maternal woman is one of an omnipotent, all knowing mother who knows what to do with her infant by sheer intuition' (as cited in Welldon, 1992, p 18). In society, the view remains that every woman fulfils her destiny once she becomes a mother. Such theories of biological determinism trap women into viewing social stereotypes as given norms. Bartlett argues how maternal instinct does not exist on its own accord, but is in fact created by man (Bartlett, 1994, p53). The argument against maternal instinct is that it is purely a feeling. 'Contrary to many assumptions, it is not a deeply rooted given in women's natures' (Badinter, 1981, pxxiii). Many feminists have questioned whether this maternal instinct actually exists or whether it is just 'an enormous put-on' (Badinter, 1981, p316). If this is true, this pretence may be used to persuade women that it is natural for them to undertake childcare duties. Is it just a socially constructed ideology that justifies women's unpaid domestic labour? (Morrell, 1994, p2). It is this aspect of maternal instinct that I will focus on when considering the role of motherhood as a form of subordination or as a desired destiny. <heading>Motherhood as a woman's destiny: </heading><quote>'Motherhood is the supreme physical and emotional achievement in women's lives'. </quote><fnote>Ussher, 1961, pg 13 </fnote>As demonstrated above in the quote, motherhood has been portrayed as not just a natural, but also a desired destiny for women. As Jacobson illustrates, 'it is woman's biological destiny to bear and deliver, to nurse and to rear children'. (Jacobson, cited in Chodorow, 1999, p9). Maternalism is the idea that motherhood is a natural desire in all women. This is evident in many arguments supporting motherhood. Motherhood provides women with a sense of identity, meaning and status in both the society and the family. I will now take each aspect of motherhood and illustrate how motherhood can be seen as a woman's destiny. To begin with, motherhood provides women with a form of feminine identity and status (Phoenix et al, 1991. p49). It is through motherhood in which women become socially recognised as a 'real' woman, who has fulfilled her destiny in life. A woman never achieves full status until she has children (Gittens, 1993. p96). There is an implicit assumption that parenthood is intrinsic to adult female identity; to not have children would be seen as failing the ideology of womanhood that society perpetuates. As Phoenix concludes, 'childlessness is linked with failure, not only in reproductive terms, but as a woman' (Phoenix et al, 1991. p59). This assumption however implies that any woman who is not a mother has an absence. It is only when this assumption is fulfilled 'will a woman's destiny truly be her own' (Ireland, 1993, p1). As motherhood is seen as a woman's destiny, those who fail to conform are subject to negative stereotypes. The childless career woman for example is portrayed as a bitter, selfish and unfulfilled woman (Bartlett, 1994, p191). Motherhood provides a release from negative stereotypes, and is therefore important in all women's lives even if they do not wish to become mothers. Secondly, as suggested by Oakley (1981), motherhood is an essential stage of development. (Phoenix et al, 1991. p40). It is hugely symbolic as the key to adulthood. Whitelegg supports this point and argues how bearing children is seen to be a natural biological process; 'it is akin to other biological processes (like menstruation)' (Whitelegg, 1989, p310). Motherhood therefore demonstrates a woman's physical adequacy as producers of the next generation. As Phoenix illustrates, 'motherhood allows women to be accepted as responsible and mature adults within the community' (Phoenix et al, 1991.p48). Female reproductive capacity has thus become central for female development and has 'become the cornerstone of the mature adult identity for women' (Ireland, 1993, p7). One final benefit of having children is the opportunity to create new relationships; these may be with other mothers or between partners. It enables parents the opportunity to express and receive affection in a greater circle than what they would previously have done (Phoenix et al, 1991. p48). Motherhood allows women to share a familiar experience and enables women to establish relationships outside the nuclear family. Motherhood is a destiny as it unites women in a common sense of knowledge. Where role segregation is dominant, Rainwater (1965) argues that women may want children to compensate for the lack of affection from the husband (cited in Andorka 1978. p340). The mother-child relationship gives mothers this 'opportunity for caring and nurturance and the expression of love and affection' (Phoenix et al, 1991.p56). This relationship can be hugely rewarding and fulfilling as the love which children give parents is unqualified and exclusive. It is vital for women to experience motherhood to experience such a unique form of love and closeness. Children also offer an insight to a 'life of fun and freshness' (Phoenix et al, 1991.p 57). Motherhood is the destiny of all women as it provides not only a source of love and affection and an outlet for the innate caring and nurturing side of women, but also allows a source of stimulation and variety that would be lost if children were not in the equation. As a conclusion to this section, I will touch on Freud. Although lacking empirical research, Freud's psychoanalysis on parenthood has been widely accepted into society today. Freud viewed parenthood as a natural development to adulthood, and asserted that women become mothers to compensate for their penis envy. Women who do not have a child may become neurotic (Bartlett, 1994, p17). To Freud, becoming a mother was the ultimate destiny as it allowed women to transfer all the ambition to her children that she has had to suppress in herself. <heading>Motherhood as a source of a woman's subordination: </heading><quote>'Motherhood is the locus of women's alienation and slavery'.</quote><fnote>Badinter, 1981, pg 317 </fnote>The contradictory argument, as illustrated by the quote above, poses the case that motherhood is the source of a woman's subordination. In this section, I will focus on the subordination that mothers encounter in the workplace, in the public sphere and within the term motherhood as an entity as a whole. Yet what does subordination mean? In our patriarchal society, men have an unfair advantage over women in all social aspects, parenthood included. As Mill illustrates in 'The Subjection of Women'; 'by the mere fact of being born a male, he is by right the superior of all and every one of an entire half of the human race' (Okin, S. 1988, p86). Women enter parenthood with less power and privilege than men. From this lowered platform women must try to conform to an idealistic role of motherhood prescribed by society. If a mother chooses to resist maternal prescriptions, she faces extreme discontent from family, friends, and society. If she chooses to embrace these ideologies, she faces a great loss of independence and agency; either way, a mother stands to lose. As illustrated by the quote above, Mill also calls up an image of slavery in relation to motherhood. He states that the subjection of women is the only remaining example of slavery in modern Western societies. 'There remain no legal slaves, except the mistress of every house' (Mill, 1988, p86). It has thus been argued that married women, with no property rights and with the double burden of housework and childcare, has been more deprived of rights than many chattel slaves had been. Motherhood is far from a destiny but is the source and root of women's subordination. Starting the debate of motherhood as a source of subordination is the argument concerning the medical profession. The medical profession can play a large part in the subordination of women, even before a child is born. Despite motherhood being viewed as natural, women are encouraged to utilize the medical institution as much as possible. This medical supervision on women's bodies can be seen as a negative intrusion. The ultra-scan for example, allows the medical sector to be the possessor of knowledge about the pregnancy. It removes the feeling of the foetus being inside the woman and instead portrays the image scientifically on screen. The medical profession views motherhood as instinctual and argues that bonding with the child should become a central core to motherhood. After pregnancy, 'she (the mother) is now the sole recipient of all new emotional, physiological and biological demands (Welldon, 1992, p 81). This could partly explain post natal depression, yet the medical profession does not take into consideration how women may actually be feeling with a new child. The mother may be depressed, anxious or hostile to her child; this will be viewed by both society and the medical profession as an inability to mother as opposed to the general consensus to which many women may conform to. Motherhood is thus taken away from the private realm and placed in the hands of the patriarchal medical institution. It is in this way that motherhood can be a source of women's subordination. Moving towards motherhood as a whole, a heavy burden has been pressed upon all women since the delusion was spread abroad that motherhood was a woman's main vocation and destiny in life. This burden takes the form of unpaid childcare and housework. As Lynn argues, 'the housewife provides unpaid, absolutely essential services and labour' (Lynn, 1975, p 101). Motherhood is as a result, a source of women's subordination as although it is work, it is not recognised or paid as such. '(Childcare) work is not worth money, is therefore valueless, is therefore not even real work [...] Essential to the economy as free labour'(Lynn, 1975, pp 101-102). Childcare is seen to be a woman's responsibility and yet although women are working a full day with increasing demands, women are denied the status that they would have received if they were doing paid work. 'Parenting, as an unpaid occupation, entails lower status, less power and less control of resources than paid work' (Chodorow, 1999, p31 ). A woman thus has a dual workload of childcare and housework, yet neither or which is classified as work. There is also the psychological aspect of unpaid domestic chores. As Stanworth illustrates, 'motherhood locks women into institutional and psychological structures of dependency and powerlessness (Stanworth, cited in Hirsch, 1990, p297). Friedan supports this point and in 'The feminine mystique' (1963) looks at the home as a simile to a concentration camp where women are oppressed and subordinated (cited in Kaplan, 1992, p4). She argues against domestic chores and responsibilities ruling women's lives. Housework is real work and deserves to be recognised as such. With a move from the private sphere to the public sphere, are issues concerned with paid work and politics. It is evident that in the current job market, work and motherhood often militate against each other. Motherhood continues to be seen as the natural role for women to undertake. However, many cultural directives prescribe that women should be able to carry out a full time work pattern and be a full time mother at the same time, often referred to as the 'second shift'. This ideal of a 'super-mum' in society suggests that women can happily manage a dual life and 'do it all' (Morel, 1994, p11). Many women fall short of this ideal which may leave them exhausted and with a feeling of failure (Bartlett, 1994, p189). Those who successfully manage to combine work and family, face serious obstacles including the lack of good quality day care; jobs with little flexibility and school schedules that seem to be premised on having a parent at home (Hochschild: 1989). The way that the public sphere is structured makes the 'double shift' of paid employment and childcare an incomprehensible idea. Despite equal opportunities legislation in Britain, the workplace structure remains to designate women to motherhood. Employed mothers are stigmatised by social definitions which see them as deviant both as mothers and as employees (Phoenix et al, 1991.p197). This can be seen as oppressive to all women as the 'working mother' implies that women cannot be a mother and hold a career without modifying the demands of either. Political policies may also be used to further subordinate women. Women's earnings are far below that of a male counterpart. Given these lower wages and the lack of affordable and adequate childcare, it is rational for families who must provide their own childcare to choose to withdraw women from the workforce. As Firestone argues, 'women are the slave class that maintains the species in order to free the other half for the business of the world' (Firestone, 1973, p192). As women are not working, they can find themselves falling further behind their male counterparts in both skill development and earning power. Men however, do not face these obstacles; in fact, it is quite the reverse for men who become fathers, often seen as loyal and hardworking and therefore enhancing the company's image. With the reduction in paternity leave, men are pushed into the public sphere of paid work. This allows men to dominate in the job sector making women a lesser rank of importance. Motherhood thus creates a source of women's subordination in the public sector. Finally, mothers may be seen as subordinate to the political system. As New and David suggest, 'family failures can often be put down to the inadequacy of particular individual parents', this mainly being the mother (Phoenix et al, 1991, p15). It is mothers, rather than fathers who have the responsibility to support, care for and socialise children in ways deemed acceptable by the state (Phoenix et al, 1991, p16). If this role is not met to satisfaction, the state will intervene. If mothers are seen as inadequate mothers, the state will place the children elsewhere. Both mothers and motherhood as an entity are under constant scrutiny and surveillance. In this final section, possible alternatives are explored that could challenge the dominant division of childcare. Many myths, folklore, social institutions, media, customs and religions all exalt the role of parenthood and encourage reproduction (Bartlett, 1994, p2). To question these beliefs would be to challenge years of tradition. However, this challenge is seen as necessary to transform the meaning of motherhood. One proposal is that of shared childcare. The social organisation of mothering today produces a huge amount of sexual inequality. The reorganisation of parenting thus needs to be a prime starting place to overthrow the dominant division of labour. As Chodorow illustrates, 'equal parenting would leave people of both genders with the positive capacities each has, but without the destructive extremes that these currently tend toward' (Chodorow, 1999, p218). Equal parenting would therefore remove the subjection from motherhood as the workload would be shared. Welldon (1992) however illustrates that the problem of motherhood as a source of subordination lies at the heart of society; it is society's expectations that need to be challenged. 'Our whole culture supports the idea that mothers have complete dominion over their babies [...] we neither help her nor her children, nor society in general' (Welldon, 1992, p 83). Glorifying motherhood in this way excludes the fact mothers need help. It is this assumption towards motherhood that requires change. Alternatives that challenge this oppressive nature of the family and childcare are vital. Childcare assistance, career breaks and other schemes such as flexi time are strongly recommended as strategies to enable women to pursue a career and to make childcare a privilege as opposed to a chore. These initiatives however, fail to challenge the assumption that parenting is exclusively a woman's issue. Whether these changes can bring about real choices of identity for mothers remains an empirical question. As a conclusion, it is evident that the pivotal debate to this topic is the issue of choice. Motherhood may be a destiny, or it may be a source of subordination; the conclusion depends on the stereotypes that society presents. The pressure for women to become mothers centres on the ideal of conformity. This dominant ideal subordinates women as it enables society to label those who do not conform as deviant. Men on the other hand, have escaped such pressures and the mass of generalisations that are heaped upon women from birth. 'Every woman has the whole weight of formulated 'womanhood' upon her shoulders' (Lynn, 1975, p 45). The modern women is thus chiefly of function, not character. A changed morality and a focus on true choice cannot successfully emerge when half of the population are regarded not as people but as functions. No woman can call herself free until she can choose consciously whether she will or will not become a mother (Lynn, 1975, p 29). This choice to motherhood is about challenging this dominant orthodox. 