<heading>Introduction</heading>With one quarter of recorded rape cases in England and Wales reaching conviction in 1985 and only one in ten in 1996, there is ongoing concern as to why the conviction rate is so low (Harris and Grace, Home Office Study, 1999). As Table 1 illustrates, taken from Myhill, A. and Allen, J. (2002) Home Office Research Study 237, although the number of recorded rapes has increased more than fourfold since 1985; the number of convictions has remained static. Added to this is the concern that many women do not even report the assault, so those who do are seen as the tip of the iceberg. As will shortly be illustrated, even this tip is decimated as the criminal justice system runs its course (Lees, 1997, p177). The criminal justice system at the present state gives a victim of sexual assault little hope of seeing the offender brought to justice. As Sampson illustrates, 'given the likelihood of any rape or sexual assault ever being reported to the police, given the reluctance of some police officers to believe the report and to record the crime, given the possibility of the identity not being discovered and given the reluctance of juries to convict for sexual crimes, there is very little hope that a conviction will actually occur' (Sampson, 1994, p41). Therefore, it is clear that if and when a victim reports the rape to the police, she sets in motion a complex and lengthy process involving the legal system. This essay will discuss the reasons as to why there is such an alarmingly low conviction rate when it comes to sexual assaults. I will focus on the factors that are linked to this concern in turn, starting with the low levels or reporting, to the characteristics of the rape and the stereotypes and prejudices that remain in the rape trial in more detail. It is hoped that an analysis of this kind may enable me to conclude what can be done in the future to enable a more resounding rate of convictions that will readdress the justice imbalance. Whilst raising such issues, this essay will draw upon certain research studies that I have included in my appendices to illustrate the statistics that will be referred to within this essay. <heading>Rape definition- sexual offences Act 2003</heading>Firstly, is the definition of rape. Some feminists have argued that rape is at near epidemic levels and that if official statistics do not reflect this, then it is because rape is the single most underreported major crime. This fact, as Estrich (1987) demonstrates, depends on the definition of rape used. If we use the definition of rape to involve strangers and/or weapons then rape is seen to be relatively rare. If the simple cases are considered, a woman forced to have sex without consent by a man whom she knows, then rape emerges to be far less common and vastly underreported (Estrich, 1987, p10). It has only been in the recent past that rape has been clearly defined. Prior to the Sexual Offences Amendment Act 1976, the common law definition of rape was 'unlawful sexual intercourse with a woman without her consent, by force, fear or fraud' (Phoenix, J and Oerton, S, 2006, p30). However, to feminists, this focused on penetration only and excluded other forms of sexual; activity such as forced oral sex. The Sexual Offences Act (2003) altered the legal framework concerning rape and included what feminists argued was missing. It firstly increased the level of punishment for sexual offence, now punishable for up to ten years imprisonment. Another reform it introduced was to gender neutralise sexual offences. This was a move away from perceiving rape as an act that could only happen to women and now enabled both the law and society to see that rape could happen to men by men, or indeed by women, this being a marked triumph for feminist campaigners. So why is it that conviction rates are so low? One reason is that many sexual attacks do not even get reported. Deciding to report a simple rape is a step that most victims never even take, due to a number of reasons. For one, women may be reluctant to report sexual attacks to the police, being too fearful or traumatised to go through such details with strangers (Sampson, 1994, p26). This is possibly one of the major causes of such low conviction rates. Secondly, women may not report a rape because they were 'successful' in resisting the actual penetration or because they felt that forced sexual behaviour within a dating scenario was not viewed as illegal. As Koss and Cook (1998) illustrate, as the correct definition of rape has recently changed, the general public as a whole may be unaware of the correct definition (Koss, M and Cook, S, 1998, p149). In this case, as they may be unclear on what constitutes as rape, victims may hesitate to report it. Thirdly, victims may also fear that the response they receive from the police will be one of hostility or disbelief of the incident, thus losing the confidence of the victims to report the rape (Alder, 1987, p4). In addition to this, many women are reluctant to give evidence if they believe that there is a low rate of conviction. Finally, there is the additional anxiety about the trial itself; the cross examination of the victim in the courtroom has been one area of particular worry and concern. As there may be insufficient evidence to rely on in the court trial itself, the cross examination is often the centre of the trial. Therefore, in order to avoid such fears and scrutiny, a large majority of victims choose not to report the rape at all, making it impossible to know with any degree of certainty how many attacks take place in Britain every year. Despite this reluctance to report sexual attacks, there is a glimmer of hope on the horizon. According to the Home Office statistics, the number of cases of rape has trebled during the last ten years. This may be due to an actual increase in the numbers of these crimes or to a greater willingness on the part of those who have been attacked to come forward in the expectation that their complaint will be handled successfully (Gregory, J and Lees, S. 1999, p8). In this respect, the number of cases being reported may actually be increasing. <heading>Rape process, attrition</heading>Once an allegation has been made to the police, there are several courses of action they can take. The case can be no-crimed, in that it is not seen as a valid crime, the police can also record a crime but decide to take it no further if they believe the possibility of a conviction to be low, or it can be investigated. It is the police that retain the upper hand in relation to the prosecution process, making initial decisions about whether and how much to investigate, a judgment which undoubtedly affects the evidence seen as vital to the trial. The long legal process from reporting the crime to the police and to the court room itself, allows great scope for the process of the crime becoming an official statistic to break down. Such high attrition rates in cases of non-stranger rape, suggests that we are experiencing the decriminalisation of rape. As Table 2 demonstrates, taken from Harris and Grace (1999), the conviction rate has dropped from almost 25% in 1985, to just 9% in 1997, thus leaving a huge margin for attrition and cases to be no crimed. By 'losing' almost all of those cases of reported rape, it can be argued that the criminal justice system is in effect condoning such crimes and creating a climate for serial rapists to get away with it (Lees, 2002, pxxxviii, Gregory, J and Lees, S. 1999, p100). Yet despite ongoing demands from women's groups for a radical reform of the way in which trials are conducted and how the initial decisions are made, very little changes. Until there is a fundamental reshaping of the trial process, minor procedural changes are unlikely to have much of an impact on alarmingly high attrition rates. <heading>Increase in acquaintance rapes</heading>The main explanation of such a low conviction rate may lie in the fact that a steadily increasing proportion of reported rapes do not conform to the stereotypical rape scenario. More women reporting rape are raped by men that they know and these are the cases in which it is most difficult to secure a conviction. As Illustrated in Table 3, taken from Harris and Grace (1999) stranger rape were just 11% of the overall reported rapes to the police, whereas acquaintance and intimate rapes made up to 39% and 50% respectively. Such intimate rapes, committed by boyfriends, partners or close friends, are of considerable concern as they result in a lower conviction rate and have greater implications as to how they are dealt with by the criminal justice system. Grace et al (1992) suggests that 'alleged acquaintance rapes are the least likely to result in a conviction and are the most likely cases where women withdraw their complaints' (Grace et al, 1992, cited in Walklate, 2004, p152). One possible reason as to why the conviction rate is so low may be that more acquaintance rapes are being reported. The number of recorded offences has evidently increased, but the prosecution rate is dropping as is the conviction rate. <heading>Problem about consent</heading>Even when cases are brought to trial, many do not result in a conviction. The difficulty of proving the lack of consent has bedevilled numerous attempts to make rape accusations stand up in court. The rape trial hinges on whether consent or indeed non-consent can be established; 'in practice however, it would seem that consent is assumed and the victim must prove non-consent' (Smart, 1989, p33). Female non-consent has long been viewed as the rubric under which all of the issues in a rape case are addressed. Estrich (1987) for one argues in favour of defining rape in terms of non-consent, rather than in terms of force (Estrich, 1987, p32). It is evident that the issue of consent is pivotal to the rape trial; the only problem being, is how to prove that it ever existed. Despite such a major concern, consent as a word itself, has no definite meaning. We may talk about it, yet in comparison to other people's definitions; it may mean something quite different. As Western concludes, in all rapes, in particular acquaintance rapes, the field of consent is rife with categories and consequent category mistakes (Western, 2004, p9). <heading>Evidence</heading>Proving rape presents exceptional problems since it occurs in private and so in many cases, there is an inadequate amount of proof or no witnesses and so corroboration is uniquely absent. Added to this predicament, if incidents are available to interpretation to those who administer the law, the likelihood of conviction will decrease dramatically (Gregory, J and Lees, S. 1999, p98). Victims of sexual assault are greatly disadvantaged in the court; their cases are dealt with in a way that demands greater evidence requirements. As Lees (2002) illustrates, judges argue that rape allegations are very easy to make and very difficult to disprove (Lees, 2002, p111). Due to such problems in this aspect of corroboration, many rape trials fall at the first hurdle, that of having limited or no evidence to base the conviction on. <heading>Stereotypes of the typical rape</heading>The article from Women's Enews, written by Rodgers (2002) illustrates how many police officers still work with the traditional model of the stereotypical 'good rapes' and 'other rapes'. A 'good rape' is one in which the victim was respectable, faithfully married and fought of her attacker, who was naturally, a stranger to her, opposed to the 'other rapes', those involving prostitutes or rapes by a friend, lover or indeed a husband. There is more sympathy to rape cases that conform to the classic stereotype of rape and for victims who conform to restrictive gender roles and norms. The most common pattern of rape is where the victim knows the offender. Given that the common pattern of rape does not match the popular stereotype, women who experience sexual assault are often disbelieved and discredited. Women who allegedly engaged in sexual misconduct, women who were acquainted with the offender or women who did not report the incident promptly were less likely to achieve convictions in court (Ward, 1995, p102). Judges still hold a very prejudiced view about women's sexualities and still blame women for making themselves vulnerable to rape by taking ordinary freedoms (Clark, 1987, p131). Juries for example may be prejudiced against the victim if there was any suggestion of 'contributory behaviour'; on her part, such as hitchhiking, prostitution or dating (Estrich, 1987, p19). Without question, rape victims confront substantial scepticism from police and prosecutors, undoubtedly playing a large part in the decision making by police and prosecutors (Rodgers, 2002) It is argued that the traditional view of sexuality still remains in rape trials, in that rape is often seen as an 'explosive expression of pent up sexual impulse, from a man who once aroused, cannot control his sexual urges' (Alder, 1987, p9). This view that a man desires sexual intercourse with a woman when he is sexually aroused, leads the courts to assume that his victim must have stimulated him in some way through behaviour or appearance. As will be shortly explained in more detail, the blame is shifted to the victim and her behaviour, even her sexual past is scrutinised. The rape trial can thus be seen to celebrate the category of man; 'being a sexual predator is regarded as normal, even desirable for men' (Smart, 1989, p42). The rape trial will not allow for any criticism of what is perceived being a 'natural activity'; as Cameron and Frazer (1987) argue, men need and feel entitled to have unrestricted sexual access to women, even and sometimes especially against women's will (Cameron, D and Frazer, E. 1987, p164). The burden for women therefore, is to outweigh this theory with evidence of non-consent, and as Smart argues, a woman's account needs to be believed 'beyond all reasonable doubt', and this may be particularly hard to do (Smart, 1989, p49). If we find it difficult to attach responsibility to men in sexual matters, how can we attribute blame to him in a criminal trial? As many radical feminists argue, the police, the law and the criminal justice system do not 'control/ male sexual violence and actually functions to protect dominant male interests (Phoenix, J and Oerton, S, 2006, p37). It is due to such dominating ideas about men and sexuality that enable the courts to shift the blame onto the victim, resulting in such low convictions. Some of the most comprehensive work on the outcomes of rape investigations and trials comes from LaFree (1980). LaFree reported that with the lack of corroborative evidence, decisions involving sexual offences may depend more on the victim's background (LaFree (1980) cited in Ward, 1995, p102). The victim is cross examined placing the character and behaviour of the victim under the severest scrutiny. On reflection to this, Clark (1987) explains the treatment of rape in England in the eighteenth century, illustrating how women who spoke of their rape were seen to be immoral (Clark, 1987, p128). This, although very different today, still has echoes in today's society. The cross examinations that still occurs today, shows how women are portrayed as virtuous or sinful- the ordeal thus rests on the complainant's person than on the defendants. In effect, 'the woman is put on trial and has the most difficult task of establishing her innocence beyond reasonable doubt in order to prove the man's guilt' (Alder, 1987, p15). When evidence is given however, it is either disallowed, discounted or demolished by unfair attacks on her credibility; what many women have deemed as a 'second rape', it is not just the defendant, but also her credibility that is standing trial; it is, as Alder (1987) comments, imperative to get away from the attitudes embodied in the current legal process, attitudes which are not only insulting and degrading to women, but which also hamper the administration of justice in the broadest sense of the term' (Alder, 1987, p168). One major example of this comes from Temkin's study 'Plus ça change'. This study is based on findings of 23 women whose cases were reported to the Sussex police as rape between 1991 and 1993. It looks at their contact with police and the experiences that the victims faced, illustrating how several officers had a fixed stereotype of what makes a 'genuine' rape victim (Temkin, 1997, p516). As Temkin demonstrates, there is no evidence to suggest that reports of rape are more unlikely to be untrue that reports of any other offences. However, reports of rape were met with high levels of scepticism. This study suggests that young women were particularly likely to be disbelieved, thus discouraging them to report such assaults. To conclude this section therefore, the courts judge the victim with the utmost suspicion, clearly showing that in many rape trials, the rape victims are often subjected to institutionalised sexism, which begins with the treatment by the police, continues through the legal system and ends with the acquittal of many rapists. <heading>What can be done in the future? </heading>So what can be done in the future? In order to obtain a higher conviction rate, there are a number of reforms that must be considered. These include a greater level of support for the victims in times of distress such as making a statement or giving evidence, an advanced level of training is needed for all concerned in the rape trial to abolish any traditional prejudices about both the rape incidence itself and the victim's character or past behaviour and a look at other country's reforms to see how they have dealt with such a major problem. I will now explain each of these in greater detail. Firstly, is the demand for a greater level of training for all of those who administer the law in rape cases. The impact of legislative reforms will be minimal until sexual assaults are heard by judges who have been trained and educated in dealing with victims of such crimes. At present, the balance in rape trials is very much in favour of the defendant; his sexual history and past criminal record are protected even if he has attacked the complainant. The victim by contrast, no lawyer to represent her interests, is scrutinised and her character and behaviour are called into question. Until this imbalance is corrected, the attrition rate in cases of rape will remain high leaving the perpetrators of such crimes to attack again and again (Lees, 1997, p190). Secondly, is the need to give the victims support when they make a statement or give evidence in trial. This process can be understandable distressing- what needs to be done is to look at inter-agency work between the police and specialist agencies (Kelly, L, Lovett, J and Regal, L, 2005). In the trial itself, 'it has been argued that the agents of the criminal justice system tend to treat women complainants in a way that amounts to secondary victimisation' (Newburn, 1995, p155). Women reporting sexual assault to the police were, on occasion treated as if they were responsible for their own victimisation. Support and help to deal with such procedures of the trial would be crucial to both the welfare of the victim, and also to other victims to combat the fear that surrounds the trial. This would undoubtedly encourage other victims to come forward and report incidents. Thirdly, is the need to change the stigma that surrounds the concept of 'rape'. It is often held that the ignorance of the realties of sexual violence did not allow the experiences of victims to be heard. What is needed therefore is a better knowledge about victims of sexual assault. This will give a common sense rationale, however, may be hard to critique in fear of being unsympathetic. Victims are often portrayed as undergoing a 'social death' and having suffered a terrible act of not just violence, but of personal invasion (Phoenix, J and Oerton, S, 2006, p39). By seeing rape or sexual assault as an act of 'social death', it may discourage those people who have been victimised from talking about the rape, let alone coming forward to report it. What is needed is a greater level of support and for victims to be put in touch with other agencies that offer counselling or advice to break this stereotype of victims of rape. Fourthly, the terms that the Home Office use must be considered and a careful look must be taken as to what effect such definitions have in the trial process. In the case of stranger rape for example, with advances in DNA technology, the chances of obtaining a conviction are quite high. Despite this progression, any verbal communication between the man and woman prior to attack reduces the chance of a conviction (Lees, 2002, p109). Many rapists are thus changing tactics to meet this situation and instead of attacking a stranger, they are entering into communication prior to the assault so they can plead that the victim consented in knowledge that they will have a chance of being acquitted. The Home Office needs to look at how they define 'stranger' and 'acquaintance' rapes. To know a man for a few hours at a nightclub for example, does not mean that he is an acquaintance, yet despite this, it dramatically affects the trial outcome. And finally, a look into other country's reforms will be hugely beneficial. In Michigan for example, a package of reforms were introduced in the 1980s, including the abolition of judicial discretion regarding sexual history evidence and the abolition of the need for proof of physical force (Lees, 2002, pvi). The effect was an increase in convictions and trials were less of an ordeal for women. Britain thus lags far behind other countries where reforms have already been implemented. As Gregory and Lees (1999) conclude, 'unless legislative reforms are accompanied by an effective monitoring process, intensive training and procedures that render criminal justice institutions accountable, the likelihood of connecting such an imbalance of power remains remote' (Gregory, J and Lees, S. 1999, p216) it is evident therefore that the reforms listed above and many more must be considered if any change is likely to occur. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>To conclude, as illustrated in Table 1, it is clear that although the overall number of convictions has risen, the proportion of cases resulting in conviction has remained constant. From the moment rape is reported, throughout the legal system, the numbers of those facing conviction are greatly reduced. This is due to a number of reasons; a low level of reporting, an increase in acquaintance rapes (which as demonstrated above provides unique problems to the trial itself), high attrition rates and the stereotypes and prejudices that still remain within the trial. These must, as a matter of urgency, be scrutinised and eliminated if there is to be any increase in the conviction rate. 