The emergence of new regulations on information and consultation rights for employees in the UK, transpositioned from the EU information and consultation Directive (Directive 2002/14/EC OJ L80/29-34) has provoked keen interest and reactions from industrial relations scholars, employers' and employees' bodies, official authorities and trade union organisations. The importance of these new rules is defined, on the one hand, by the legal implications arising from that for the first time the UK has, as Hall (2005:103) puts it 'a general statutory framework giving employees the right to insist on being informed and consulted by their employers on a range of key business, employment and restructuring issues'. On the other hand, the new regulations are perceived by many as key, as they objectify a possible answer to a major problem in UK industrial relations - the 'representation gap'. The evidence that such a 'representation gap' exists is quite strong - in their analysis of the first findings of the Workplace Employment Relations Survey (WERS) 2004, Kersley et al summarise that only 36% of workplaces (both private and public sector) with 10 and more employees in the UK have trade union members. This leaves a huge 64% of workplaces with no union representation which is an increasing trend compared to the 57% of such workplaces quoted in WERS 1998. Moving to alternative forms of representative 'voice' Kersley et al (2004:14) point to the fact that only 14% of the workplaces have joint consultative committees (20% in 1998) and a mere 25% operate a consultative forum at a higher level (compared to 27% in 1998). As for the qualitative aspects of information likely to be discussed with employees or their representatives the same sources state that it is staffing plans that are brought forward most often (in 64% of the cases in 2004 and 61% in 1998), rather than the financial position of the company (51% in 2004 decreasing from 66% in 1998) or investment plans (41% in 2004, down from 50% in 1998). All this illustrates that both the quantity and quality of information exchanged between employers and employees as well as the representation and feedback mechanisms need to be improved and the new regulations granting information and consultation rights are looked upon as a possible solution. In this, their significance is anticipated to be key and change-prompting. <heading>Defining the terms </heading>Before moving on, it is felt that clarification of the terms of 'consultation', 'negotiation' and 'collective bargaining', incorporated in the DTI quotation in the text title is necessary, as it will make further discussion on the features of new legal rights and their implications much more feasible. As Dill and Oxenbridge comment (2003:33) the blurring of boundaries between these terms is 'often an issue in workplaces where the employer/employee discussions [have] focused exclusively on pay bargaining involving the trade union.' Still, using definitions from the EMIRE part of the European Industrial Relations Observatory (EIRO) homepage we could refer to the term of consultation as the 'process of discussion and debate (...) between employers and employees, usually distinguished from collective bargaining and negotiation in that it does not imply a process of bargaining, compromise and joint agreement but is rather a means through which employers seek views before deciding on action.' Drawing on the same source, collective bargaining will be perceived as 'necessarily containing an element of negotiation and hence as distinct from processes of consultation, from which negotiation is absent, and where outcomes are determined unilaterally by the employer". Consultation should then be referred to the broader process of asking feedback from employees on certain key issues in the organisation, which may not necessarily result in this feedback being implemented, while the process of negotiation (by means of collective bargaining for example or leading to joint decision-making) is firmly oriented towards agreeing on results (often on pay issues) (see also DTI Guidance on Information and Consultation Regulations 2005). In addition, the distinction between the processes of 'information' and 'consultation' should be noted. For the purpose of this essay the definitions used by Dill and Oxenbridge in their ACAS research paper (2003:12) will be taken into consideration: <quote>Perhaps most important, information and consultation are not one and the same. The first is essentially "top down" and involves the disclosure of information by management. Consultation on the other hand assumes employees will be in possession of information, but also that managers are actively involved in seeking opinions and "taking account of the views of employees before making decisions". </quote>These definitions would suggest a form of continuum which sees the provision of information as the first most basic level of employer-employee communication, followed by involvement in consultation, when management still has full prerogative on decision-making, finally reaching negotiation which allows for employees' agendas to be introduced. Sisson (2002:16) supports the idea of kind of continuum but reinforces that <quote>'to minimize any misunderstanding, management and employee representatives will need to agree where consultation sits on the continuum between the formal noting of views and joint decision-making,and what each party expects from it'.</quote>Having clarified terms and established the importance and relevance of the debate around the new regulations on information and consultation rights for employees, this essay will attempt to discuss the form of the new legal rights, provide a summary of the perspectives of all the actors affected by them - employers, employees and trade unions, and assess the likely significance and impact of the new legislation. By looking into the possibilities incorporated in them, it will try to demonstrate that the effect of the new rules, although eagerly anticipated and extolled by official institutions, might not be that quick or dramatic for employment relations in the UK as yet. Although regulations on information and consultation rights should be transposed by means of the EU Directive into all countries - members of the EU and the process is currently at various stages of progress, this text will concentrate only on the effect they have in the UK, due to limitations of space and relevance to the topic of the essay. <heading>Form of Information and Consultation Regulations</heading>The Information and Consultation of Employees (ICE) Regulations entered into force in the UK on 6 April 2005, transposing the European Information and Consultation Directive in a framework agreed jointly by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), the Trade Union Congress (TUC) and the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), this multi-sided approach representing as Hall has rightly pointed out 'a notable departure in the UK context' (2005:104). Here several features of the regulations' form will be commented upon. <heading>Scope </heading>The implementation of the ICE Regulations in the UK has been divided into three stages - they apply to undertakings with at least 150 employees from April 2005, to those with at least 100 - from April 2007; and for those with at least 50 - from April 2008. Authors like Storey (2005:3) have argued that in this the new regulations' impact will be massive, 'with some 75 per cent of all employees in the country within [their] reach'. This may be true ultimately, if carried out properly and from 2008 onwards, but it still leaves a significant number of the employees in smaller establishments outside the coverage of the rights and very possibly, without representation at all. As Tailby and Winchester (2005:448) note 'information and consultation rights shall be denied to a quarter of the workforce when the regulations apply to undertakings with between 50 and 100 employees in 2008, just as more than 5 million workers currently are denied access to the statutory trade union recognition because they are in workplaces employing fewer than 21 people'. It is clear then that although the new ICE regulations will cover a major part of the workforce by 2008, there still remains a not negligible proportion of the workforce for which the new rights will have no impact at all. <heading>Trigger Mechanisms</heading>The legislation is triggered when a valid employee request (supported by at least 10% of the employees) is made to negotiate an Information and Consultation agreement, or an employer starts the process (DTI 2004). Although 10% of the work force may seem like an easily achieved figure on the surface, Hall (2005:113) draws attention to the fact that 'the [additional] specified minimum of 15 employees could be seen as a somewhat high hurdle in small undertakings, and at the other end of the scale, the maximum of 2,500 signatures can also be said to constitute a very stiff test in absolute terms'. Hall and Terry (2004:221) reinforce this argument, adding that that it is especially true 'in cases where agrees arrangements already provide for direct forms of information and consultation'. This demonstrates that employee willingness, familiarity with the procedures and commitment for ensuring mechanisms are in line with the regulations are crucial for starting the process in the first place. It is then equally visible that as Hall and Terry (2004:221) suggest 'employee apathy, perhaps combined with an awareness of lack of employer enthusiasm, could limit the take-up rate'. This lack of automatic trigger and the implicitly built voluntary start of the process may prove to be another reason for the new legal rights not to have a very widespread impact. <heading>Pre-existing Arrangements (PEAs)</heading>DTI (2004) specifies that pre-existing arrangements which have employee support may be retained. This allows for great flexibility on the employers' part, granting them the possibility to, as Hall (2005:111) puts it 'avoid unnecessary disruption to existing arrangements and rely on direct forms of information and consultation where these have the support of employees'. It could be said, that by providing the right to keep the status quo, the legislation once again limits the likely impact of new ICE rights as it guarantees even greater discretion to employers in their relations with employees. Moreover, Hall goes on to argue that the existence of PEAs 'then prompts the application of substantially higher thresholds of support for negotiations over the new information and consultation arrangements to take place (40% of the employees and the majority of those voting in the ballot)' (2005:115). These increased requirements, existing due to and alongside the fact that the keeping of PEAs is regulated by legislation, are another barrier to granting universal and unconditional rights to information and consultation to workers and could significantly diminish implications for the workforce. <heading>Forms of employee representation</heading>The provisions for different types of employee representation in the new regulations must also be addressed. Hall summarizes that 'the law prioritises information and consultation via the representatives of independent trade unions where they are recognized by employers, and that otherwise information and consultation should take place with representatives elected by employees under regulated balloting procedures' (2005: 113). It seems evident then that the successful implementation of the ICE regulations would largely depend on the sufficient expertise of the employee representatives balloted by their fellow workers. But as Hall goes on to point that 'it (...) seems odd that the Regulations do not provide the right to time off for employee representatives to undergo training' (2005: 116), a view not at odds with that of Davies et al (2004:151) who conclude that 'it is difficult to place much confidence in the quality of the consultation - or therefore in its potential for transforming work-place cultures - where (...) the representatives are inexperienced'. It is then clear why this feature of the regulations' form might not lead to significant implications for employment relations or at least not highly effective ones. It should be noted though, that however highly prescriptive the new legislation is, it incorporates the vision that, even with regard to form there is no 'one size fits all' solution. A survey executed by Welfare (2004:11) illustrates there is no uniform solution to consultation and information with 'arrangements ranging from purely direct forms of consultation with individual employees at some organisations to a patchwork of different arrangements with different groups of employees in some larger ones.' Various company-specific arrangements do exist but the above-mentioned points of the regulations' form affect all of them. <heading>Implications for parties concerned </heading><heading>Employees' perspective</heading>The new regulations introducing minimum standards for information and consultation of employees should, by definition, benefit employees first and foremost. They are a part of a more general framework, aiming at, as DTI states, 'introducing fair standards for employees and a better framework for industrial relations designed to promote both fairness and flexibility in the workplace' (2002: 8). One of the key elements in the new legislation with regard to employee participation is that it would bring forward mechanisms for representation of non union members, alongside union members (already represented by their relevant union), as the new regulations have to cover all employees. This would mean that as the Chief executive of the Work Foundation (the independent advisor on workplace issues) notes ' these [ICE] proposals have the potential to transform the way this country conducts relations at work' (quoted in IRS Employment Review 781:9; emphasis added). The question seems to emerge about if this general potential will be realized to bring the much promised advantages closer to employees. Several factors may hamper this with regard to employee participation. First of all, the success of the implementation the new rights to information and consultation largely depends on the awareness employees have of their existence and the ways to set procedures in motion. If employees have no or limited information about their own rights and the key role they have in triggering them, this could prove to be a serious hurdle for them to enforce these rights (see also Hall and Terry 2004). In addition, even if employees are informed about their new rights, they might be sceptical about their real potential to introduce change. Storey (2005:4) advances this argument by illustrating: <quote>[Employees] have, in recent years, witnessed and been party to a range of initiatives, many of which have entailed elements of an involved, and even empowered, approach. Team working, team briefings, town hall meetings, corporate videos, quality circles, TQM (total quality management), and Six Sigma to name a few, have entailed messages about the importance of involving employees. Accordingly, the basic message about involvement is not new, and beyond these direct forms of involvement, there may be even more scepticism about representational modes. </quote>It can be concluded then that, although apparently introducing new rights for employees in the course of the employment relationships, these rights may not initially mean significant implications for workers, due to their lack of awareness of new statutory rights or scepticism about their enforcement. <heading>Employers' views</heading>Being one of the sides to be consulted about the implementation of ICE regulations, CBI officially seems to support them, especially in the aspect that they allow a great scope of flexibility for employers. As the IRS Employment Review analysis confirms 'CBI is pleased that the proposals encourage voluntary arrangements and that they do not allow 'small groups of employees to overturn successful consultation arrangements' (781:8). Still, there is some sceptism among employers as well. Storey (2005) notes that the reasons for this sceptism stem from various sources including unwillingness to accept initiatives prompted by employees, dubious rationale of investment in information and consultation mechanisms and desire to keep the prerogative of managing processes for managers. Still, the inherent scope of flexibility in the new legislation guarantees employers the right, as Hall (2005:125) points out 'not [to] act unless 10% of their workforce triggers negotiations under the legislation'. Moreover, the absence of serious penalties for non-enforcement of new rights on the side of employees (maximum fine of £75,000) could encourage them to maintain their passive stance or even pay the fine but refuse employees certain kinds of information (see also Storey 2005). All this illustrates that, although employers may not feel the impact of new provisions to a great extent or even at all, what is more important is that this would lead to non-existent consequences for employees as well and could deny the workforce the chance to balance the power within the employee-employer relationship. <heading>Trade unions' reactions</heading>On the face of it, most major union bodies in the UK seem generally in favour of the new regulations as well. Their position can be summarized by TUC's General Secretary Brendan Barber, who claims that 'it's an opportunity for both employees and employers to improve the quality of working life and boost productivity' (quoted in IRS Employment Review 781:8) However, TUC's positive outlook could be largely attributed to the partner role it played in the formulation of proposals by the DTI, as arguably the attitude of trade unions towards the contents of the newly adopted regulations remains quite ambivalent. As Hall notes (2005:124) 'the fact that the Regulations establish information and consultation rights for employees, irrespective of union recognition, could present significant new opportunities (...) in terms of building influence in unorganised workplaces and aiding recruitment.' As far is the 'qualitative' aspect of union communication is concerned, he mentions that the increased breadth of issues to be covered under new rules 'could in many workplaces enable recognised unions to address a substantially broader agenda than is currently the case (2005:124). Yet the reality of union acceptance and activity with regard to the ICE regulations looks different. The unions' main suspicion seems to stem from the fear of allowing another tool to define the dialogue between actors in employment relationships, other than collective bargaining. Union officials feel that it might lead to the depreciation of this traditional institution. As Storey (2005:4) puts it 'to intrude a wholly, or partially, non-union mode of representation is seen as a potentially dangerous undermining of the organised workforce approach.' This argument is also present in Hall's analysis where he points out that 'union representatives regard the Regulations' workforce-wide approach to information and consultation as a threat to 'single channel' union-based representation arrangements where they exist' (2005:125). All this points to the conclusion that trade unions are currently quite wary of the consequences new regulations may have and would not act upon then as a possibility of gaining new positions in the fear of losing traditional ones. It then seems that the likely implications of ICE regulations for trade unions for the time being are very restricted. <heading>Conclusion</heading>It is clear that law and legal enactment are becoming more and more important with regard to regulating industrial relations in Britain. The new regulations on information and consultation rights for employees serve only to underpin the shift from the traditional voluntarist system of regulation to more statutory models, controlled by the state. Yet, by examining several features of the form, application and concerned parties' involvement with regard to new ICE regulations, this essay has attempted to demonstrate that, for the time being, they may not have the strong normative effect they have been predicted to have. As Hall states they 'do not constitute a new phenomenon and there is already a wide range of precedents and examples on which [skilled] negotiators will be able to draw' (2005:123). Moreover, and emphasizing the employers' flexibility in applying them, the same author argues that 'the ICE Regulations fallback provisions are extremely 'minimalist' in infrastructural terms, and offer little by way of an operational template' (2005:123). It can be inferred then that as Beaumont and Hunter (2003) predict their success will be strongly dependant on the will of trade unions and especially employers and employees to challenge their traditional perceptions. As DTI (2005:4-5) points out 'decision-making remains the responsibility of managers' but that could stem form inability to implement provisions properly, alongside as well as instead of some of their inherent features. In addition, as Beaumont and Hunter (2003) argue new legislative forms may mean that managers will be more likely to listen to their employees, recognize the benefits this different form of cooperation may bring and incorporate it in new styles of leadership. In summary, it is evident that new ICE regulations possess strong intrinsic potential to introduce new employee rights and take employer-employee interaction and cooperation to a new level, but there is great dependence on involved actors' interest, sufficient training of representatives and more proactive union response. It may be early days yet but these elements seem to be lacking currently in the employment relations with regard to ICE regulations which makes their effect for the time being if not dubious, then highly limited. Finally, it should be mentioned that as Hall (2005:125) notes 'it would be foolhardy to make firm predictions about the likely impact of the Regulations in practice'. This essay has attempted some tentative forecasts, based on current conditions, but it is a question to be further researched as the new legislation comes fully into force and begins to be implemented under the influence of different factors and actors. 