<heading>1. Introduction:</heading>Investors always need to monitor the performance of a company before and after investing in the company. Apart from checking financial figures like revenue, profit, etc. and financial ratios like profitability, gearing, etc., there are other issues like Weighted Cost of Capital, Free Cash Flow, company's policies on international finance, etc., which need to be considered while judging company performance. This report is for the existing shareholders of Centrica PLC and is aimed at critically analysing these issues. First, it gives a brief overview of Centrica PLC. Second, it calculates Weighted Average Cost of Capital of Centrica from 2001 till 2005 and explains the effect of its change on shareholder's wealth. Third, it explains the importance of free cash flow in analysing Centrica's position. Then, it evaluates Centrica's policy on international finance and discusses its susceptibility to takeover. Finally, it analyses Centrica's policy on environmental issues and concludes with some recommendation for shareholders. <heading>2. Company Overview:</heading>Centrica plc is a very large parent company having subsidiaries engaged in the provision of gas, electricity and energy-related products and services, the operation of gas fields and power stations, energy trading, roadside assistance and other motoring services, and the provision of financial services. [1] Its main focus is on energy and home-related services. It operates from sourcing and securing energy to providing a broad range of distinctive services to homes and businesses. Centrica plc was formed as a result of the de-merger of British Gas plc in February 1997 into Centrica plc and BG plc. <heading>Company Vision [2]: </heading><quote>"Centrica's vision is to be a leading supplier of energy and related services in our chosen markets. Our distinctive strategy is to create value for shareholders. This is at the heart of everything we do." </quote>As of 2005, Centrica serves customers in Britain, USA, Canada, and European market. [3] <heading>3. Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC):</heading>Broadly speaking, any business on a long term basis is financed either by Equity capital and/or by long term Debt capital. Equity relates to the funds provided by the company's shareholders whereas long term Debt relates to the loan, bonds and debentures. Each source of finance has its own cost associated with it and it is important to know the cost of capital in order to make informed financial and investment decisions. Since, businesses are normally financed by a mix of capital; Weighted Average Cost of Capital is a useful method to determine the average cost of capital mix. "It is a weighted average of the expected after-tax costs of debt and equity capital, in which the weights are the expected proportions of debt and equity financing." [4] It is important for the company shareholders to know the WACC figure as it tells whether the company is investing in projects having returns higher than WACC or not. The formula for WACC is given as follows [5]:  FORMULA  <list><heading>where E = total market value of equity</heading> B = total market value of debt ke = cost of equity capital  kd = cost of debt capital </list>The WACC for Centrica PLC over the five years period from 2001 to 2005 is calculated using the above formula as shown in the table below: <table/>Notes: (a) Risk Free Rate is taken as 4.5% from 21 st April 2006, Financial Times, UK. (b) Beta for Centrica PLC is taken as 0.9 from Manual (Index Constituents, Risk Measurement Service). [5] (c) Market Risk Premium is taken as 4.5% over the period based on the 4% - 6% of equity risk premium bandwidth given by Centrica PLC. [6] (d) The data is taken from FAME database. From the above table, it can be seen that WACC increased every year from 7.15 in 2001 to 9.06 in 2005. This was mainly due to the increase in the cost of debt as the company's long term debt was increasing over the period as compared to the shareholder's funds. This increasing WACC trend is in line with the WACC trend given in the report of Centrica PLC by Cheuvreux [7] as shown in the graph below: <figure/>WACC is useful while making investment decisions. But also changes in WACC are required to be monitored by shareholders as it might effect their wealth. This effect is similar to the effect of changes in capital structure on shareholders wealth. For shareholders to get the expected return on their investment, the return on invested capital (ROIC) should be at least greater than WACC. If ROIC is less than WACC then shareholder will not get their desired return as cost of debt will be fixed for a period and will have to be paid first from shareholders wealth. Thus, ROIC < WACC will decrease shareholders funds. For Centrica PLC, ROIC is always greater than WACC since the year 1999 which shows shareholders got minimum expected value on their investment. But, as it increased over the period it affected their wealth also. The increase in WACC is due to increase in cost of debt. During 2001 - 2003 period cost of debt was less than cost of equity which implies that the excess return above weighted cost of debt is shareholders wealth. But during this period weighted cost of debt was increasing resulting in relative reduction of the value spread and in turn shareholders wealth. In 2004, cost of equity is approximately equal to cost of debt while in the year 2005 it is less. Thus, it can be observed that return on shareholders funds is more than the value spread during 2001 - 2003 period but decreasing. During 2004, it's almost the same while during 2005 return on shareholders funds becomes less than the value spread. This is due to the change in WACC because of increase in cost of debt. However, converse would have been true if WACC changed due to weighted change in the cost of equity. Thus, changes in WACC considerably affect the shareholders wealth. <heading>4. Free Cash Flow:</heading>'Free Cash Flow' is an important measure to shareholders. This is the cash that is left over and available to the providers of the capital, after the payment of all cash expenses and operating investment required by the firm. It is a measure of the company's ability to generate cash and can be easily calculated from the company's cash flow statement. It is basically operating cash flow minus capital expenditure. An increase in free cash flow is useful for the investors as they can immediate benefit. Free cash flow can be used as one of the criterions for making investment decisions as it depicts company's financial position. Earnings can also be used as an indicator of the company's performance and position. But earnings can be manipulated and this is tougher in case of free cash flow. Hence, free cash flow is a better measure of company's position. [8] Most businesses fail because they do not forecast their future cash requirements in terms of their current free cash flow. It is the lack of cash flow that leads to the doom of a business. It also gauges a company's financial being. The significance of free cash flow is that it allows a company to take advantage of all the opportunities that enhance shareholder value. Without free cash, it is tough to develop new products, pay dividends, expand business by entering into mergers and acquisitions, pay interest on debentures and other forms of loans, etc... [8] Hence, it is an important indicator of company's future growth capability also. But free cash flow may not always be positive. A negative free cash flow might indicate heavy investments by the company which may be beneficial in the long-run. Thus, free cash flow signals a company's financial flexibility. A rising free cash flow implies a rising share price too as investors would like to invest in companies having more free cash to give as dividends. Hence, free cash flow is very important while analyzing company's position. The free cash flow of Centrica PLC for three year period of 2003 - 2005 is calculated using the following formula as shown in the table below: Free Cash Flow = (Operating Cash Flow) - (Tax Paid) + (Purchase/Sale of fixed assets) <table/>As seen from the table, Centrica's free cash flow position in 2005 is weaker than in 2004. Free cash flow amount decresed from 1527 mill GBP in 2004 to 346 mill GBP in 2005. [3] This decrease in free cash flow is because of the net cash outflow from investing activities due to the following two reasons: (a) Increase in fixed assets by investing in Property, plant and equipment resulting in cash outflow. In 2005, Centrica acquired gas - fired stations in UK and North America and gas storage resulting in increase in fixed assets from 3169 mill GBP in 2004 to 3670 mil GBP in 2005. [3] (b) Cash inflow due to disposal of subsidiary was 1404 mill GBP in 2004 as compared to 184 mill GBP in 2005. Centrica received cash due to disposal of AA in 2004. [3] Thus, it can be derived that Centrica's cash position has weaken in 2005 because of the reasons explained above. This does not mean that the company is declining; in fact the cash has been invested in assets to generate future cash benefits. This is good for the shareholders in a long run. <heading>5. Centrica's Policy on International Finance:</heading><heading>5.1 International Expansion: </heading>Apart from UK, Centrica also operates in North America (USA and Canada) and Europe. Even though, Centrica entered the international market recently but made good progress in the energy and related services by establishing a strong foundation in these market by many major acquisitions and mergers. Centrica is making huge foreign investments in order to have strong presence in the international market and reap benefits of becoming big MNC. <heading>5.1.1 North America: </heading>Centrica plc entered the North American market in August 2000 by acquiring Direct Energy, provider of energy and home services and is now one of the largest providers of deregulated retail energy services. [2] Now, it has got Direct Energy, WTU Retail Energy and CPL Retail Energy brands to supply gas, electricity and related services to business and residential customers across North America. Even though Centrica expanded in the North American market, the financial benefits were not significant till 2004. But in the year 2005, it showed 58% increase in Turnover to 3552 million GBP (2004: 2242 million GBP) and 40% increase in Operating Profit to 185 million GBP (2004: 132 million GBP). [3] These improved financial results are mainly contributed to the positive effects of the acquisitions like ATCO retail, Residential Services Group (RSG), etc. taken by the company over the period. <heading>5.1.2 Recommendations:</heading>Centrica's current decision of expanding in the North American market is good for the financial growth of the company. This is because, energy market in North America is huge as compared to UK as shown in the figure below [2]: <figure/><figure/><figure/>Also, strong knowledge and experience synergies with Centrica UK like sales channel management, product design, operational processes, assets and risk management, automation and energy management technology for business, etc helps to compete effectively in the North American market. Centrica's approach of entering the North American market by way of acquisition is also valid and proper since the acquired companies already have the operational and customer base which makes it easy for Centrica to establish itself and become competitive. Also, the local market knowledge of the acquired company helps in operational ease. <heading>5.2. Currency Risk:</heading>Currency risk is the risk that the Group suffers financial loss as a result of changes in the value of an asset or liability or in the value of future cash flows due to movements in foreign currency exchange rates. [3] Centrica group has operational exposure in US and Canadian dollars and euros through its subsidiaries in US, Canada and Europe. The Group's policy on Net Investment hedges and operating Cash flow hedges are explained as under: <heading>5.2.1 Net Investment Hedges:</heading>The Group's policy is to use balance sheet hedging instruments for maintaining the sterling value of its foreign currency investment. Canadian dollar and euro balance sheet translation exposure is hedged by maintaining and approximating the foreign currency financial liabilities to the net asset value of the Canadian and Euro based operations. This is done by holding either foreign currency debt or entering into foreign currency derivatives or a mixture of both. Thus, changes in the sterling value of borrowings or derivatives are used to offset changes in the sterling value of the investments. Similarly, US dollar balance sheet translation exposure is hedged by borrowing on a short-term basis through a US commercial paper programme. [3] <heading>5.2.2 Operating Cash Flow Hedges:</heading>The Group's policy is to use forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge the risk of future foreign currency cash flows variation with changes in foreign exchange rates by fixing the sterling value of a specified foreign currency amount on a specified basis. Centrica Group achieved the Net fair value gain of 408 million GBP in the year 2005 which is attributable to equity holders of the company by using cash flow hedging. [3] This shows Group's policy of using forward contracts is paying off. <heading>5.3. Accounting Standards:</heading>Till end 2004, Centrica followed UK GAAP accounting standard. But from 1 st January 2005, it shifted to International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS) in order to comply with the European Regulation for reporting financial statements. Adopting international accounts reporting standard made it easier for Centrica PLC to be quoted on the stock exchange having its own country accounting standards followed. <heading>6. Centrica: A good take over target or not? </heading>Since the de - merger of British Gas PLC in February 1997, Centrica PLC has grown at a rapid pace in UK as well as in the international market. Centrica meets 63 per cent of gas requirements and 23 per cent of electricity requirements of Britain and has a customer base of 11.7 million. [9] It is also the largest supplier of electricity and gas to residential customers in Britain. [3] Earlier it used to operate in different areas like telecommunication, motoring services, etc but with the sale of its major subsidiaries i.e., Goldfish, AA and OneTel over the past three years, it has now changed its strategy to focus on its key business area of providing energy and related services. The financial and market strength has been increasing at an impressive rate since it was formed in 1997. Its turnover increased over this period except in 2005 where it decreased to 13448 mil GBP due to the increase in the energy prices. [3] However, despite volatile market conditions its profit during 2005 was higher than previous years. It shows an upward profitability trend over the period which indicates a strong financial strength. Also, it has grown in its assets and customer base indicating increase in the market share. It also started gaining benefits from investment in North America with impressive increase in profit and turnover in 2005. Thus, it can be derived that Centrica is financially strong and growing company. Broadly, any company becomes a takeover target under two conditions. First when the company is financially weak and its market is declining which is not the case with Centrica. Secondly, when the company is financially strong and has good market share. Company might like to takeover such companies either to expand their business or because of fear of being taken over by that company or losing business to that company. The above reasons hold valid for Centrica PLC being taken over as it has strong hold in UK market, good presence in North American market and has established itself in the European market. Hence, Centrica PLC can be considered as a good takeover target for the companies operating in the same or similar industry. The companies that might be interested and have the financial capability to bid for Centrica PLC are Royal Dutch Shell, Gaz de France, Norsk Hydro, E.ON Group, RWE Group, etc. These companies are strong European giants and have global presence. Companies like E.ON and RWE have their subsidiaries in UK named E.ON Powergen and RWE npower which are direct competitor to Centrica in UK market. Hence, Centrica is an attractive takeover target for these companies to increase their market share in the UK and is also a proper fit for their businesses. This above argument can also be supported by the increase in the share price of Centrica over speculation of its take over. Centrica shares went up to 8% during a fevered period of trading inspired by the speculation of the Scandinavian energy outfit Norsk Hydro leading as a potential buyer along with Shell and Gaz de France as mentioned in reports by Bloomberg. [10] In fact, Norsk Hydro was negotiating with Centrica on take over issues but the talks later faltered on the reservations of Norwegian government. [10] Also, Dow Jones considers Centrica as an attractive takeover target mainly because UK gas market bottleneck will ease after from 2007. [11] All above confirms Centrica PLC to be a good take over target. <heading>7. Environmental Issues: </heading>Centrica is the UK's biggest residential gas and electricity supplier. Its policies towards environment are as follows [2]: (a) To reduce the direct impact of Centrica's activities on the environment. (b) To reduce the indirect impact of Centrica's products and services by helping the customers to make informed decision about its use. The above policies are implemented by [2]: (a) Implementing sound environmental management system. (b) Improving resource efficiency especially in transport, energy and waste. (c) Contributing environmental stewardship. (d) Working with stakeholders to improve communication. As a public limited company having huge stakeholder base mainly as shareholders and customers, Centrica need to have policies which adhere to strict environmental legislation. This is important for the long term success of the business. It is operating in the energy and related services sector which has higher impact on the environment as compared to other industry sectors like software, telecommunication, etc. The direct and indirect impact of Centrica's activities on different areas of the environment is as shown in the figure below [2]: <table/>From the figure above, it can be seen that the major environmental impact areas are climate change, air pollution, waste and hazardous chemicals. These impact areas are related to the gas and power provision industry which forms major business of Centrica. Recently, the impact have increased due to the acquisitions of 7 gas - fired power stations in the UK, 2 in North America and a gas storage facility in UK. [2] This is because power stations and storage facility by their very nature raises air pollution through emission of hazardous substances and climate change gases. Also, British Gas being UK's largest domestic central heating and gas appliance installation company, it is responsible for significant emission of greenhouse gases. [2] Also, use of resources like fuel emission from vehicle transportation and building lighting and heating also add to the impact. Since the impacts are very severe on the environment, Centrica is minimizing them using the policies stated above by implementing sound environmental management system (EMS) and involving stakeholders to work together towards achieving the targets and objectives. The successful implementation of the policies can be understood from its compliance with most of the environmental legislation and its target achievement success rates. Centrica's also looks into the future by investing in the resources like wind farms for providing renewable sources of energy. As more strict and new norms and regulations are being enforced by the government due to environmental concerns, investing in renewable sources of energy will be beneficial for the future success of the business. This policy and strategy for future has helped Centrica to meet UK Government's Renewables Obligation (RO) of providing a percentage of electricity generated from renewable sources and fared best amongst other licensed suppliers as can be seen from the chart below [12]: <figure/>Even though Centrica followed its policies to comply with environment legislation, its target of achieving ISO 14001 certification only for its selected UK businesses [2] and not for all businesses is a non - compliance which is not acceptable at least for big multinational public limited company. ISO 14001 is a specification to help companies design environmental management system (EMS) for ensuring compliance with legislation. Getting ISO 14001 certification for all of its businesses will demonstrate to its stakeholders like customers, shareholders, employees, etc that the company is managing its environmental affairs properly and within system. This will in turn help Centrica to promote and market its products and services and compete more effectively. Centrica's businesses not adopting ISO 14001 might fail with their EMS which may lead to some breach of government consents and it might face heavy fines or actions for environmental damages. This will result in bad reputation and market decline thereby affecting the overall profit. Hence, non compliance will affect its financial performance and growth which is not acceptable. <heading>8. Conclusion and Recommendations:</heading>In short, it can be inferred from above that Weighted Average Cost of Capital should be used with other ratios in reaching investment decisions. And it is recommended that shareholders should monitor how WACC changes as it affects their wealth. Also, free cash flow is useful in analyzing company's position. Centrica's policy on international expansion is giving benefits especially from North America with increased profit in 2005. Its investment in North America and Europe will give future benefits. Also, currency risk is minimized by used different hedging techniques which are saving money to the company. Centrica is an attractive takeover target with many international competitors eyeing on it, but due to its strong financial position it not susceptible to being taken over. However, Centrica doesn't seem to be interested in being taken over as they started share buy back program in 2004 to become more self - reliant. [3] Centrica strictly adheres to its environmental policies but its non - compliance of not adopting ISO 14001 for all of its business might harm the business and in turn the shareholders in future. 