The Immoralist focuses on one central character, Michel, and his psychological changes as he moves from a prescribed, reserved way of life and love to a strong sensual desire to live more fully and to live only for himself. This culminates in a frightening ethic of individualism based purely on his impulses, be they positive or negative. The result is that he becomes so involved in himself that he neglects his wife to the point of abandonment, and she dies alone. Of course other characters are involved in this transformation. His wife Marceline and his enigmatic friend Ménalque play particularly important roles, however there is often critical debate over the function and validity of the two as actual human characters. Marceline is variously described by critics as 'spirit of waiting, endurance and immobility' and 'l'honnetete' personified. She is generally agreed to be imbued with the noble characteristics of love, faith and patience, which she shows to her husband 'with the strength of her love... tender care she took care of me'. However this story is in first person narrative through the eyes of Michel alone. It soon becomes clear that he lies throughout the narrative 'Marceline... would have stopped me' pg26 when there is nothing to suggest she would be so controlling 'I seemed to recall I was quite calm' pg26 when he has just described the horror he felt when coughing up a blood clot. We are aware that we cannot, therefore, take anything that he says at face value. Many critics complain that Marceline, for example, says very little, she is often described as 'silent' and because of this cannot be analysed as a person or character in her own right. However if we are seeing her from Michel's perspective, it is important to note that firstly, he only recognises her as an individual when he leaves to go to Tunis with her 'she to whom I had attached my life had a whole real life of her own' pg19. Even after this occurs, the person he discovers her to be is someone attached to his previously gentle and intellectual way of life and thinking. As his worldview becomes more and more self-centred, she appears to him as an obstacle, stopping him from doing what he wants, which is whatever pleases him at the time. Marceline may well be a very intelligent character, full of depth, but from the viewpoint of our protagonist that really does not matter at all. Marceline is silent perhaps, because Michel does not want to listen to her. <fnote>Fowlie, Wallace André Gide: His Life and Art pg 51 (Macmillan: New York) 1965 </fnote><fnote>Ireland, G.W André Gide, a Study of his Creative Writings pg 197 (Oxford: Clarendon) 1970 </fnote><fnote>Gide, Andr éThe Immoralist pg 22 (Penguin) 2000 (All further page references are taken from this edition) </fnote><fnote>Fowlie, Wallace Andre Gide: His Life and Art pg 53 (Macmillan: New York) 1965 </fnote>She represents what he is rebelling against, his former self. She is also later associated with his illness, something that he loathes and detests. Michel identifies Marceline as 'weak' and 'spoiled' when she is affected by the illness he probably gave to her in the first place, and increasingly abandons her to follow his own pursuits. Adolphe Jacques Dickman reads this story as 'the drama of fulfilment of the self' and that this involves the 'sacrifice' of the weaker Marceline: <fnote>Dickman, Adolphe-Jacques "André Gide, the Critical Novelist" in The Modern Language Journal, Vol. 17, No.7. April 1933 pg 496 published by National Federation of Modern Language Teachers Associations - accessed 23/04/06 via  URL  </fnote><quote>'By the weak is often meant those that are the most delicate, the most principled, and the most moral; because those who have not dared reject moral constraint cannot fully realise their own self and cannot come into close contact with those who might have helped them to do so. Placed before this dilemma, the stronger are those who choose themselves, unequivocally (especially if they feel real value in themselves) as much justification in this choice as in the less egocentric alternatives.'</quote><fnote>Dickman, Adolphe-Jacques "André Gide, the Critical Novelist" in The Modern Language Journal, Vol. 17, No.7. April 1933 pg 496 published by the National Federation of Modern Language Teachers Associations - accessed 23/04/06 via  URL  </fnote>This is basically how Michel ends up viewing the world. Marceline notes this perfectly 'it leaves out the weak' pg112. He refers to his new self as authentic and true, because he thinks that to truly live, one must simply follow impulse and even claims that the inhuman impulses are the purest and therefore most authentic and true. However, that this results in the death of an innocent woman casts a severely critical light on individualism and the extremes it can lead to. Marceline is therefore key to Gide's critique of the concept, even though she speaks and acts very little. The fact that she is so carelessly pushed into the background speaks volumes for her. We cannot really tell if she is the weak character Michel claims she is, because he is a completely untrustworthy source of information, but even if she is, the reader cannot justify his treatment of her. Michel's view of Marceline as an obstacle is clearly a biased view. The reader can quite easily see Marceline as a positive force in Michel's life, constantly attempting to save him from completely indulging his egoism. Without her death there would be no consequences to Michel's actions, nothing to bring him to his senses. She is the only character who immediately sees and responds to Michel's metamorphosis 'you like what is inhuman.' In her death she helps him see what he has done and is still doing to himself, but even all her faith and love cannot stop him. He refuses even her prayers, for fear of being indebted to God and is determined to cure himself. He also attempts to hide his new self from her 'I offered only an image of myself which... became falser and falser each day' pg49. When Marceline does speak she makes it clear that she sees the change in her husband 'I understand your doctrine... but it leaves out the weak' pg112. However it is possible to see Marceline as a purely representational device. In this light she represents physically Michel's spiritual state, and as she weakens, so does Michel's grasp on his previous life, until finally she spends her last night on earth completely alone, dying without comfort. She represents the final rejection of Michel's old ways; he has pushed them away to the point where there is no going back. Marceline even rejects her rosary on her deathbed. His new personality has not just destroyed but consumed and transformed his old life to the point where it is unrecognisable. Another way to view the character of Marceline, again in a more representational then human way, is the balancing force to the character Ménalque. The influence of this character on Michel is undeniable. Michel leaves his wife dying in order to simply drink and talk with this figure. Most critics view him as the catalyst in the story. Before meeting him Michel is in a 'tenuous state of equilibrium', his newfound impulse to "live" at any cost balanced only by his wife's patience and care. Ménalque tips the scales completely, offering to Michel a kind of individualism-in-action, not just a way of thinking, but also a way of living. Michel has not yet put his thoughts into real practice at this point and the prospect is appealing. <fnote>Brée, Germaine Gide pg137 (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press) 1963 </fnote>Alan Sheridan compares Michel's relationship with Ménalque to that of Gide and his relationship with Oscar Wilde. Although some events in the book closely match those in Gide's life, (like his journey to Africa, an illness, and a marriage requested by a parent on their deathbed), equating the personalities of his characters with people in his life is problematic. Brée claims that Ménalque 'recalls certain aspects of Gide himself." She also says Gide was a very conflicted man and I find it far more likely that rather than using one character to represent himself, if he does represent himself at all, he would use all the characters to reflect the conflicting aspect s of his personality e.g. Marceline's faith as the influence of his religious upbringing. <fnote>Sheridan, Alan "Introduction" in Gide, Andr éThe Immoralist pg vii (Penguin) 2000 </fnote><fnote>Brée, Germaine Gide pg136 (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press) 1963 </fnote>Brée comments on critics that suggest that Ménalque also highlights Michel's latent homosexuality, previously hinted at in his preoccupation with the appearance of Bachir 'That is what I fell in love with - his health. This small body was in beautiful health' pg26. Indeed Christopher Bettison makes this allusion about his 'obvious attraction for Melanque's appearance'. Brée however is adamant that Ménalque himself makes no suggestion that would encourage Michel in this way, that he merely shows him the ethical system by which he can live, as he does. Brée makes the point that critics of the novel overly pinpoint Michel's homosexuality, and that this is not its main focus 'much has been said about his latent homosexuality, a great deal too much'. However I would point out that Melanque's speech is often very affectionate and could be construed to be the language of attraction ' "This sadness this caused me revealed to me how strong my affection for you is..."... grabbing my hand.... "Can I count on you to spend this last night with me?"' pg82 I think that the new system of ethics being offered by Ménalque, in order to be based on individualism and basic impulse must necessarily include sexual impulses. It is the way that Bachir is so full of life that attracts the ailing Michel to him in the first place and starts him off on the road to pure egoism. If Ménalque does not highlight or suggest the indulgence of Michel's sexuality with explicitly with him, the life he proposes and lives out himself would do so implicitly; it would be what it truest and most authentic for Michel. At the time it was written, this would have been deemed an unnatural impulse; the exact kind that Michel has decided is in fact the truest. <fnote>Bettinson, Christopher David A Student's Guide to Gide pg21 (London: Heinemann Educational) 1979 </fnote><fnote>Brée, Germaine "Form and Content in Gide" in The French Review Vol. 30 No. 6 May 1957pg 424 published by the American Association of Teachers of French - accessed 23/4/06 via  URL  </fnote>Brée goes on to describe Ménalque as a 'true pre-Sartrean hero who assumes a mode of life that corresponds to his exigencies' and who 'warns rather than perverts' Michel. Having re-read the passages involving Ménalque, I can only disagree. The only way to take up this view is if we view Ménalque himself as the embodiment of a warning, which Michel fails to pick up on. I can only find evidence in the text which points to Ménalque goading Michel on further into his self-obsession and immoral lifestyle 'The slightest hint that you might be one of them [people of principle] froze me in mid sentence. I hoped I was mistaken....' Pg82 <fnote>Brée, Germaine Gide pg138 (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press) 1963 </fnote>Davies makes a very scathing judgement of both characters and picks up on an issue discussed by many critics. It is often commented that Gide's writing is very dramatic, his characters often not well developed, which leads to the reader's difficulty in being really engaged with the story. Davies goes further than this, stating that 'minor characters exist purely in terms of their functional purpose, which is to serve as stimuli for setting in motion the psychological reactions of Michel'. For him they are 'cogs in a wheel' who 'hardly exist in their own right' with 'little more than symbolic value'. He describes Ménalque as 'a mouthpiece for the ideas which are to insinuate themselves gradually into Michel's mind.' He is 'a phase in the development of Michel's mental attitude', the 'ideal embodiment of certain principles of individualism' 'so ideal that he fails to come to life' appearing and disappearing once his 'mission as converter is accomplished." As for Marceline, she is reduced to a character 'without the depth or substance of real life and existing primarily for the reactions she provokes.' <fnote>Davies, J.C. Gide: 'L'Immoraliste' and 'La Porte etroite' pg 36 (London: Edward Arnold) 1968 </fnote><fnote>Davies, J.C. Gide: 'L'Immoraliste' and 'La Porte etroite' pg 36 (London: Edward Arnold) 1968 </fnote><fnote>Davies, J.C. Gide: 'L'Immoraliste' and 'La Porte etroite' pg 37 (London: Edward Arnold) 1968 </fnote>There are varying critical responses to this question of reality and humanity in the two characters who appear to be the angel and devil on Michel's shoulders. Thomas suggests that Marceline 'succeeds in pervading the work with a potent charm of presence' and Fowlie says she is 'silent, but the reader has no difficulty in imagining her thoughts.' Yet in the same article she refers to her as 'more a warning than a woman.' <fnote>Thomas, Laurence André Gide: Ethic of the Artist pg 129 (London: Secler and Worburg) 1950 </fnote><fnote>Fowlie, Wallace André Gide: His Life and Art pg 53 (Macmillan: New York) 1965 </fnote>A lot of what Davies says about Ménalque appears to me to be true. He lacks any real human qualities and disappears as suddenly and mystically as he appears. Marceline at least has positive human qualities we can relate to. However it is true that most of the other characters in the book simply provoke reactions in Michel. Marceline tries to bring him back to his former self, but ends providing something for him to rebel against, and Ménalque gives him the final push he needs to put his thoughts into action. Marceline's death serves to awaken Michel to what he has caused with his relentlessly self-centred lifestyle. Beyond this the characters do and say very little. I would argue, however that this does not make them unimportant characters. Their two dimensionality may be due to the fact that Michel sees people this way because he is so wrapped up in himself. The fact that their functions are very clear in the novel may well be a device to make the reader more aware of Michel and the effect they have on him, rather than what they are like themselves. At the end of the day, the only developed character in this story is the man protagonist, through whose eyes we continually see. He is far too concerned with himself to be bothered with anyone else, and accordingly so are we. What I find interesting about his relationship with Ménalque is that in following his advice he is almost returning to ethical system he was following at the start. He complains that ever since he was born he has never really lived, just followed rules set down by others, mindlessly and unquestioningly. Although he does attempt to question Melanque's version of individualism, eventually he finds himself agreeing. 'You can't expect them all to be different... I realized what I had said was stupid' pg81. In my opinion this shows Michel to be the weak character that Marceline realises is excluded from his philosophy. He is not even strong enough to put his own theory into practice without the push from Ménalque. Alan Sheridan expands on this, stating that the book is 'an exploration of what can happen if such ideas fall into the hands of someone too weak to sustain them'. He also supports my point that Michel cannot live the individualist life that Ménalque proposes 'this supposed Nietzschean complains of his lack of will and is reduced to calling on his friends to get him out of his North African lethargy.' <fnote>Sheridan, Alan "Introduction" in Gide, André The Immoralist pg viii (Penguin) 2000 </fnote><fnote>Sheridan, Alan "Introduction" in Gide, André The Immoralist pg ix (Penguin) 2000 </fnote>Ménalque is also a key part in Gide's satire. He represents an ideal to which Michel becomes determined to live, but cannot without sacrificing something, which ends up being Marceline, the only one who really looked out for his ethical well being. Davies points out this idealism as the characteristic of Ménalque, which prevents him from coming to life for the reader. Perhaps again this was intentional on the part of Gide, he is a product of these ideal values and therefore cannot be seen as a real person. People like Ménalque simply do not exist because his lifestyle is impossibly idealistic. Marceline and Ménalque are difficult to analyse because they appear so little in the story in comparison to the main protagonist. However this does not make them irrelevant because they both have huge impacts on the way Michel thinks, which is of course the main focus of the novel. Gide is not concerned with creating a cast of complex characters who we grow to know and care bout, and besides, he has one character that is complex enough on his own to make up for the others. 