I have chosen to look at these novels because they incorporate mythic and/or fairytale elements, sometimes in similar ways and even to similar ends. Some are obvious but I have included some ideas that are not explicitly myths/fairytales, and I would like to begin by explaining the choices I have made. Winterson's novel relies heavily on Biblical ideology, as well as fairytale elements, and is even structured by it, the chapter titles named for biblical books of the Old Testament. The Oxford English Dictionary defines 'myth' as ' A traditional story, typically involving supernatural beings or forces, which embodies and provides an explanation, aetiology, or justification for something such as the early history of a society, a religious belief or ritual, or a natural phenomenon'. The Old Testament, whilst following the historical story of the Jewish nation searching for freedom, also includes stories that fall under this category, so I will be including references to biblical texts in my analysis. I will also be including references to Freudian concepts. The dictionary offers a second definition of the word 'myth' as 'A widespread but untrue or erroneous story or belief; a widely held misconception; a misrepresentation of the truth.' In his time Freud was widely respected as pioneer in psychological studies but many of his ideas have been disproved are and a lot of his research has been dismissed, especially in relationo to sexual theory. Much of the criticism I have come across refers to them as 'Freudian myths' or 'social myths' and it is for these reasons that I will also be including them in my analysis. <fnote>Both definitions found at  URL  </fnote><fnote>Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essays p77 </fnote>The plot of The Magic Toyshop itself resembles a fairytale. Linden Peach points out the journey, the dumb mute and metamorphoses as prominent fairytale motifs. Others are clearly the tyrannical character of Uncle Philip and the death of the children's parents leaving them orphaned. <fnote>Peach, Linden Angela Carter p64 </fnote>Uncle Philip is a difficult character to analyse. On first reading the novel I found him to be one dimensional, and many critics are in agreement, claiming him to be 'less a character than a barely embodied principle' and a 'parody patriarch'. Many critics writing in the 90s view him as so ridiculous that it makes the 'model of dominant masculinity' that he clearly represents seem 'implausible'. However earlier critics take him as a serious character, placing the relationship between Philip, his puppets and his family as 'symbolic of the control exerted by a partiarchal culture on women and the roles available to them'. This is clearly a feminist assertion, with Uncle Philip as a symbol of a dominant and oppressive patriarchal system. There are many other ways in which Carter uses fairytale and myth to challenge a male dominated world, what is interesting is that she turns these stories on themselves to point out the ways in which they themselves have constructed the patriarchal society that women find themselves trapped in. <fnote>Gamble, Sarah Angela Carter: Writing From The Front Line p71 </fnote><fnote>Sage, Lorna Angela Carter quoted in The Fiction of Angela Carter Sarah Gamble ed. Pg. 37 </fnote><fnote>Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essay p75 </fnote><fnote>Palmer, Pauline From Coded Mannequin to Bird Woman: Angela Carter's Magic Flight in The Fiction of Angela Carter ed. Sarah Gamble pg 33 </fnote>The most obvious reference to myth is to Leda and the Swan. Carter uses parody here again to mock the role that the myth places the woman in and the masculine values that drive it. The swan itself is ridiculous, like Uncle Philip himself 'It was dumpy and homely and eccentric. She nearly laughed to see its lumbering progress' pg165. Sarah Gamble points out that the systems greatest weakness is that it is 'sustained by the force of its subjects belief'. The myths and fairytales which work to place women as subject to the force of men can be very simply overturned when we cease to believe that what we are being told is true. On a more serious note, the swan parody juxtaposes romantic, artistic notions of femininity with the very real facts of sexual violence. As Wyatt suggests, any version of Leda and the Swan completely romantices the fact that a rape is occuring e.g. Yeats' poem. This consistent placing of women as inferior in traditional stories is what has led to the construction of feminine identities in society. Carter uses the story itself to reveal how unrealistic and prejudiced these stories are. <fnote>Carter, Angela The Magic Toyshop Virago 2003 (This edition is used for all further page references) </fnote><fnote>Gamble, Sarah Angela Carter: Writing From The Front Line p72 </fnote><fnote>Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essay pg 65/66 </fnote>However Linden Peach also points out that on one level the novel works as a simple reactionary fairytale. Traditionally fairytales were used as cautionary tales, according to Peach, for the 'socialisation of young women'. In a way the novel follows this pattern. Melanie believes that because she stole her mother's wedding dress she has somehow caused the death of her parents. This could be seen, in a very simple light, as a warning to little girls that they should be wary of trying to grow up too fast. However the novel begins by going into detail about Melanie's exploration of her own maturing body. Peach points out, correctly in my view, that the novel here is emphasising something that traditional fairytales would have suppressed. Girls in fairytales are generally obedient, virginal figures of purity and they do not feel the excitement which Melanie experiences discovering the changes in her body. In this way Carter is writing her own version of a fairytale, placing a female character at the forefront and pitting her against traditional female roles. Melanie clearly has the intelligence and sexual freedom to take on the male defined visions of feminity which she is constantly pushed into. However Carter does not, arguably make her entirely successful. The Leda and the Swan episode suggests that these roles, though ridiculous and grandiose, are so established that in a sense she must experience them before she can escape them. It appears that she is not strong enough to immediately overthrow them by herself. This poses problems for the novel as a feminist text. As Pauline Palmer suggests it is difficult to 'represent a female protagonist as a victim...while at the same tme portraying her as an autonomous individual." When Melanie falls victim to the swan, she falls victim to male dominance. Perhaps Carter is criticising the system but finds that she can offer no alternative? Dworkin suggests that these myths are not 'adequately revisioned' and that Carter fails in her attempt to create a 'female erotic'  <fnote>Peach, Linden Angela Carter pg 74 </fnote><fnote>Peach, Linden Angela Carter pg 75 </fnote><fnote>Palmer, Pauline From Coded Mannequin to Bird Woman: Angela Carter's Magic Flight in The Fiction of Angela Carter ed. Sarah Gamble pg36/37 </fnote><fnote>Dworkin, Andrea quoted in Peach, Linden Angela Carter pg74 </fnote>One aspect of this failure could be the fact that some critics see Finn as Uncle Philips successor, meaning that even at the end, when Uncle Philip is gone, the system of patriarchy will continue. Lucie Armitt points out that it is not Uncle Philip who imposes the dress and behaviour code on Melanie, but Finn 'he said violently "No, you can't wear them!"'pg62. She also claims that the two 'do not just share a pheonetic similarity of names, they also share a fascnation with women as spectacular commodity'. I think that taking into account Finn's paintings of Melanie and the peep hole he creates to watch her undress is evidence to support the latter claim. However Finn is clearly not to be placed in the same category. He fails to perform the rape he is ordered to and clearly despises not only his uncle as a person, but also what he stands for. '"He wanted me to do you and he set the scene. Ah he's evil!"'. <fnote>Armitt, Lucie Contemporary Women's Fiction and the Fantastic quoted in The Fiction of Angela Carter ed. Sarah Gamble pg 45 </fnote>The peep hole can also be read as a reference to the story by Hoffman, The Sandman. In the Sandman as well as The Magic Toyshop it is the male who is the voyeur. This is another example of myth and culture overriding subjectivity. Women are generally seen from the perspective of a man. Melanie reverses the gaze, and simply by doing this, according to Palmer, Carter makes gender roles more flexible, bringing her and Finn closer to being equals. <fnote>Palmer, Pauline From Coded Mannequin to Bird Woman: Angela Carter's Magic Flight in The Fiction of Angela Carter ed. Sarah Gamble pg 35 </fnote>Jean Wyatt disagrees with this. He claims that Carter 'rewrites Freud's account of a girl's oedipal transformation', exploring the 'pressures exerted to... coerce a girl into accepting the limitations of feminity' but also offering an 'alternative masculinity'. Wyatt takes a post-feminist stance by positing Finn as a victim of the patriarchal system too. He claims that Carter takes the Fruedian concept of 'castration' and twists it by having Finn 'castrate' himself, symbolised in his chopping up of the swan '"I dismembered it... I chopped it into small pieces"'pg171. Finn thereby forefeits his 'privilege of masculinity' and creates a a different relationship between men and women, in which they are presented as equals. 'Their experience ran parallel'pg173 He quotes John Haffenden saying 'psychological domination is ultimately the failure to recognise the other person as like, although separate from oneself." When Melanie sees Finn and herself as equals they can build an entirely new relationship and, eventually, destroy the system that separated them in the first place. In this way Carter uses the Leda myth to criticise the system, but also takes a Freudian myth and manipulates it to offer a different system, based on equality. <fnote>Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essays pg 59/60 </fnote><fnote>Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essay pg 67 </fnote><fnote>Haffenden, John Novelists in Interview pg 80 quoted in Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essays pg 69 </fnote>Another Freudian idea which Carter tackles is the theory of female maturity. Freud empasised a woman's anatomical 'lack' when compared to that of a man, and claimed that is was the recognition of this 'lack' which finally compelled her to take her place as a passive being. In Melanie's case it is the swan-rape which forces her to see this 'She felt she cast no shadow'pg68 and puts her in her place in the system. But this is not something which Melanie subconciously discovers about herself, it is forced upon her. Wyatt takes this to be symbolic of the Freudian myth itself, a theory so strong that it itself has the power to be a 'castrating process that strips a girl of her active impulses'. <fnote>Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essay pg65 </fnote>At the start of the novel however, it appears that Melanie has already placed herself in the system, without the help of Uncle Philip or his phallic swan. She poses for male artists such as Lautrec and wraps white veils around her face, almost in parallel with Uncle Philip's vision of how a girl should be '"That is how he sees you. White chiffon and flowers in your hair."'pg141. Wyatt says 'she unwittingly acknowledges her subjection' by seeing herself from a male perspective. However Gamble counters this by suggesting that 'a...self-absorbed auto-eroticism keeps breaking through... showing that the real desire is in fact herself." 'forgetting the fantasy in sudden absorption in the mirrored play of muscle as she flexed her leg.'pg2 From Gamble's perspective this is a much more feminist assertion and Carter has given Melanie even more power to break away from patriarchy. However the fact remains that she cannot do this by herself, she has to endure Uncle Philips regime before she can escape it. It seems that these myths are ingrained into society, constantly overriding our own subjectivity, and that although there is the possibility of destroying them, it cannot be done simply or easily. <fnote>Wyatt, Jean The Violence of Gendering: Castration Images in Angela Carter's The Magic Toyshop, The Passion of New Eve and Peter and the Wolf in Alison Easton ed. Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essay pg 69 </fnote><fnote>Gamble, Sarah Angela Carter: Writing From The Front Line pg 69 </fnote>One story which has obviously had huge influence is the Biblical story of creation. The use of it challenges a myth which clearly endorses women's inferiority to men, placing it in a paganistic setting and looking at it from a female perspective Carter makes obvious reference to it at the start as Melanie climbs up the apple tree to get to her window, very self-conscious of her own nakedness 'She felt a new and final kind of nakedness'pg21. It is also mentioned in the end when Finn and Melanie look from the garden to the burning toyshop. This ending has prompted a number of responses. Gamble makes the point that having destroyed Uncle Philip, and along with him his patriarchal system of living, neither of these characters really know what to do. 'The Magic Toyshop is unable to think beyond the breakdown of ideological structures which it itself has initiated." This is of course dismissing Wyatts theory that they have in fact created a new system of equality. Aidan Day takes a more positive view of the ending: 'they are not about to leave... as the sinful children of a wrathful patriarchal God. The mythology of sin has been purged." Again this rings true, but Carter still does not appear to offer a future for the victors of the war against patriarchy. It appears that even if we destroy stories which create such cultural boundaries, ideals and gender roles, we are not at the point where we can cope without them. <fnote>Gamble, Sarah Angela Carter: Writing From The Front Line pg 73 </fnote><fnote>Day, Aidan Romanticism quoted in The Fiction of Angela Carter ed. Sarah Gamble pg 42 </fnote>Carter has described the toyshop in interviews as a 'secularized Eden' and took the story of the 'Fortunate Fall' to mean that it was fortunate that 'Adam and Eve' could escape from it. Peach suggests that the fall was indeed fortunate but that the two of them, being again in a garden, and clearly in a position which reflects that of Adam and Eve, have not escaped the myth, they are still trapped by it. 'everything is gone but the myth remains." This would back up Dworkin's argument that Carter's myths have not been successfully revisioned, but then for many of these stories, if they were revised to the point of reversal, Carter would simply create a matriarchy. Her characters are not out to reverse gender roles or stereotypes, they are simply looking for what creates them, attempting to unravel them. They are on a journey of discovery, but this journey does not necessarily lead to a discernible conclusion. <fnote>Haffenden, John Angela Carter in Interview in Novelists in Interview </fnote><fnote>Peach, Linden Angela Carter quoted in The Fiction of Angela Carter ed. Sarah Gamble pg 45 </fnote>Jeanette Winterson's novel also uses parody but her target is the Bible. The most obvious use of this is the way that the narrative is structured, using the names of books of the Old Testament to title each chapter. The fact that this book is very autobiographical means that this is not just a cultural reference for Winterson but a personal one too. She takes words which relate to the story of the quest of a nation for its freedom and applies them to individual lives, making light of the grandiose view that the characters have of their own lives and works. Laurel Bollinger goes through each one and points out the parallels between the biblical chapters and Winterson's narrative. Genesis desbcribes Jeanette's origins but does not refer to the many stories within Genesis itself. This is the first of many instances where Winterson clearly takes a story and uses only the details relevant to her story, changing it to fit her argument. However Jeanette's origins do contrast with the 'predominantly male image of creation'. Rather than a loving father, it is Jeanette's mother who has the power of creation for her, her father remains passive. Whether this is positive or negative is hard to say, as Jeanette takes an ambiguous attitude towards her mother. Giving her control of creation makes her appear a strong, capable woman with powerful feelings about her faith. However she uses this strength to reject the daughter she apparently wanted so much, because of her sexuality. This ambiguity arises in many places in the novel, especially in the fantasy sections. <fnote>Bollinger, Laura Models for Female Loyalty: The Biblical Ruth in Jeanette Winterson's Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit in Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature, Vol. 13, No. 2 pg 365 accessed from  URL  on 19/4/06 </fnote>Exodus refers to Jeanette leaving home to school, referring to the 'pillar of cloud' which she, like the escaping Israelites has to guide her. Leviticus and Numbers are used to parody they Biblical texts as being 'The Law', as Winterson uses them to explore the influences Jeanette's mother and her evangelicalism have on her. Numbers, which involves the wandering of ths Israelites through the desert shows Jeanette also 'wandering' from the church and from heterosexuality. Deuteronomy is a short chapter and mirrors the biblical text in that it is a non narrative chapter. Whereas the original talks about human behaviour, Winterson focuses on history and how people should approach it. Judges is the chapter in which Jeanette is forbidden to preach and exiled when she refuses to renounce her lesbianism, however the judges who are male in the Bible, are predominantly female. In Joshua the prophet of the same name is referred to as Jeanette explains her pain at being separated from her mother. Each chapter takes one main element from the Biblical chapter but sometimes Winterson plays with it to fit with her parody. Putting women in traditionally masculine roles is a continuing pattern, and both Carter and Winterson write from a female perspective, using these stories to challenge a tradition in which men are often in positions of power and women must simply obey. Finally Winterson refers to the book of Ruth. Bollinger asserts that this book is specifically folkloric in genre, referring to Propp's 'structural analysis of the Russian folktale'. Many of the narrative functions of Propp's theory are fulfilled as well as the main characters. The story begins with a lack, of food due to famine and of family as their husbands die, an interdiction is made an violated as Ruth disobeys Naomi, her mohter-in-law and stays with her, and there is interaction with a donor (Boaz) and a flase hero (unknown kinsman). Bollinger also notes that the opening line 'Once, in the days when the Judges were judging... there came' as almost fairytale-like, and that it works to assert plausibility rather than to establish a sense of time and place. In addition it contains a story of female maturation, common to fairy tales such as Snow White or Cinderella. <fnote>Bollinger, Laura Models for Female Loyalty: The Biblical Ruth in Jeanette Winterson's Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit in Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature, Vol. 13, No. 2 pg 371 accessed from  URL  on 19/4/06 </fnote><fnote>Edward F. Campbell, Ruth: A New Translation With Introduction, Notes and Commentary in Anchor Bible ed. William Foxwell Albright and David Noel Freedman p81 quoted in Bollinger, Laura Models for Female Loyalty: The Biblical Ruth in Jeanette Winterson's Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit in Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature, Vol. 13, No. 2 pg 371 accessed from  URL  on 19/4/06 </fnote><fnote>Bollinger, Laura Models for Female Loyalty: The Biblical Ruth in Jeanette Winterson's Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit in Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature, Vol. 13, No. 2 pg 372 accessed from  URL  on 19/4/06 </fnote>So, taking the book of Ruth as such, it is very clear that Winterson picks and chooses which parts she wants to emphasise. She intersperses the chapter with two other fantastical storylines, Winnet Stonejar and Perceval, which means she 'need not respond to the full story' and there are no direct references to the Bible. However this means that there are constant parallels and conradictions between Wintersons version and the Biblical version. Both Jeanette and Ruth seek female loyalty, both are responding to a maternal figure, yet neither are actually relating to their biological mothers. Both characters appear to have been abandoned by God yet keep their faith, Jeanette to a lesser extent, and both choose female loyalty when it is the most difficult option for them to take. However Tess Cosslett suggests that Winterson is not making such a specific comparison, that she is 'veering away from a close parallel... using the name only to refer generally to strong themes of loneliness and woman identification." She also makes comment on the parts of the story that Winterson leaves out. She does not refer to parts of the story which refer to conventional female roles, the roles of wife and mother which are prominent, as is the idea of heterosexual marriage. Cosslett interprets this as the 'effect that her lebianism has had on the stereotypical feminine story' leaving the novel with a sense of 'loss....hope and absence of closure." This may well be true.The roles of hereosexual wife and mother are ones which are not open to Jeanette, however even in stories such as Ruth, which many have cited as feminist because of the focalisation of female characters, these roles are the only ones avaiable for female fulfilment. Jeanette has no traditional model to follow, but the strong message of female loyalty in Ruth is something she can identify with and search for, even if she is unsure of ever finding it 'I knew a woman in another place...what if she sleepwalked beside me and I never knew?'pg171. <fnote>Bollinger, Laura Models for Female Loyalty: The Biblical Ruth in Jeanette Winterson's Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit in Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature, Vol. 13, No. 2 pg 367 accessed from  URL  on 19/4/06 </fnote><fnote>Cosslett, Tess Intertextuality in Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit: The Bible, Malory and Jane Eyre in I'm Telling You Stories: Jeanette Winterson and the Politics of Reading ed Helena Grice and Tim Woods pg 17 </fnote><fnote>Cosslett, Tess Intertextuality in Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit: The Bible, Malory and Jane Eyre in I'm Telling You Stories: Jeanette Winterson and the Politics of Reading ed Helena Grice and Tim Woods pg 17 </fnote><fnote>Winterson, Jeanette Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit Vintage 2001 (This edition is used for all future page references) </fnote>She treats the Perceval story in a similar way. The story of the Holy Grail is first found (Perceval, le Conte du Graal), the unfinished fifth romance of Chrétien de Troyes, but Perceval also appears in Sir Thomas Malory's Le Morte Darthur and Parzival by Wolfganf von Eschenbach. However the only parts of any of these stories we read are vaguely about Perceval, his quest and his relationship with Arthur, no other charcters or plot lines are mentioned. Perceval obviously represents Jeanette, they are both tired of their quests, Jeanettes being to find acceptance and romantic fulfilment for herself. The sense of homessickness is evident, as is the inevitability of their choices 'could have turned back'pg 161 'he dreams...of his stables and his faithful friends', and reference to being 'pulled like a bobbin' echoes comments made by Jeanette about her feelings towards her mother 'she had a thread around my button to tug when she pleased.' The father in the Winnet sequence is clearly wicked, but for Perceval Arthur is a figure to which he is attached, showing again Jeanette's mixed feelings. The fact that Perceval is male puts a new perspective on Jeanette's experience, some critics claim it makes the experience more universal, in the same way that the Winnet Stonejar sequence does by using a father figure condemning the protagonist for having feelings for a boy. However even though Perceval is male, suggesting Jeanette's identification with masculinity, this male hero is feminised 'He was a warrior who longed to grow herbs'pg161. Cosslett suggests that 'gender boundaries are crossed and blurred though not abolished. <fnote> URL  </fnote>Throughout her article Cosslett makes it clear that she believes that 'Winterson does not seem to be revising her originals as such, but appropriating and changing bits of them as she wants." Ruth involves roles which are inappropriate to her character, so she leaves them out; the quest for the grail is far to complex for her to appropriate altogether, what she is interested in is the quest element and the relationship with a parental figure, Arthur representing her mother. This fits with the assertation she makes about history in Deuteronomy 'History should be...a game for playing... Claw it, chew it, rearrange it' pg91. Pauline Palmer, however, claims that these fantastical sections 'employ stratgeies of inversion' and uses the example of friendly 'demon'. For Palmer the fantasy sections of the novel empasise the part that storytelling and fantasy play in the construction of the psyche, allowing Jeanette to escape the world of fundamentalist oppresion to a simpler realm, where she is not a victim and has more control. She also says that by revising stories, 'she challenges the patriarchal values associated with the genre [fairytale]' and contrasts her approach directly with Carter's 'Carter's stories portray the girl accomodating to hereosexual relations... Winterson highlights her resistance.'  <fnote>Cosslett, Tess Intertextuality in Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit: The Bible, Malory and Jane Eyre in I'm Telling You Stories: Jeanette Winterson and the Politics of Reading ed Helena Grice and Tim Woods pg 22 </fnote><fnote>Palmer, Pauline Jeanette Winterson: Lesbian/Postmodern Fictions in Engendering Realism and Postmodernism ed. Beate Neumeier pg 45 </fnote><fnote>Palmer, Pauline Jeanette Winterson: Lesbian/Postmodern Fictions in Engendering Realism and Postmodernism ed. Beate Neumeier pg 47 </fnote>I think this is simply a way of pointing out that Carter's appropriation of farytales are simply less interested in a lesbian viewpoint. Carter is interested in taking fairytales and myths themselves, as a whole and revising but not reversing them, mostly via parody, in order to show how they build a social structure which leaves women in a very unenviable position in a patriarchal system. Winterson's stories are used in a different way, much more personally. She chops them up and takes the parts which are interesting to her, still focusing on women and their roles in society, but from a lesbian point of view, trying to make a new model, a new type of fairytale in which her protagonist, and arguable therefore she herself, will fit. 