Words used to describe Pat Barker's Union Street range from 'raw and honest' to 'bleakness, futility, nostalgia and defensiveness'. Barker herself recalls that the initial responses from many publishers were 'frankly this is too bleak and depressing." This would appear fitting for a book depicting, often quite brutally, the lives and hardships of seven working class women living somewhere in the north of England. Michele Hanson's use of the word 'exhilarated' therefore does not initially seem to fit. The Oxford English Dictionary defines 'exhilarate' as 'to make cheerful or merry; to cheer, enliven, gladden'. Union Street is certainly not cheerful or merry and the reader does not come away with any of those emotions. What there is, is a certain sense of optimism and a feeling of respect for the women the reader meets throughout the novel. <fnote>Thursfield, Amanda Pat Barker (2002)  URL  accessed on 12/5/2007 </fnote><fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) </fnote><fnote>Nixon, Rob 'An Interview with Pat Barker' in Contemporary Literature Vol. 45 No. 1 (2004) pg 4 </fnote><fnote> URL  accessed on 12/5/2007 </fnote>Barker states that one of her intentions whilst writing Union Street was to give a voice to the working class women whose stories has not been heard, and had been dismissed as unimportant and irrelevant. 'They are what Barker calls "voices that had not been listened to"'. Working class women had often simply been ignored in literature. This aspect of her work could be seen as exhilarating. Despite the bleakness of the women's stories, at least they have been heard. Bochenski refers to it as 'stories of the other Britain, the one that many never see or never want to realise exists'. However, a current reader will not be unfamiliar with such texts. Barker was one of many writers, artists and filmmakers of her time who sought to represent the working class in a new light of significance. The working class towns which Barker describes are few and far between today, and Barker is in fact depicting their decline. Any impact the text makes today is therefore likely to come from another aspect of Barker's writing. <fnote>Nixon, Rob 'An Interview with Pat Barker' in Contemporary Literature Vol. 45 No. 1 (2004) pg 2 </fnote><fnote>Bochenski, M Theology from Three Worlds (Macon, Smyth and Helways, 1997) pg 70 </fnote>This could be the fact that Union Street revolves around working class women as central characters. It is not unusual to find texts which centre around 'angry young men' from the working class, for example Osborne's Look Back in Anger or Sillitoe's Saturday Night and Sunday Morning, but rarely are working class women given center stage, the inner monologues are solely male. Haywood comments 'it is this separate sphere of essentially feminine ordeal and trial which mediates elements of class consciousness." Barker enters the heads of these women, and finds that their stories are moving tales of strength, as they persevere through hardships often unrecognised by traditional histories. Hanson's suggestion that the reader is not meant to consider the situatutions themselves may not be so far fetched if we understand it to mean that we are not to despair at these women's lives, but marvel at how they make it through them at all. <fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 146 </fnote>In this sense we can recognise some optimisms in a text where there initially appears to be little hope. In each story, bleak as it may be there is often some light. The final line of Kelly Brown's story, preceded by a horrific rape and a painful description of her attempts to deal with it by rejecting her femininity, is 'she was going home'. This suggests that perhaps she can return to society, a reappropriation of the family. Although Lisa Godard initially rejects her third child 'There was nothing about this baby she recognised as hers' (113) the chapter ends with them sharing a close bond simply through their shared gender 'the thought that inside that tiny body was a womb like hers' (139). Alice Bell fights the welfare workers to the end, refusing to go into a care home and dies, sadly not in her own home, but at least on her own terms 'she wanted to die in her own home. And if that was no longer possible...she would not be here waiting for them when they came' (260). Muriel Scaife's husband dies after a horrific battle with disease but his death brings her closer to her son 'The she held out her arms and her started to cry too... He put an arm round his mother's shoulders. And she started to dry her eyes' (176). Finally, although Iris King murders her daughter's unborn baby, she finds comfort in the form of her other grandchild 'She nuzzled into his chest...and the warmth consoled her' (220). <fnote>Barker, Pat Union Street (Virago, 1982) pg 69 (all further references in main text) </fnote>However this does not apply to every character. The end of Joanne Wilson's chapter holds no hope 'I wish I didn't have to go' (106). Pregnant and unmarried, with a boyfriend who reacts to the news by having violent sex with her 'she was afraid for the baby... he was trying to screw it out of her' (100) Joanne is trapped with no real alternative offered to her. She goes on to marry Ken but there is no sense that this is a happy occasion. Her friendship with Joss is a positive in her life but it cannot get her out of the situation she is in. Similarly Blonde Dinah's chapter is in fact more about her elderly client George Harrison than it is about her. She is defined by her job as a prostitute and although George does attempt to depict her in a more humanistic and positive light 'He listened to her talk... the cracked and seamed face lit up... as she talked about the past, about the people she had known' (226) we only hear her speak as reported by George. She is the only woman in the book who does not have a voice of her own, it has been appropriated by her clients. This is hardly makes for exhilarating reading. There is an argument for a sense of exhilaration through the down to earth, realistic style of Barker's writing. The author herself claims that the characters are based on women she knew when she was growing up, and the blunt northern dialogue is certainly naturalistic 'You mucky bloody sod' (2) 'He could see she was a bairn' (37). The disclaimer at the start of the novel is clearly ironic, preparing the reader for a realist text. However this is not a naturalistic or realist novel in the classical sense. The narrative is highly symbolic, each woman representing a different aspect of the life cycle of one woman. Coming to terms with sexuality, for Kelly this comes violently and far too early, pregnancy, post natal depression, marriage, motherhood, loss of loved ones, abortion and death. The women get older with each chapter, and finally, under a tree which is clearly representative of life itself 'withered and unwithering' (265) the oldest and youngest characters meet and both face their mortalities 'at the same moment...she found it possible to believe in her own death' (67) 'it was time for them both to go' (265). The symbolism is obvious and therefore not necessarily very effective, however it does make the message of the text more universal and humanistic, where it could have been very dry and politicised. D.J. Taylor argues that 'realism is at least a limited or partial aesthetic' and quotes Eva Figes as saying 'the English social realist tradition cannot contain the realities of my lifetime, horrors which one might have called surreal if they had not actually happened'. Obviously in Union Street a degree of realism is key, and the blunt, matter-of-fact descriptions of some horrific scenes for example 'unbidden came the memory of the other child, red as raw meat, gasping its life out on the lavatory floor' (220) is surely meant to shock us and indeed make us stand back and consider 'what these poor women have to put up with'. There is an argument for a kind of exhilaration here, the kind one would attach to violent films, perhaps, or to the sense of disbelief that comes with the realisation that these scenes were a reality for many women. Indeed the psychological and emotional depiction of the characters is highly realistic, Haywood even describes it as 'pioneering'. However there are some things that traditional realism cannot achieve. The lack of an observational narrator allows the reader to become more highly involved and attached to the characters, creating a much greater emotional impact. Kirk argues that 'the narrative[s] are seen to refuse the pitfalls of monologism, a characteristic predicated of "classic" realism' There is also a sentimentality in the symbolic nature of the narrative which has just as much impact, and is perhaps, 'exhilarating' in a different, more positive way. <fnote>Taylor, D.J A Vain Conceit: British Fiction in the 1980s (Bloomsbury, 1989) pg 44 </fnote><fnote>Figes, Eva quoted in Taylor, D.J A Vain Conceit: British Fiction in the 1980s (Bloomsbury, 1989) pg 42 </fnote><fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 145 </fnote><fnote>Kirk, John 'Recovered Perspectives: Gender, Class, and Memory in Pat Barker's Writing' in Contemporary Literature Vol. 40 No. 4 (Winter 1999) pg 613 </fnote>Another avoidance of realism is the lack of temporal specificity. The only pointer we have in the text itself to suggest any kind of time frame is the various mentioning of the Northern Ireland troubles as read by the women in newspapers, and fleeting references to miners' strikes. Also telling is the fact that many of the men in Union Street are unemployed, suggesting a period of deindustrialization. However this could place us anywhere between the early 1970s and the 1980s. Although discussion of class is clearly a key issue, and there are points at which characters specifically discuss the politics of the time ' "you mean that's your Labour Council. Government has nowt to do with it' (241), the novel often skims over contemporary events, mentioning them briefly but never dwelling on them as something which particularly affects the lives of these women. Haywood points out 'these absences could be the whole point', but also finds a problem with it. 'If the overall point is that history as conventionally defined has passed these women by, the essential critical question is the extent to which the novel colludes with that disempowerment." Monteith argues that 'Barker is attempting a distillation of historical and class memory, of the national with the personal." Of course the national does creep in, but only via issues which affect the women's lives directly i.e. deindustrialization causes their husbands to lose their jobs, miners' strikes cause a shortage of coal. This poses a problem for Michele Hanson's comment, as this form of disempowerment would undercut the idea that the women are in fact empowered in any way by their stoicism in such hard times. The only solution seems to me to take the view that rejecting conventional history in the novel is necessary to allow the women's stories to be told. The novel does suggest that the women are uninterested in history as it stands, but equally, conventional history has never been interested in them. The two histories cannot be conflated, at least not simply. <fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 145 </fnote><fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 147 </fnote><fnote>Monteith, Sharon Pat Barker (Northcote House, 2002) pg 20 </fnote>John Kirk argues that the representation of the working class women as a community is something which strengthens the novel's impact. 'We are presented with a community...and this sense of community is sharpened by Barker's use of dialogue and dialect'. Not only this, but he suggests that Alice and Kelly's encounter, which both begins and ends the novel, develops a 'sense of mutuality...which calls for a recognition of communality and kind,' 'a kind of sisterhood which transcends age and is grounded in identifications of gender, class and community." There is a sense, perhaps in this encounter, that the women in the novel could bond and form a community on the basis of 'sisterhood' and shared female experience. However I think what the novel is more keen to point out is the isolation of these women. Barker quite clearly sets out to debunk the working class myth of neighbours being able to rely on each other, with their doors always open, sharing what little they have. Although characters like Iris claim to play mother to the street, each woman is quite definitely alone, and gossiping behind each other's backs, acts of racism and violence, and even flat out rejection from the community are more numerous than acts of kindness 'she needed a woman to talk to but in all this sodding street there wasn't one of 'em you could trust. They'd all turned against her because since Tom left there'd been other men in the house' (35). Sharon Monteith also points out that 'Barker shows that easy community...is fallacy... women are not celebrated in a feminist reclamation of sisterhood or class solidarity... rarely seen to form genuine friendships or maintain supportive mother-daughter bonds.'  <fnote>Kirk, John 'Recovered Perspectives: Gender, Class, and Memory in Pat Barker's Writing' in Contemporary Literature Vol. 40 No. 4 (Winter 1999) pg 612 </fnote><fnote>Kirk, John 'Recovered Perspectives: Gender, Class, and Memory in Pat Barker's Writing' in Contemporary Literature Vol. 40 No. 4 (Winter 1999) pg 614 </fnote><fnote>Monteith, Sharon Pat Barker (Northcote House, 2002) pg 14 </fnote>Haywood also argues that the 'psychological... representation... also stresses their isolation from each other and the fast disappearing community' who have 'no common core...other than shared stoicism and often violent sufferings of the gender itself." This breakdown of community is not essentially gendered. This is particularly noted in George Harrison's story. Having lost his job he loses his friends at the pub and becomes an outsider in the community. 'After a while the talk left him behind... He gradually saw less and less of his mates... But in fact they were not avoiding him. He was avoiding them.' (222) <fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 145 </fnote>If we choose to read the women's shared bravery and courage as an 'exhilarating' sense of community, overcoming their shared hardships together, then in a way we choose to read it as a feminist text. The fact that it was picked up by Virago, a publisher of books by and about women also backs this up. However this creates the possibility that for a male reader, Union Street would be particularly un-exhilarating. Any male characters that they could possibly relate to are 'written off' according to Seabrook, and for Haywood, 'the only sympathetic men...are sexually unthreatening...inert... or are ready to undergo a feminist conversion." Quotes from Barker herself on the matter range from 'I never thought for a second that feminism is only about women' to 'they aren't allowed to say much. I think that's mainly because I'm focussing on the women." Could it be that in telling the unheard stories of these working class women, it is almost necessary to silence the voices of the working class men who have for so long been the centre of the narrative? Monteith disagrees entirely, stating that Barker deals with 'disintegration of northern industrial communities... and its repercussions in relationships between women and men'. She also argues that men are relegated to the background because that is where they were at the time. Having been displaced from their working communities they are left 'on the vulnerable edge of the family unit'. She suggests that they are 'disempowered...but not universally demonized', 'pushed to the symbolic edges of the text...they have not been airbrushed out." Admittedly, what Barker depicts is symptomatic of the realities of deindustrialization and the difficulties facing both men and women in adjusting to these economic changes, having to re-evaluate their roles in the family unit, and finding that this can pull them further and further apart. However, there is often a sense that men are simply a burden to women. Although Muriel Scaife is shown to have enjoyed a long and loving marriage to her husband, and Joss proves to be a strong and reliable friend to both Iris and Joanne, it is noticeable that both these men are in some way feminised, both displaying a castrating 'lack'. George Harrison's late sexual awakening may be a positive for him, but it is at the expense of Blonde Dinah, for whom prostitution and therefore sex is 'just a job' (227). Union Street is far from comfortable reading for men, let alone 'exhilarating'. <fnote>Seabrook, Jeremy and Blackwell, Trevor  A World Still To Win: The Reconstruction of Postwar Working Class (Faber and Faber 1985) pg 174 </fnote><fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 147 </fnote><fnote>Perry, Donna 'Pat Barker' in Backtalk: Women Writers Speak Out (Rutgers University Press, 1993) pg 51 </fnote><fnote>Nixon, Rob 'An Interview with Pat Barker' in Contemporary Literature Vol. 45 No. 1 (2004) pg 11 </fnote><fnote>Monteith, Sharon Pat Barker (Northcote House, 2002) pg 16 </fnote><fnote>Monteith, Sharon Pat Barker (Northcote House, 2002) pg 17 </fnote><fnote>Monteith, Sharon Pat Barker (Northcote House, 2002) pg 17 </fnote>Haywood also points out that 'women inhabit an elemental world of feminine experience' citing frequent references to periods and other bodily fluids. This could be considered as a way of representing women as being more connected to nature and the fundamental essence of life, as well as a continuation of the symbolic theme of the female life cycle. These are things which connect all women, arguably reinforcing the idea of a community grounded in 'sisterhood'. However Haywood suggests that 'such an approach reinforces biological reductionism' and that the women's 'inability...to control their own bodies and social backwardness of the setting... positions the narrative uncomfortably on the edge of a form of cultural voyeurism'. A reinforcement of this representation as a positive aspect comes surprisingly from a male character. George Harrison contemplates 'He had always believed there were two sorts of women: the decent ones and the rest...how could you remember they were different, if every sag, every wrinkle of their used bodies proclaimed that they were one flesh?'(230) This is clearly an uncomfortable description of the female form, but it unites women in their bodily experiences. George's encounter with Blonde Dinah is highly voyeuristic, but leads him to a greater understanding of women than he had before, perhaps even greater than any of the other men in the novel. There is always a danger of 'biological reductionism' in such an approach, but Barker's matter of fact take on it neatly avoids this, turning it into a positive aspect of the novel. <fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 146 </fnote><fnote>Haywood, Ian Working Class Fiction from Chartism to Trainspotting (Northcote House 1997) pg 147 </fnote>Hanson's use of the word 'exhilarating' is perhaps ill-advised. Barker demonstrates that the working class women who endure the horrific, but entirely realistic scenarios she places them in, are funny, warm, strong and interesting people with important stories to tell. She does this, however, without diminishing the suffering they go through. The horrible details of life are still horrible, but Barker's achievement lies in exposing them at all, not revealing them as any less wretched, sordid or pitiful than they are. Where there is optimism it is always preceded by bleakness and despair. The 'exhilaration', if there is any to be found at all, comes from knowing that the women she depicts are strong enough to work through, if not entirely overcome the troubles in their lives. 