Conflict has been a feature of human society since time immemorial. Conflict can occur within states as civil wars, insurrections, or terrorism or it can occur among states as international war or outside-supported insurrections. Similarly, disputes can be organised around social class, ethnicity, religion, region, economic opportunities or some combination of these factors. Economists are increasingly concerned with the subject of conflict and peace resolution due to its impact on development. Economic and human development cannot occur without a large measure of social stability; conflict not only retards growth but also public funds are misused in military resources and it is the poor who are disproportionately the main victims of conflict. This essay will explain the contribution of economists to the theory of conflict and peace resolution and will use the region of Africa as an example, where civil war has been perpetuated over the years. As mentioned before war retards development, however, development also retards war. This double causation gives rise to virtuous and vicious circles. Where development succeeds, countries become progressively safer from violent conflict, making subsequent development easier. Where development fails countries are at high risk of becoming caught in a conflict trap in which war damages the economy and increases the risk of further conflict. Traditionally, war has been viewed as an irrational act, brought about by misunderstanding and coordination failure, and primarily a breakdown in relations between nation-states. Today, however, most armed conflicts occur between groups within the same nation, prevalently in low-income developing countries. Therefore, we will focus on analysing particularly the economic theory of civil wars. <fnote>Collier et al (2003), Breaking the Conflict Trap, World Bank Policy Report, Oxford University Press, p. 1 </fnote><fnote>Murshed (2002), "Conflict, Civil War and Underdevelopment", Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 39, p. 388 </fnote>A profound gap exists between the popular perception of the cause of conflict and the results from recent economic analysis. Popular perceptions see rebellion as a protest motivated by genuine and extreme grievance where rebels are viewed as public-spirited heroes fighting against injustice. Economic analysis, on the other hand, sees rebellion as the ultimate manifestation of organised crime and the result of a series of rational decisions, where greed for income is the main determinant - income that can be achieved either from quasi-criminal looting during the rebellion or, if the rebellion is victorious, from controlling state revenues. As Grossman (1999) states, 'in such insurrections the insurgents are indistinguishable from bandits or pirates'. Discussion of greed as a motive for conflict has mainly arisen in the context of natural-resource endowments, an abundance of which appears to increase the risk of a country falling into serious conflict. Examples of conflict in mineral-rich countries include, notably, Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Sierra Leone. However, the rebellion has costs as well, such as the costs of labour and equipment needed to fight governmental forces. Moreover, the economic theory of conflict argues that the motivation of conflict is ultimately unimportant; what matters is whether the rebel organization can sustain itself financially. It is this, rather than any other objective grounds for grievance which determine whether a country will experience civil war. This is explained by the Collier-Hoefffler econometric model of civil war (Collier and Hoeffler 1998, 2000) which focuses on whether a rebel organisation will be established. <fnote>Murshed (2002), "Conflict, Civil War and Underdevelopment", Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 39, p.389 </fnote>The economic theory of conflict then assumes that perceived grievances and the lust for power are found more or less equally in all societies. Groups are capable of perceiving that they have grievances regardless of their objective circumstances, a social phenomenon known as relative deprivation. Similarly, some people will have a lust for power regardless of the objective benefits conferred by power. In this case , it is the feasibility of predation which determines the risk of conflict. <fnote>Collier (2000), Economic Causes of Civil Conflict and Their Implications for Policy, World Bank Research Papers, p.4 </fnote>The Collier-Hoeffler econometric model (CH model hereafter) analysed the patterns of conflict using global data for 161 countries for eight 5-year periods, from 1960 to 1999. In this paper, a civil war is classified as an internal conflict with at least one thousand battle-related deaths. Their model found three economic variables to be significant: the initial level of income, its rate of growth and its structure. The model found that the higher the initial level of income per capita, the lower the probability of a civil war breaking out during the period. Per capita income can be interpreted as a proxy for the cost of recruiting rebel labour, hence, higher recruitment costs would make the rebellion more difficult. Similarly, more rapid income growth reduces the risk of conflict. The structure of growth - the level of primary commodity exports relative to income at the start of the period - appeared as the most powerful risk factor. Countries that were highly dependant on primary commodity exports were substantially more at risk of conflict. The most dangerous level of primary commodity dependence was 26% of GDP; at this level the ordinary country had a risk of conflict of 23%. On the contrary, if the country had no primary commodity exports its risk would fall to 0.5%. Thus, without primary commodity exports, ordinary countries are pretty safe from internal conflict. Additionally, the CH model found grievance to be of small importance. The model tested three measures of objective grievance: inequality, political repression and social divisions. Neither inequality nor political repression proved to be significant. This result is consistent with the view that groups with grievances are sufficiently common that differences in the supply of such groups between societies are not an important influence in the risk of conflict initiation. Social divisions were proxied by ethnic and religious fractionalisation and ethnic dominance. Contrary to common belief, the model found that fractionalised societies have a lower risk of conflict since this makes it more difficult for rebel organisation to maintain cohesion while having members from different social groups. However, if there is ethnic dominance (if one ethnic group constitutes between 45% and 90% of the population), the risk of conflict doubles in comparison to other societies. <fnote>Collier and Hoeffler (2002), "On Incidence of Civil War in Africa", The Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 46, p.16 </fnote>This model was applied analyse the incidence of conflict in Africa in Collier-Hoeffler (2002). The authors found that Africa largely conforms to the pattern of conflict predicted by the global model. On average, over the period from 1965 to 1999, Africa had an incidence of conflict similar to that in other developing regions. However, its structure of risk was very different. Africa's economic characteristics generated an atypically high risk of conflict, but this was offset by its social characteristics, which generated an atypically low risk. The analysis suggests that the rising trend of African conflict is not due to deep problems in its social structure, as suggested by Kaplan (2000), but rather is the contingent effect of economic circumstances. <fnote>Collier and Hoeffler (2002), "On Incidence of Civil War in Africa", The Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 46, p.25 </fnote>Murdoch and Sandler (2004) quantify the impact of civil war on economic growth at home and in nearby countries. They discover that the influences of civil war on income per capita growth are quite substantial. For example, a country that experiences a civil war and is also in the same region as other countries with civil wars is more likely to experience negative annual growth. Thus, policies to bring peace to civil-war-torn countries have a return not only for the conflict-ridden country but also for its neighbours. The spatial diffusion of these detrimental influences peaks at 800km where economic impacts are enhanced through trade and other factors. <fnote>Murdoch and Sandler (2004), "Civil Wars and Economic Growth: Spatial Dispersion", American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 48, p. 150 </fnote>Furthermore, when quantifying civil war influences, they found that a civil war at home can reduce a country's growth by 31% in the long run and 85% in the short run, highlighting that time allows an economy to repair itself. Moreover, this probability can be lowered by each additional nearby civil war by 30% in the long run and 24% in the short run. Thus a country in a region with three or more civil wars may be equally impacted as a country experiencing a civil war. The temporal analysis indicated that countries successfully limit these negative consequences of nearby civil war to their growth in a couple of years. In contrast, the host country experiences greater harm as the war drags on. <fnote>Murdoch and Sandler (2004), "Civil Wars and Economic Growth: Spatial Dispersion", American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 48, p.150 </fnote>Explanations of particular civil wars often invoke economic causes. For example, the war in Rwanda has been attributed to pressure on land, while that in Angola has been interpreted as a contest for natural resources. Based on Grossman (1995) and Azam (1995), Collier and Hoeffler (1998) argue that war occurs if the incentive for rebellion is sufficiently large relative to the costs. In general, the incentive for rebellion is the product of the probability of victory and its consequences and the probability of victory depends upon the capacity of the government to defend itself. For a given population, the military capability of rebellion is unrelated to the domestic economy, whereas the military capability for the government depends upon its military expenditure. Therefore, if the taxable base is used as a proxy for the capacity of military expenditure, we can say that the probability of rebel victory, p, would be diminishing in the per capita taxable base of the economy, T. Furthermore, the incentive for rebellion conditional upon victory is determined by the capacity of a future rebel organisation to reward its supporters. If the objective of the rebellion is to capture the state, then this capacity will be dependent upon potential revenue of the government and hence of the taxable base, T. Hence the incentive for rebellion is an increasing function of ( p(T)•T ) . Since T both reduces the probability of victory and increases the gain in the event of victory, its net effect on the risk of war is a priori ambiguous. <fnote>Collier and Hoeffler (1998), "On Economic Causes of Civil War", Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 50, p.564 </fnote>If the objective of the rebellion is secession then the taxable base of the pre-secession state is not the determinant of the gains conditional upon victory and distributional considerations are intrinsic. For example, secession might be motivated because the region is atypically well-endowed with resources, or because the preferences of the region are under represented in the government. One variable which is likely to capture the desire for secession is the size of the population (P). The effect of population size on the desire for secession is most apparent when considered at the extremes. Were the global population contained within a single nation, linguistic and cultural disparities would be likely to generate continuous violent conflicts. By contrast, were there are as many nations as socio-cultural groups, the desire for secession world presumably be much diminished. <fnote>Collier and Hoeffler (1998), "On Economic Causes of Civil War", Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 50, p.565 </fnote>In terms of costs, the actual conduct of civil war is costly to rebels. This is due partly to the opportunity cost of rebel labour and partly to the disruption to economic activity caused by warfare. Both of these costs can be expected to increase with per capita income: a high income population has more to lose than a low income population during rebellion. These costs of rebellion increase with the duration of conflict. The expected duration of the conflict also affects the gains from rebellion through the discount factor as modelled by Grossman. Nicholas Sambanis (2001) identified significant differences between the determinants of identity and non-identity civil wars. He argued that identity wars (ethnic wars) are predominantly caused by political grievance, and they are unlikely to occur in politically free (democratic) societies. Additionally, he found that ethnic heterogeneity is significantly and positively correlated with the onset of ethnic war, contrary to economic literature suggestions that ethnic heterogeneity either decreases risk of war onset or has no significant association with the risk of war. His analysis also reveals significant systematic and regional determinants of war. For example, the cold war seems not to have been a major determinant of ethnic war onset and regional democracy exerts a moderating influence on the probability of ethnic war, whereas it appears to encourage ideological rebellion in the neighbourhood. Neighbourhood wars and long periods of peace also seem to be much more significant for ethnic war onset than non-ethnic war. This study suggests that some theories are better suited to explain ethnic war than others: it appears that modernization theory, with its emphasis on economic variables, is less applicable than theories of political development or neoliberalism, whose emphasis on the role of political institutions seems highly relevant as an explanation of the onset of ethnic war. In peaceful societies, conflict is channelled into non-violent means and institutions for both its expression and resolution. The fundamental problem of developing countries is that such conflict-management institutions do not exist or are too weak to enforce any course of action. Economists' have been unable to reach a consensus on the causes of war, as seen by the sample literature provided in this essay. However regardless of the causes of war, whether is it motivated by grievance or greed, the fact remains that conflict lowers economic growth, as shown in Sub-Saharan Africa were per capita growth rates have been negative in many countries over the last two decades. During a civil war a society diverts some of its resources from production to destruction. This causes a double loss: the loss from what resources were previously contributing and the loss from the damage that they are now inflicting. Therefore, it is essential to create institutions, particularly in developing countries, which can design and implement effective policies to protect political stability and lower the risk of conflict. <fnote>Murshed (2002), "Conflict, Civil War and Underdevelopment", Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 39, p. 387 </fnote>