<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>The report investigated the past performance of Kidde plc as well as the reliability of its annual report in the year 2003. It also considered the potential future of Kidde plc's performance. The results were Kidde plc has had increased profitability and efficiency ratios. Kidde plc has strengthened its market position and has had good results for investors. The Kidde plc Annual Report and Accounts 2003 was deemed reliable. It was recommended that shareholders increase their shares in Kidde plc. Kidde plc has a promising future due to their strategy of concentrating on core business and using infill acquisitions. The recent takeover by UTC (United Technologies Corporation) will have great benefit for Kidde plc in America. </abstract><heading>1. Introduction</heading>Kidde plc is an independent fire protection business. They also have divisions providing aerospace and specialist equipment as well as some business in the residential and commercial sectors. This report will evaluate the past performance of Kidde plc by use of horizontal and ratio analysis. By considering the reliability of the Kidde plc Annual Report and Accounts 2003 alongside the past performance this report will recommend to shareholders whether to hold, sell or buy shares in Kidde plc. Finally the report will discuss the potential future of Kidde plc. All figures are taken from the Kidde-best file unless otherwise stated [1]. <heading>2. Evaluation of Past Performance</heading>The past performance will be considered by first horizontal analysis on the profit followed by relevant profitability, efficiency, investment and liquidity ratios. <heading>2.1 Profit</heading>Kidde plc generated £86.5m profit (before taxation) in the year 2003. On comparing this value to their peers it can be shown that this is far more than any of them. The closest peer was 3M UK plc who made £31.841m, less than half of what Kidde plc produced. At the end of 2003 Kidde plc had 7,758 employees and had a turnover of £938.1m. A company of similar size and turnover were Crown Holdings UK ltd who had 5,246 employees and a turnover of £695m at the end of 2002. However the difference in profit is large. Crown Holdings UK ltd made a loss of £47.3m. Cookson group plc generated the most turnover of £1,640.5m but still made a loss of £187.3m. The aim of any business is to make money and Kidde plc has shown that it can do this better than its peers in the year 2003. Kidde plc may have other problems but they still managed to outperform their peers in the year 2003. (All data in this section was taken from the Kidde-peer file [2].) <heading>2.2 Gross Profit ratio</heading><figure/>The gross profit ratio is the ratio between gross profit and total sales revenue represented as a percentage [4]. The graph shows that Kidde plc has had a fairly constant gross profit ratio of around 35%. More than a third of the turnover is profit which is good for any company. This shows that Kidde plc have managed to keep production costs down and have also built a good reputation allowing them to sell goods high above their manufacturing price. Kidde plc was formed by demerging from Williams plc in the year 2000. Data from this period may have been estimated therefore accounting for the sudden rise and fall of the gross profit ratio during the years 1999 to 2001. However from 2001, where Kidde plc had been properly established, the gross profit ratio has steadily increased, representative of a growing company. In general the gross profit ratio is steadily increasing and shows no signs of drastically changing. <heading>2.3 Earnings per Share</heading><figure/>The graph above shows the adjusted earnings per share. Earnings per share relate net profit to the number of shares. However adjusted earnings per share do not include exceptional items, amortisation of goodwill or acquisition reorganisation costs and so are more useful when comparing from year to year [6]. Using earnings per share it is possible to see exactly how much money is made for each individual share. From the year 2000 the earnings per share have increased from 5.71p per share to 8.79p per share in the year 2003. As previously shown this trend shows that Kidde plc is a growing company. For an investor this is an important figure as it shows how much money the company can make for the shareholder; it shows whether the company is making good use of the shareholders money. Kidde plc has demonstrated that it can generate good profit from the shareholders input. The drop in the year 2000 is again due to the demerger from Williams plc. <heading>2.4 Return on Total Assets</heading><figure/>Return on Total Assets is the ratio between profit and total assets represented as a percentage; the higher the percentage the better the use of the assets. The large drop from 30% in 2000 to 15% in 2001 can be attributed to the demerger of Kidde plc from Williams plc. However from 2002 onwards it can be seen that Kidde plc has improved its return on total asset percentage by using the assets more efficiently. This increase has only been present for one year, however by looking at the rate of growth of other ratios it seems that the return on total assets may grow at least for another year. <heading>2.5 Stock Turnover</heading><figure/>The stock turnover ratio is an efficiency ratio which measures how much stock is left as part of the company's assets. A lower value suggests that the company has many months of stock left in warehouses. A quicker stock turnover will mean that less money will be tied up in stocks. A fast stock turnover means that stock is being moved quickly, which in turn implies that sales have been improving. A faster stock turnover means faster revenue generation. Since 2000 Kidde plc have been continually been improving their stock turnover. This may be attributed to better marketing or an improved sales team as well as a more efficient stock management system. By the end of 2003 there is approximately 3 months worth of stock in the warehouses. <heading>2.6 Trade Debtor Collection Period</heading><figure/>Trade debtor collection period displays the number of days it takes for people who owe an entity to pay. In the period from 2000 to 2002 the trade debtor period was increasing. This increase shows that Kidde plc has had poor trade debt control. Kidde plc was formed from a demerger in 2000 and so was in a weak position for calling in debts. However the trade debt collection period was still increasing in the year 2001. It is possible that Kidde plc prolonged this poor debt collection period to build relations with customers. In the year 2003 Kidde plc have reduced their trade debt collection period showing a strengthening of market position. As long as this downward trend continues it will mean Kidde plc have improved their reputation and image amongst their customers. <heading>2.7 Dividend Cover</heading><figure/>Dividend cover is the number of times a company could pay its dividends. As a long term investor a lot of income may be gained from dividends. It is important to make sure that the company that was invested in can pay dividends when due. The graph shows that Kidde plc had no cover in the year 2000. This was the year of the demerger and so Kidde plc was not in a good financial position. However in 2001 Kidde plc improved its dividend cover to over 2 times the dividend. This value increases slightly in 2003. Kidde plc has a good relationship with its investors, even paying dividends in the demerger year. <heading>2.8 Return on Shareholders Funds</heading><figure/>The return on shareholders funds ratio is a profitability ratio that relates profit to the shareholders investment. If the ratio is high then a lot of profit is being generated from the shareholders input. To a shareholder this is important because it shows how effectively the company is using their money. The graph displays the trend of the return on shareholders funds ratio for Kidde plc over 5 years. There seems to be a large jump in 2000. This was the year of the demerger and so any shareholders funds attributed to Kidde plc would have been estimated. Therefore there should not be too much emphasis on the peak in 2000. What is important to note is that there is downward trend in the years 2001 to 2003. This is worrying as it shows that the shareholders' investments are not being used as effectively as possible. However in 2003 the return is 126.83% which means Kidde plc are still making some profit on the shareholders input. <heading>2.9 Dividend Yield</heading><figure/>This investment ratio shows the dividend in relation to the market share price. A high dividend yield is useful to the investor who wishes to secure a steady income off their investment. A company which pays out dividends shows itself to be financially stable. From the years 2000 until 2002 Kidde have an increasing dividend yield. However in 2003 it drops slightly from 3.47% to 2.84%. The lowering of the dividend yield is slightly worrying for the investor who relies on this income. However it has not dropped significantly below previous years' values. Also this drop may be attributed to the loss made by the change in the pound-dollar exchange rates. In the annual report it states that the exchange rate was down by 13.4%. Divisional profits lost £8.9m due to this exchange rate [13]. But if this trend continues then it will be damaging to the company's reputation and performance for the year. <heading>2.10 Acid Test</heading><figure/>The acid test is a liquidity ratio measuring how quickly assets can be turned into cash, thereby avoiding liquidation. Ideally a company would have a ratio of at least 1, meaning the company could generate enough cash to pay all liabilities at once if necessary. If the ratio is too high it would mean the company is being over cautious and not using all its assets efficiently. The graph displays an acid test ratio less than 1.0 in 2000. This figure only decreases until it is only 0.88 in 2003. This is worrying because the company could potentially liquidate if required to pay all liabilities at the same time. However the acid test is quite strict and does not take into account of stock. In reality Kidde plc is not close to liquidation but it could be troubling if this value were to continue to decrease. <heading>2.11 Conclusion</heading>In general Kidde plc has shown that it is a successful growing business. The graphs show a slightly distorted trend in the periods 1999 to 2001 due to the demerger from Williams plc. However Kidde plc was fully established and separate by the end of 2001. Most of the figures start low in 2001, compared to the 1999 values, but over the next few years it can be seen that Kidde plc have improved their profitability and efficiency ratios. As an investor it is interesting to note that Kidde plc paid dividends even in 2000 when funds were low. Kidde plc seems to have a good relation with investors. In conclusion Kidde plc is a business that is performing well and will continue on their success for at least a few more years. <heading>3. Reliability of Kidde plc Annual Report and Accounts 2003</heading>The Kidde plc Annual Report and Accounts 2003 seem quite reliable. There is a lot of information provided about how the business is run. In the corporate governance statement there are details on measures taken to produce accounts which represent a true and fair view of the financial status of the company. The report is helpful in allowing the reader to make better comparisons with previous years reports. According to the Group Finance Directors report in 2003 Kidde plc changed their number of operating divisions from four to three [15]. This could cause problems when trying to compare to previous years. However in this report they have included figures in the four division format especially to allow for comparisons. They have also converted the old 2002 figures to a three divisional format again to allow for ease of comparison. A report which provides such useful comparison methods must have something good to show otherwise if there was something to cover up the reports would not contain easy comparison. As with any set of accounts adjustments have been made. These adjustments seem quite appropriate. For example in section 13 of notes to the accounts depreciation has been applied to tangible fixed assets [16]. The technique used was a straight line basis which is a valid depreciation method. Freehold land has not been depreciated which is also valid with normal accounting practice. The only slightly worrying figure is here is that some plant, equipment, or vehicle has a depreciation rate of 33.3% which seems a bit high. Either Kidde plc should invest in longer lasting assets or someone is taking liberties with the accounts. Apart from this the depreciation adjustments are reliable. Another accounting adjustment was made to the stocks. On page 26 of the annual report it states that 'stocks are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value' [17]. The Inland Revenue website states 'One of the acceptable basis of stock valuation is the lower of cost and net realisable value' [18]. According to the report 'cost is calculated on an average or 'first in, first out' basis.' Both of these methods are valid however it may have been more useful if they stated what costs were calculated via a particular method. When making accounting adjustments Kidde plc have used well known adjustment methods for providing a true and fair view of the accounts. Inspecting the figures themselves there seems to be no discrepancies. Kidde plc has made reliable accounting adjustments. It is important to note that the PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have audited the accounts and found that 'the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group at 31 December 2003...' [19] The auditors are an external independent company and Kidde plc have stringent regulations on even employing ex-employees of the auditors as stated on page 20 of the accounts [20]. Ernst & Young, a separate accountancy firm, worked with Kidde plc to make better financial decisions [21]. It is clear that the auditors were completely independent from any other interaction with Kidde plc. There is a slightly puzzling figure in section 5 of the accounts when mentioning the disposal of fixed assets. Kidde plc made a £1.6m loss on disposal of fixed assets in 2003. However Baxi, an associated company of Kidde plc managed to make a £1.6m profit on disposal of fixed assets [22][23]. These values match up all too conveniently and perhaps further investigation could be made. However it is noted in the exceptional items section which would suggest it is a one-off and would not be happening too frequently. Apart from this the Kidde plc annual report and accounts 2003 can be deemed reliable, and represent and a true and fair view of the financial health of the company. <heading>4. Recommendation to Shareholder</heading>As stated in the conclusion to the performance section Kidde plc is a successful business. The growth rate has not been too explosive suggesting there is more growth yet to come. Kidde plc has a good relationship with investors, a strengthening market position and reputation and has a promising business strategy. For these reasons and those suggested in the conclusion of section 2 I would recommend buying more shares in Kidde plc. <heading>5. Assessment of Potential Future Performance</heading>Kidde plc is a growing business. Every year it is implementing new strategies that help the business to thrive. The approach employed in 2004 was to concentrate on core business while still gaining extra income from acquisitions [24]. Early in 2004 Kidde plc sold their shares in associated companies Baxi and Robbialac [25]. In the previous report Baxi and Robbialac were regarded as non-core activities [26]. Kidde plc also sold their investment in professional paint. These sales provided a small, one-off income for the business at the cost of losing the steady income obtained by acquisitions. To overcome this Kidde plc made new acquisitions of Harden SA, a provider of fire equipment and services [27], Croda (now named Kerr fire fighting chemicals), a provider of fire fighting chemicals [28] and Gloria KG, a fire extinguish manufacturer [29]. This strategy is very beneficial to the company these acquisitions relate more directly to core activities. Interaction with the acquired companies may assist in research and development and providing new services or products. In 2004 UTC (United Technologies Corporation), an American company, made bids to buy out Kidde plc. The BBC website stated that Kidde saw its share price rise by 20% ... after it confirmed it had rejected a £1.35bn ($2.46bn) takeover offer [30]. It also mentioned that Kidde plc stated that 160p per share was materially understating the company [31]. On the website analysts suggested that Kidde plc could have sold each share for 170p. However in the end Kidde plc was bought for 165p per share. If this is the case then why did Kidde plc sell out so low? Perhaps Kidde plc has some unknown difficulty that could have emerged as a real problem if they had not been bought out soon. Generally the takeover by UTC will generate more shareholder interest in Kidde plc and also cause share price to rise. Being bought out by an American company will also allow Kidde plc to get even more presence in America, in which some of Kidde plc's operations are based. The takeover will also please shareholders because there part of the deal included a 2p per share special interim dividend [32]. It is also possible for UTC's rivals Fairfield and Honeywell to make higher bids which would only be more beneficial for Kidde plc [33]. If UTC does win the bid Kidde plc will be reunited with Chubb plc who were bought out by UTC earlier. Kidde plc and Chubb plc were together as part of Williams plc and as shown in the ratios in the previous sections they enjoyed much success. However there were problems at that time which is what caused the demerger in 2000. Now Kidde plc have reorganised their structure and are in a better efficiency and management situation. By rejoining Chubb plc under new terms they may be able to achieve more accomplishments than before. According to the interim report Kidde plc have been making good progress in the first half of 2004 securing important fire protection contracts on the Boeing 7E7 Dreamliner [34]. In all divisions Kidde plc has generated higher divisional profits than in the previous year. It has been a strong first half and on reading the interim report it would suggest that the rest of the year will be just as strong. In general Kidde plc is a business which has a determined strategy which will help generate revenue while still allowing strong development of products and services. They have new prospects in America and by concentrating on their core business they will be successful for more years to come. 