George Green published his Essay by subscription in March 1828. Described by Green's advocate, Edward Bromhead as 'dead born'1, the publication essentially went unnoticed. It was only in January 1845, nearly four years after Green's death that William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) obtained a copy and, amazed by it contents, brought it to the attention of the leading French mathematicians of the time. Almost two hundred years on, Green's results are still frequently used by mathematicians and physicists alike; not only in electrical engineering, but also in a diverse range of modern applications from the theory of quantum electrodynamics to the study of the Mandelbrot set 2. The Essay ran to nearly eighty pages - we shall consider just a few of the preliminary results from the first section, analyse the proof given for the first theorem and then go on to discuss why this work was so remarkable. Green began his Essay by considering a single body through which electricity is arbitrarily distributed and a point p located outside of the body. He denoted by x', y', z ' the rectangular co-ordinates of a particle within the body, by ρ ' the density of electricity in the particle, and by r ' the distance between the particle and p. He then defined a function V representing the 'sum of all the particles of electricity divided by their respective distances from this point [p]',  FORMULA  His opening claim, based on a result from Laplace's Mécanique céleste, was that V satisfies the equation  FORMULA  which he abridged to  FORMULA . Green's next step was to consider the same function for a point p located within the body. He showed that in this case  FORMULA . Green then used this equation to demonstrate that in a perfectly conducting body all of the 'electric fluid' is carried to the surface. In other words, that  = 0 for all points p inside such a body. It was in presenting this result that Green coined the term 'potential function' - a particularly intuitive name for a function that describes the forces impelling and repelling particles (in this case 'of electricity') in a given system - the introduction of which Gray describes as Green's 'deepest insight'3. This demonstration was immediately followed by a theorem: <quote>"Let U and V be two continuous functions of the rectangular co-ordinates x, y, z, whose differential coefficients do not become infinite at any point within a solid body of any form whatever; then will the triple integrals extending over the whole interior of the body, and those relative to d , over its surface, of which d  represents an element: d  being an infinitely small line perpendicular to the surface, and measured from this surface towards the interior of the body."</quote>This theorem is now known as Green's theorem and was one of Green's most significant accomplishments (along with what are now called Green's functions; introduced later in the Essay). Essentially it relates the properties of the two functions inside the body with those on the surface. Green began his proof by considering the triple integral  FORMULA  for which integration by parts gave  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  where U', V' and U'', V'' were used to denote the values of U and V at the lower and upper limits of the integral respectively. He then observed that, since d  was defined to be perpendicular to the surface, he could make the following substitutions  FORMULA  at the upper limit in x  FORMULA  ,at the lower limit in x and analogous substitutions for the other limits, giving rise to the expression <list> FORMULA {bawe_formula FORMULA </list>Green also noted that the integrals with respect to d ' , together with the integrals with respect to d '' cover the whole surface of the body, and hence reduced the expression to  FORMULA . Finally, by noting that inverting the roles of U and V would not alter the value of the expression, Green obtained the equation  FORMULA  completing the proof of his theorem. Green's Essay is remarkable for a variety of reasons. One of the most significant is Green's modest education. Green was born in 1793 the son of a baker. At the age of eight he was sent to Robert Goodacre's Academy in Nottingham. Challis describes Goodacre as an enthusiastic science teacher 4 and this may well have fuelled Green's interest in physics. However Green only remained at the academy for four terms at which point he returned to work at his father's bakery. He was to receive no further teaching until his move to Cambridge in 1833, five years after the publication of his Essay. In 1807, when Green was fourteen, his father built a windmill at Sneinton, then a village about a mile from Nottingham. He left the bakery to help operate the mill and it is likely that this is where he would have spent calmer days studying mathematics. However, it is not known how Green came acquainted with the advanced mathematics he appeared to be studying - there were still no public libraries at this point. One theory is that Green may have known John Toplis, a Cambridge graduate in mathematics living in Nottingham and an avid promoter of French mathematics; <quote>"There is no proof that John Toplis was George Green's mentor but circumstantial evidence suggests strongly that he was guiding him in the new mathematics and helped him with the French he undoubtedly acquired in order to read the works of other French mathematicians, such as Lacroix, Poisson and Biot."5</quote>The opening of Bromley House (later the Nottingham Subscription Library) in 1816 was undoubtedly a tremendous boost to Green's resources. Green joined the library in 1823 and there he would have had access to a modest collection of textbooks and scientific journals. These journals would have included abstracts from papers published in foreign journals and hence would have given Green access to some of the new Mathematics being developed abroad. Green's essay was also strikingly original. British mathematicians were still relying on Newtonian methods. Their research centred around traditional concepts such as mechanics, optics, astronomy and planetary motion. Green's calculus, on the other hand, was very analytical - reflecting a sound understanding of methods recently developed in France by the likes of Laplace and Poisson - and his examples were based on the new physics of the time: electricity and magnetism, 'the most interesting of physical sciences'6. It could perhaps be argued that Green's methods were not always particularly rigorous and the notions of 'electric fluid' and 'particles of electricity' he used seem somewhat vague compared to our modern terminology of charge and electrons. However his ideas were particularly original and expressed with exceptional clarity. Most striking of all however, is the longevity if his results. The fact that mathematicians and physicist are forever finding new applications for Green's techniques is evidence of just how flexible and powerful they really are. , University of , 28 th November 2005 