<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>In the first investigation on a dc machine, we find that there is a non linear inverse relationship between line voltage vs line current and speed vs line current in both shunt and compound generators. As requested, we use a fitting line to measure the gradient and thus find out the EMF constant for the shunt generator. In our induction motor investigation, we have managed to use our results from no-load and locked rotor test to work out values for the equivalent simplified circuit parameters. Finally in our synchronous generator investigation, we have drawn a graph (see appendix 6) which describes a quadratic logarithmic decay function between field excitation current and output voltage. It simply means they have a non linear positive relationship, which the output voltage increases at a slowing rate as field excitation current increases. In synchronous motor, at synchronous speed Cos Φ = 1, however, as the excitation voltage at the field is increased, power factor increases too up until a certain point before it suddenly goes negative. Beyond that point, we can see the power factor slowly increases and approaches zero again. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>This laboratory investigation aims to provide an insight to the fundamentals of different electrical machines introduced in the module (such as operation of a shunt dc generator, an induction motor and a synchronous machine). This report presents basic technical information of each machine, followed by analysis of numerical data collected in the laboratory session in week 15. Using the experiment data, conclusion can then be drawn. <heading>Part A: Shunt dc generator and the effect of compounding</heading><heading>Introduction of shunt dc generator</heading>DC machines can be operated as generators or motors, depending on the direction of the power flow through it. In this report, we will focus our investigation on dc generator. DC generators convert mechanical energy input to dc electric energy. In general, dc generators can be classified into 5 different types according to how its field flux is produced Separately excited generator: Its field flux is derived from a separate power source i.e. independent of the generator itself Shunt Generator: Its field flux is derived by connecting the field circuit directly across the terminals of the generator Series generator: Its field flux is derived by connecting the field circuit in series with the armature of the generator Compounded generator: Both a shunt and a series field are present. Their effect is additive. Differentially compounded generator: As cumulatively compounded generator, it has both a shunt and a series field but has a subtractive effect. Because of the topic of this investigation, we will only discuss shunt generator in this report. The equivalent circuit of a shunt dc generator is illustrated below: <figure/>The advantage feature of a shunt generator is that it does not rely on external power supply. It operates on the use of residual flux and voltage build-up. The following table 1 below illustrates the values of the name plate ratings of the DC generator/motor. <table/>Now using an Ohm meter we measured the resistance of the motor armature and field windings. These results are illustrated in table 2 on the next page. <table/><heading>Self-Excitation Check</heading>Before our investigation, it is important to ensure that the generator can self-excite i.e. without relying on an external power source. This can be done by connecting the dc shunt generator to a three phase supply from the variable voltage unit to the induction motor. The rated voltage when the induction motor is connected in star (380V line to line). This is approximately 85% on the variable voltage unit. The dc machine must be connected as illustrated in the instruction sheet. The induction motor is then switched on and the dynamometer controller to measure speed. If generator fails to self excite, there are several possible causes: There may be no residual flux in the generator thus the generator will not be able to start. If no residual flux exists then there is no voltage build up. In this situation disconnect the field from the armature circuit and connect directly to an external dc supply (e.g. a battery); this will thus allows current to flow for one instant and thus when dc supply is removed and original circuitry reconnected then a residual flux will be left in the poles. This process of adding an external dc source is better known as "flashing the field". The field resistance may be adjusted to a value greater than the critical resistance. Under normal operating conditions the shunt generator has an increase in its magnetisation curve up to the point where it intersects the field resistance. At the point where the field resistance is parallel to the magnetisation curve the generator can fluctuate widely with only tiny changes in field resistance or armature current. This resistance value is known as the critical resistance. If the field resistance exceeds the critical resistance (i.e. gradient becomes steeper) then the steady-state operating voltage is essentially at the residual level, and it never builds up. In order to cure this problem it would be advisable to reduce the field resistance. The generator rotation direction may have been reversed or field connections may have been reversed. In both cases residual flux produces an internally generated voltage. The voltage then produces a field current which produces a flux which opposes the residual flux, instead of increasing it. In this case no voltage build up is possible and to solve this problem, we just flash the field with an opposite magnetic polarity or by reversing field connections. Finally, the shunt generator may be switched off once all the above tests have been completed. Table 3 displays the following results that were established by conducting the above experiment. <table/><heading>Characteristics when operated as a shunt generator</heading>In this section the aim is to use the measure of speed,  FORMULA  to develop an understanding of the characteristics of the shunt generator. The circuit is connected as illustrated in the appendix. Table 4 shows the measurements obtained for the speed,  FORMULA  variables and from these we use formula [1] listed below to find field and armature currents. This is followed by a graphical illustration of  FORMULA  and Speed versus I L. It is important to note that  FORMULA  in figure 1. <table/> FORMULA The graphs for table 4 are found in the appendix. Let us look back Figure 1. The shunt generator circuit again. Where,  FORMULA  [1] If we look at appendix 1 we are able to see that there is a negative relationship between line voltage and current of the load. So as the line voltage increases, the current decreases. Similarly, in appendix 2 the speed vs current relationship is negative and non-linear thus indicating that in order to achieve a higher speed the current must be low. This can be achieved by having a higher line voltage. <heading>Characteristics when operated as a compound generator</heading>In this section the generator is connected as illustrated in instruction sheet so that it operates as a compound generator. Like the shunt generator test, we measure the speed,  FORMULA  characteristics. It is essential to compare the measurements of V L, if the voltage drop on load is less then this is fine however, if this is not the case then the series field must be reversed and measurements repeated. Table 5 below illustrates the results for the above section of the experiment. <table/> FORMULA The graphs for table 5 are found in the appendix 3 and 4. In appendix 3 the voltage of the compound generator is following an inverse relationship between the voltage and the current of the load like the shunt generator. According to Chapman, compounded dc generator performs differently depending on how many series turns it has. Similarly, in the appendix 4 similar relationships can be observed between the speed and current of the load. We are able to say that there is no significant difference between the graphs for speed vs current in both shunt and compound arrangement. <heading>Calculations</heading>In this section the graphical results produced in earlier chapter are analysed and we work out and plot the EMF vs. Field current for the shunt generator. The electrical losses and electrical efficiency for each load setting are calculated. Shunt Generators (appendix 1&2) As the graphs illustrate the voltage of the shunt generators drops off with an increasing load current. The same is true for the relationship between the current and speed of the shunt generator, as speed increases so the load current decreases. Compound Generators (appendix 3&4) Again as the graphs indicate there is an inverse relationship between the current and the voltage as well and the speed and current. As current decreases so the voltage and speed increases. The compound generator appears to be able to produce a larger voltage for a small current value compared to the shunt generator while the compound generator is unable to attain as high speed as the shunt arrangement. The following analysis is based on the relationship between the emf of the shunt generator and the field current. The emf is found in the following manner:  FORMULA  Thus using the above formula and the table 4 we are able to produce the following table 6 illustrated below: <table/>Table 6 is best summarised in the graph which is found in the appendix 5. It shows a non linear relationship but for better graphical illustration, MATLAB can be used to establish a curve fitter to fit the function. It can also be seen that from the graph that it does not pass through the origin; the reason for this is that there remains a residual flux in the shunt generator. To find out the EMF constant (the ratio between the EMF and Field current ), we can fit a straight line from the starting point to the end point of the line. We then have a slope of:  FORMULA  For more accurate result, one should use MATLAB as mentioned before. Finally, it is also useful to know the electrical losses and electrical efficiency for each load setting of the shunt generator. This is performed in the following manner: Total electric power to armature =  FORMULA  Electrical power lost in armature resistance =  FORMULA  [Total electrical power to armature]-[power lost in R a] =  FORMULA   FORMULA [2]  [3] From equation 2 and 3, we can obtain table 7: <table/>We can make the following conclusions: Mechanical power increases as efficiency increases Because of electrical losses, it will never obtain an efficiency of 100% <heading>Part B: Induction Motor</heading><heading>Introduction of Induction Motor</heading>The induction motor has the same physical stator as a synchronous machine however; its rotor construction is different. There are two types of induction motor rotors available, a cage rotor and a wound rotor. An induction motor relies for its operation on the induction of voltages and current in its rotor circuit from the stator circuit. Stator receives 3-phase power supply and thus produces a rotating magnetic field. The rotating magnetic field induces a current in the conductors in the rotor, which in turn sets up a counterbalancing magnetic field that causes the rotor to turn in the direction the field is rotating. The rotor must always rotate slower than synchronous speed or else the rotor bars would be stationary relative to the magnetic field and thus there would be no induced voltage. Figure 2 shows an equivalent circuit of a DC motor relative to the magnetic field. However, a simplified version is often preferred for its convenience and will be used later on in our investigation. <figure/><heading>Preliminary observations</heading>Table 8 below illustrates the values of the name plate ratings of the Induction motor. <table/>Using the Ohm meter determine the dc resistance per phase of the motor. This is illustrates in the table 9 below. <table/>Now connect the variable voltage source to the energy analyser, switch on and set the variable voltage control to 380V (line to line voltage). Then switch off. Finally, set the dynamometer to T Manu and load torque to 0. <heading>No- load test</heading>The no-load test of an induction motor shows the rotational losses of the motor and gives information about its magnetization current. This is due to the fact that the only load on the motor is the friction and windage losses so all the power in this motor is consumed by mechanical losses. <table/>Then we are asked to measure the waveform of starting current. To do this, an oscilloscope is used. First of all, channel volts/ div has to be set as 200mV with a time base sec/div= 50 msec. Push the 'Acquire' button and then follow the procedures below: - On the screen 'Acquire' menu, select 'peak detect' push the 'trigger' button - on the screen trigger' menu, set 'mode' to single and 'slope' to rising - use the 'Trigger level' knob to set this to about 200 mV - set run/stop - push the run stop button such that is shows 'armed' and 'ready' - scope is then ready to use and we turn on the induction motor. Measure the peaks using the oscilloscope and print a copy of starting current trace, which can be found in appendix. The print out from the oscilloscope illustrates a starting current of approximately 1 ampere then a settling down to approximately 200 mV. <heading>Locked- rotor Test</heading>Locked-rotor test is a popular test to determine the total motor circuit resistance. This is done by blocking or locking the rotor so that it cannot move. To perform a locked-rotor test, an ac voltage is applied to the stator, and the current flow is adjusted to be approximately full-load value, the voltage, current and power flowing into the motor is measured. Referring back to figure 2, since the rotor is not moving, it has a slip of 1 and therefore the rotor resistance R 2/s is equal to R 2, which is comparatively smaller than magnetizing reactance X M. The circuit can be seen as composed of a series of X 1 , X 2 , R 1, R L. In our investigation, we have been asked to complete the following steps to carry out a locked-rotor test. Set the dynamometer control to N manu Turn the manual control to maximum to stop the motor running Carefully increase the supply voltage until full-load current flows in the motor Measure voltage, current, power and power factor Switch off and set the dynamometer control back to T manu <table/><heading>Calculations</heading>In this section we are going to use our results to work out values for the equivalent circuit parameters of the motor. <heading>No-Load Test</heading>First we look at the no load test, at no load conditions, the input power measured is equal to the loss in the motor and also provides information about its magnetization current. For convenience, a simplified equivalent circuit is used in the analysis (will be shown later on in this chapter, see figure 3) The slip of the motor is very small in this condition so therefore resulting a very high resistance (imagine s= 0.0001). Rotor copper losses are negligible because I 2 is extremely resulting from the extremely high load resistance.  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Locked Rotor Test</heading>The following calculations identify the series reactance and resistances (here slip is equal to 1).  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  So finally, if we combine all the values attained from the locked rotor test and the no-load test we obtain the following simplified equivalent circuit in figure 3 below. <figure/><heading>Part C: The Synchronous Machine</heading><heading>Introduction to the Synchronous Machine</heading>A synchronous machine is an ac rotating machine which can be operated as either a motor or a generator. Their basic operation characteristics will be explained later on in the chapter. <heading>Preliminary Measurements</heading>Table 12 below displays the nameplate values of the synchronous machine. <table/>For safety reasons due to the fact that the power rating of the alternator is very small we must be careful not to exceed that value. The equipment for this investigation is connected as illustrated in the appendix. Ensure that the following is done to ensure the equipment does not get damaged: - Synchronising switch should be open Variable three-phase voltage source should be set to zero Variable dc supply should be set to zero <heading>Operation as a Generator</heading><heading>Measurement of Excitation Characteristics</heading>Set operating frequency of the inverter to 50Hz. Press the green button on the inverter to start the induction motor. It can be noticed that the induction motor is delta connection with voltage supply of 240V). Once the motor has accelerated up to speed adjust the speed to 1500 rev/min using dynamometer. The line voltage of the alternator not zero because of the magnetism in the machine; as the rotor has a residual field. Table 13 shows the test result and it is done by increasing the field excitation current in steps from zero to the maximum rated value (0.37A). At each step check the speed and adjust it if needed. Measure the output voltage of the alternator using the panel-mounted analogue meter. As soon as the experiment is finished, turn the motor off and turn down the alternator current thus protecting the machine from overheating when its fan is not running. <table/>The graph (see appendix 6) seems to illustrate a logarithmic decay function which tends to flat out at around 450 volts as the output of the alternator. This relationship may be explained by a quadratic relationship. We are not going through that here but from the graph we can say as the field excitation current increases, output voltage of the alternator increases as well at a decreasing rate. <heading>Synchronisation</heading>In this section we will be examining the synchronisation of the induction motor. Start the induction motor and set the speed to 1500 rpm and slowly increase the generator field current. Increasing the generator field current makes the machine noisier for the following possible reasons: Heating in rotor because of increase in flux (due to induced currents in the rotor) A greater motor speed will also mean a larger degree of mechanical friction Now we measure the output voltage using the panel-mounted analogue-meter and adjust the field current so that the generator line-to-line voltage is 380 V (or line to neutral voltage is 220 V). Then we turned up the variable three-phase voltage source and set the 'busbar' line-to-line voltage to 380 V as shown on the energy analyser. For safety reasons and for the protection of the equipment used to investigate synchronisation following conditions have to be met before synchronisation starts: Voltage match: vary generator excitation to give V G=380 V (the rms line voltages have to be equal when synchronising) Phase sequence match: all the lamps must flash simultaneously. If for instance they flash one after the other, stop the generator and reverse the phase sequence by swapping the two phases. This is to ensure have the same phase sequence which is essential in synchronisation Frequency match: All lamps flash as slowly as possible .Adjust the generator speed until this happens It is important to close the switch when all lamps are out for the following reason: The voltage difference across them is zero and the systems are in phase. <heading>Operation as a Synchronous Motor</heading>By disconnecting the induction motor, it leaves the synchronous machine to run as a motor as it runs on electrical energy. In our investigation, we use the dynamometer to apply a mechanical load of 100 W. We now monitor the effects that the variation of the excitation voltage of the synchronous machine has on the supply power factor. <table/>At synchronous speed Cos Φ = 1, however, as the excitation voltage at the field is increased, power factor increases too up until a certain point before it suddenly goes negative. Beyond that point, we can see the power factor slowly increases and approaches zero again. 