<heading>Introduction </heading><quote> "People around the globe are more connected to each other than ever before. Information and money flow more quickly than ever. Goods and services produced in one part of the world are increasingly available in all parts of the world. International travel is more frequent. International communication is a commonplace. This phenomenon has been titled "globalization.". 1 </quote>The process of globalization has accelerated remarkably in the last 15 years, which can be attributed to increasing FDI flows, mainly since 1980s, Mergers and Acquisitions, or strong increase in economic integration. Such a growth has led to emergence of thousands of Multinational companies nowdays. According to Franklin Root (1994),a MNC is a parent company that engages in foreign production through its affiliates located in several countries, exercises direct control over the policies of its affiliates, implements business strategies in production, marketing, finance and staffing that transcend national boundaries. So in other words, MNCs exhibit no loyalty to the country in which they are incorporated. This has raised a question, whether with the progress of globalization, the national origin of multinational companies have any relevance? <heading>Criteria for determining "stateless" corporation</heading>As there are many cross - border transactions for MNCs, there have been many arguments that they have become stateless, in which their national meaning is no longer relevant. However how can we define a term "stateless" ? Except for the geographical spread of MNCs, there are other factors, which need to be look at in order to determine whether a company is more national or transnational: this, according to Hu (1992) mainly depends on in which country are the company's assets and people located, by whom are the local subsidiaries owned and controlled, the nationality of people in the executive positions in the parent company, and the nationality of the most important decision makers at the subsidiaries in host nations and legal nationality of the group and its oponents. Also there is a need to consider whether operations are evenly distributed among these nations. When generally taking into account ownership and control of MNCs, these factors remain national rather than multinational. Althought foreigners may own shares in companies, in most cases it is the shareholders in the home country who own the majority of company's shares. Thus in terms of ownership and control, there is no doubt that a company like Ericsson is Swedish or Philips is Dutch. 2 <heading>Comparison of different companies</heading>It has been argued that consumer tastes and culture have now become homogenized and that some products are standardized with no connection to place or community. Others however argue that not that much has changed and that national meaning remains still significant. Looking at practical examples for finding out whether multinational companies retained their national meaning or not, I also found my inferences to be quite subjective. In one of the cases, like L'Oréal, which sells toiletries and cosmetics all over the world, there are differentiated products to meet different requirements of people in Europe, North America and Asia. Their brands Softsheen,Carson of haircare products are dedicated for people of African descent, Lancome and L'oréal Paris, epitomizing European tastes and traditions, Shu Uemura, a standard bearer for Japanese style, Maybelline New York and Redken, trendsetters for the US, or Armani in Italian style. However, there are also products which can be standardized for the whole world, like Ikea furniture or McDonald's or Coca Cola. We can see also differences in the meaning of the national origin in the car industry: For example most Japanese car companies have now shifted their Headquarters to the US because it is the largest automobile market in the World. Looking at Toyota in particular, they try and enforce the Toyota culture in all their overseas operations and the Toyota Culture itself is in line with the Japanese culture. They have a number of quality control processes that have Japanese names all over the World like Jishu Hozen, kaizen, etc.This culture of having established systems and rules would probably be a good way to manufacture and run mundane operations and administration. On the other hand product development and design Engineers in Toyota work in a different way with flex-timings, casual wear in office, etc.This is more of the Western working culture and this way probably suits in managing creative people and enabling them to perform better. General Motors in the contrary has no national meaning all over the World. All of their subsidiaries have unique working cultures. One of the reasons for this is because the company grew by acquisitions than by ventures in the last couple of years. Hence they have been working by the way of local cultures instead of enforcing the american way, eg. Chevrolet in America works the American way, Vauxhall-Opel in Germany works the German way and Daewoo in Korea works the Korean way. When looking at ownership and control of global car companies, Honda US, Toyota US, and Nissan US are owned and controlled by their parent companies in Japan. The subsidiaries's profits go to the home country. The U.S. subsidiaries of these companies cannot be owned directly by Americans. The important decisions are made by the Japanese. Therefore it is clear that these companies do have and stand for their national origin. On the other hand, GM and Ford are majority owned and controlled by Americans. Their worldwide profits accrue to the United States. When considering the nationality of most important decision makers of the company, there are no non - Japanese on the parent company boards of Honda, Toyota, and Nissan or in their top management positions. With Ford and GM, top management and the parent board are American, and the U.S. workforce is the majority. 3 This clearly shows that whether products are standardized depends on a particular company which we are looking at. <heading>Arguments over national meaning</heading>There is also a question over the national origin of companies who rely on the reputation of their home country as a source of advantage, however their home nation may account for only a small percentage of worldwide assets and operations.Eg. in the case of the Nestlé brand, where competitive advantage may be based partly on its national qualities, such as Swiss quality, Swill standards, Swiss punctuality and accuracy or Sony with perceived Japanese quality of electronics. In some cases, the home nation is more important for the group than any other single country where it operates, eg. Microsoft based in U.S. or Renault in France whereis its largest market. There is also another argument standing for national origin stating that companies tend to concentrate most of their innovative efforts and strategic decision making in the home nation. This means that the most important and the most skill - intensive jobs will be taking place in the home nation. When looking at different industries, the managing directors are more likely to be a parent country national in the automobile industry and more likely to be a host country national in the food and beverage industry (McDonalds, KFC, where the local taste is more important). Moreover, looking at the Porters five forces model, the objective of a company is to keep its Investors, Employees, Customers, Government and Suppliers happy. As a company globalizes, its share gets held by a more diverse set of investors from a wide range of nationalities in stock markets across the World (if shares are sold to foreign investors). Global shareholders obviously do not want to set practices of home country and would be unhappy is the country enforces the culture of its country of origin and gets attached to its national meaning. Overseas Customers need products custom made to suit their home country and their needs, they would not be able to relate themselves to the brand and the product if the perception of the brand is dictated by its nationality. Overseas Employees would also want the company's working culture to be in line with their own culture since it would be easier for them to impose their own practices. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Practically speaking it is not possible for a company to exhibit behaviour on one end of the spectrum. As it has been shown in the above examples, the answer to whether the national origin of MNCs have any relevance depends on at which company we are looking at and how we are looking at it. In every case this also depends on markets, company's shareholders, employees and their nature of work. Some companies, even when operating in all parts of the world, do still keep their national meaning, manner of work and culture of the home country, some other cases rely on the meaning of their national country as a source of competitive advantage or in other cases companies do have an unique working culture or differentiated products for a country where they are operating in. The approach that companies can take is quite subjective and most of them balance their working culture between their country of origin and the country that they are working in to make use of the favorable aspects of both. But generally with the increasing globalization, it seems that there is an increasing tendency for companies to adapt at least partially to the culture of the host country where they are operating in. As even when there is determination to keep a national meaning, there is also a need to adapt to a local country to meet the requirements of local customers. ________________________ 1  URL , by Keith Porter 2 Hu, Y. 1992. Global or Stateless Corporations Are National Firms with International Operations, California Management Review, 34, p: 111 3 Hu, Y. 1992. Global or Stateless Corporations Are National Firms with International Operations, California Management Review, 34, pp: 122-123 