<abstract><heading>ABSTRACT</heading>The aim of this experiment was to determine whether we could create visual search slopes that were consistent with the feature integration theory. We conducted an experiment using a computer program that measured participant's reaction times for identifying if a target object was present or absent. We found that on the whole when the target is easy to find an increase of distracters does not affect reaction time, when it is hard to find though an increase in distracters does affect reaction time. This shows that integration theory can be suggested to be correct. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Looking for an object is an everyday task of life, having to search for the location of relevant visual information. However the search for the relevant object can sometimes be hampered by the presence of irrelevant objects. The relevant object is known as the target, whilst the irrelevant objects are known as non-targets or distracters. Examples of this are attempting to identify a friend who is amongst a large group of people, or trying to identify a specific book on a bookshelf. The task is made harder as there are more non-targets than there are targets. Some search tasks though are easier than others though, if the relevant visual information has something distinct or specific about it. Such as shape, size or colour as the target therefore is distinguishable from the distracters around it. An example being, if the relevant object was a red book on a bookshelf full of green books. Or to find a friend in the crowd if they have a distinct haircut. If the target though is very similar to the distracters then the task is going to be much harder. The process of visual search has been suggested to have two main stages as stated by Triesman and Gelade in 1980. Known as Feature Integration Theory. Firstly feature maps are filled in, these each contain a specific piece of information such as colour, shape and size. These feature maps though provide no conscious information about the location of the features or any other features at the same location. Triesman and Gelade suggest at this point the maps are free floating. For an individual to recognise an object, activity from corresponding locations within each feature map must be combined. This combination requires a second stage, as an object representation is formed. In this stage attention is turned to a master map of locations. Which connects all the feature maps and identifies the location of objects present in the individual's visual field. The integration of all this information at one single location means the representation of a single object with all its features is produced. In this experiment we wanted to investigate whether distracters affect the time taken to locate a target object. The hypothesis was that when the visual field only contained one single feature then having distracters will not increase the time taken to identify the target object. However this would not be true when there was a conjunction visual field. When the target object was not in the visual field during the conjunction condition, it would also take longer to identify this. This would be because when the target object is absent all the feature maps need to be integrated. When the target object is present then usually only half the feature maps need to be integrated before the object can be identified. This is known as the serial self-terminating search theory, so there should be a 2:1 ratio between the absent and present search slopes. <heading>METHOD</heading><heading>DESIGN</heading>This was a within-participants design, the Dependant variable was the reaction time. The independent variables were whether the target was absent or present and which condition was being used. <heading>PARTICIPANTS</heading>This experiment involved 105 1 st year undergraduate psychology students at  University. The participants were in 4 separate groups who did the same experiment during the same week. They were informed the experiment was voluntary and that they could leave at any time. <heading>MATERIALS</heading>The experiment will be conducted using a computer program that asks you to identify whether a target object is present or absent. All participants used the same computer program and given the same instructions as to how the run it. <heading>PROCEDURE</heading>Participants were first asked to familiarise themselves with running the computer program. They were asked to do a practice block of trials for all three conditions. The first condition was a single feature search task where the target was defined by a unique colour (SFC). The second, a single feature task where the target is defined by a unique shape (SFS). The final condition was a conjunction search task where the target is only uniquely defined by a combination of both shape and colour (CJ). Within the conditions each search display will contain either 4, 8 or 16 display items and the target can either be present or absent. Each combination of target absent or present and display size will be repeated 20 times. As the computer program was a stimulus presentation program, participants would press the 'z' and 'm' keys on the keyboard to indicate whether the target was present or absent. Approximately half the group will use the 'z' key to indicate present response and key 'm' for absent responses and for the other half this will be reversed. The computer will then process the data, creating a set of mean correct reaction times. <heading>RESULTS</heading>The results show that our hypothesis was generally supported. The first condition, a single feature search task where the target was defined by colour, there is no increase in reaction (search) time. The search slope has remained flat which is what we expected, the dependant variable (reaction time) was not affected by the independent variable of whether the target was absent or present. However in the second condition which was also a single feature search task where the target was identified by shape, the search slope did not remain flat. The reaction time increased when the target was absent, this is not what we expected. In the third condition, a conjunction search task where the target was defined by a combination of both shape and colour. We got results that we expected, reaction times were longer in general and reaction time was around double for when the target was absent compared to when it was present. <figure/><figure/><figure/><heading>DISCUSSION</heading>The search slope for the first condition, which was a single feature search with the target being defined by colour, was consistent with feature integration theory. As the feature maps are filled in, the map concerning colour is not changed. Therefore the feature map concerning a distracting colour can be ignored. So only a few of the feature maps need to be integrated for the target object to be produced in the visual field. The results from the second condition, in which the single search target was defined by shape, are not consistent with the feature integration theory. As the reaction time is greater when the target object is absent. Only certain feature maps should be needed to be integrated, so they reaction time should not be affected by whether the target was present or absent. The number of feature maps needed to be searched should still be few as there was only the one difference between the target object and the distracters. For the conjunction condition, the hypothesis stated that the reaction time will increase as there are more distracters. Whilst the serial self-terminating search hypothesis states that the search slopes for the absent and present conditions would have a 2:1 ratio. As when the target object was absent all the feature maps need to explored and integrated. As you cannot be sure of the target being absent unless all the maps have been integrated. When the target was present usually only half the feature maps need to be searched, meaning there should be a 2:1 ratio. Our results show that the absent slope on the conjunction condition is much steeper than the present slope. With there being an almost 2:1 ratio of 15.932 to 27.248 concerning display size, which is recorded as the time taken to identify whether the target object was present or absent. We also expected the reaction time to increase as the number of distracters in the visual field increased. As the relationship between reaction time and the number of distracters is a measure of the difficulty of the task. On the single search conditions reaction time should not have increased due to an increase of distracters, as the target was easy to find. However when the target was hard to find such as in the conjunction condition, then increasing the number of distracters will increase the time taken to determine if the target is present or absent. Our results are generally consistent with this theory. 