<abstract><heading>ABSTRACT</heading>Our investigation was looking at the correlations between the three measures of gratitude, the GQ-6, the Gratitude Resentment and Appreciation Test (GRAT) and the Appreciation Scale. We were looking to see whether they were in fact reliable measures of gratitude. We did this by putting all three measures into one questionnaire and asking 150 participants, both male and female, to fill it in. We found that the three measures did correlate quite highly however they seem to be measuring different concepts of gratitude, shown by the correlations between the subscales of the measures. This suggests that what the measures defined as gratitude and what they measured it as was different, putting question primarily over the GRAT and Appreciation Scale as reliable measures of gratitude. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Gratitude is a significant emotion in modern day society and is seen to be a commonly experienced affect. Research found that feeling grateful was the third most common discrete positive affect experienced by adults, 90% of the sample reported this affect, (Weiner 2003, cited in McCullough 2004). The experience and expression of gratitude throughout history has been regarded by many cultures as being beneficial to both society and individuals. Several world religions such as Judaism, Christianity, Islam and Buddhism teach about the importance of gratitude, (Emmons & Crumpler 2000, cited in Tsang 2006). One of the first in-depth studies into gratitude was done in the late 18 th century, finding it to be a basic and necessary emotion that promotes social stability by guiding people to respond to others' goodwill towards them, Smith 1790 cited in (McCullough 2004). Yet there has been a small number of psychological work done on gratitude, this could be attributed to the fact that psychological research has generally been dominated by a focus on vice rather than virtue. Gratitude, along with other phenomena related to the good life, has been neglected, (Myers & Diener 1995, cited in McCullough 2004). Since 2002 and the publication of McCullough's article on gratitude, this field of psychology has come more to the fore. McCullough's article defined gratitude as an affective trait, that it is part of someone's personality, so this appears to be what the GQ-6 is measuring gratitude as. He stated that person's who were highly grateful, had a grateful disposition, a characteristic in people that others would recall about them easily. The grateful disposition was defined as a generalized tendency to recognize and respond with grateful emotion to the roles of other people's benevolence in the positive experiences and outcomes that one obtains, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). Affective traits, such as gratitude, lower one's threshold for experiencing certain emotional states, (Rosenberg 1998, cited in McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). The grateful disposition therefore creates a lowered threshold for recognizing and responding with gratitude. The grateful disposition may emerge from particular attributions regarding the causes of the positive outcome. When there is recognition of an positive outcome happiness occurs, which is attributed to an external source, so happiness is labelled as gratitude, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). McCullough hypothesised that dispositionally grateful people tend to attribute their positive outcomes in life to the effort of other people and that due to this disposition they experience high levels of positive affectivity and low levels of negative affectivity. What might distinguish grateful people is their ability to stretch their attributions to incorporate a wide range of people who contribute to their well being, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). This led McCullough to constructing the GQ-6 in order to measure the disposition towards gratitude. Further research by Watkins supported McCullough's argument that gratitude was a disposition, but disagreed on the make up of the disposition. He developed another measure of dispositional gratitude devising the Gratitude, Resentment and Appreciation Test (GRAT), (Watkins 2003). This self-report measure conceptualized dispositional gratitude as a combination a four different characteristics. Firstly, acknowledging the importance of expressing and experiencing gratitude, secondly a lack of resentment with respect to benefits received. Thirdly, an appreciation for the contributions of others towards benefits received, lastly an appreciation for simple pleasures, (Watkins 2003). This led to them testing their own measure of gratitude, known as the GRAT. Adler and Fagley offered an alternative definition, believing gratitude to be one aspect of the feeling of appreciation. They argued that being appreciative facilitates and enhances feelings of well being and life satisfaction, (Adler & Fagley 2005). Expressing appreciation to others is also believed to build social bonds, and is seen as something that can be learnt over time. Appreciating something involves noticing and acknowledging its value and meaning, then feeling a positive emotional connection to it. To test this definition they constructed the Appreciation Scale, which contained 8 sub scales which they saw to be the defining aspects that made up appreciation. These being, have focus, awe, present moment, self/social comparison, gratitude, loss/adversity and interpersonal, (Adler & Fagley 2005). Their definition of gratitude is that it is an acknowledgment of a benefit that has been received, from a person or a deity, feeling thankfulness for the efforts and sacrifices of an 'other'. It is a positive emotional reaction to someone or something that has bestowed a positive event upon us, (Adler & Fagley 2005). Within our investigation we were interested in looking at the relationships between these three measures of gratitude. Examining whether these three measures are actually measuring the same concept, a similar concept or are they in fact measuring something completely different. We expect to find a correlation between the three measures as they are all intended to measure gratitude. <heading>METHOD</heading><heading>PARTICIPANTS</heading>There were 150 participants who varied in age from 18 to 82, with 75% of participants under the age of 25. There were 81 females and 69 males, consisting of university students as well as members of the general public. All participants were informed of their right to withdraw from the investigation at any time, signing a consent form to indicate this (see Appendix 1). All participants were briefed in the aim of the investigation and informed of how long it would take. <heading>DESIGN</heading>Our investigation looked at the correlation between the three methods of measuring gratitude. These three measures were represented in a single questionnaire (see Appendix 1) which was distributed to each participant and fully completed by all. The three measures were counterbalanced in the questionnaire, so the order in which the measures were done in varied. <heading>THE GQ-6</heading>The GQ-6 contains six questions designed to measure the trait of gratitude. A 7 point Likert rating scale, ranging from 'strongly disagree' being 1 to 'strongly agree' being 7, is used to measure the score. Two of the questions are negatively worded meaning that when analysed reverse scoring is required. After reverse scoring was implemented, scores could range from 6 - 49, higher scores indicated a more grateful disposition. In four different studies it was tested against other measures, it maintained an alpha value of 0.82 showing high internal validity. <heading>THE GRATITUDE, RESENTMENT AND APPRECIATION TEST</heading>The GRAT is a 44 item questionnaire designed to measure the grateful disposition. Scores are measured using a 5 point Likert rating scale, 1 meaning 'strongly disagree', 5 meaning 'strongly agree'. 15 of the questions were negatively worded, bar one in the 'Sense of Abundance' scale, reverse scoring was required for these questions. Scores could range from 44 to 220, which higher scores indicating a more grateful disposition. It has good internal validity with a coefficient alpha score of 0.92. <heading>THE APPRECIATION SCALE</heading>The Appreciation Scale is a 57 item questionnaire measuring both the trait and manifestations of gratitude. The first 22 questions measure the score using a 7 point Likert rating scale, ranging from 1 meaning 'Never' to 7 meaning 'More than Once a Day'. These questions measure how often a certain act occurs. The remaining questions were also measured using a 7 point Likert rating scale, though with 1 meaning 'strongly disagree' and 7 meaning 'strongly agree'. Two questions are negatively worded within the 'Gratitude' subscale, and require reverse scoring. Scores range from 57 to 399, with higher scores indicating higher appreciation. In the one study it was tested in, it showed good internal validity within the 57 questions, with a coefficient alpha of 0.94. <heading>PROCEDURE</heading>Questionnaires were given to participants in their counter balanced forms who were de-briefed in the nature of the investigation. They were asked to complete all questions fully and as honestly as possible. The results were then collected and collated and statistical tests were performed on them, in order to determine validity and correlations. <heading>RESULTS</heading>We set out to try and identify whether the three measures of gratitude were in fact measuring the same thing. Our findings showed that the three measures did have a fairly high correlation, suggesting that they are measuring a similar concept or phenomenon, but not the same thing and definitely not an identical concept. The GRAT correlated quite strongly with the Appreciation scale, r =0.681, p<0.01. The GQ-6 also had a relatively strong correlation with the Appreciation Scale, r =0.634, p<0.01. The GQ-6 and the GRAT also had a quite strong correlation, r =0.674, p<0.01, (see Table 2).The internal validity of all three measures is extremely high, coefficient alpha =0.959, (see Table 1). The three measures need examining further. <table/><heading>APPRECIATION SCALE</heading>Internal validity was seen to be very good within the Appreciation Scale, across the questionnaire, coefficient alpha =0.940. The subscales within the Appreciation scale also have relatively good internal validity with coefficient alpha reporting a range of 0.647 - 0.886. The inter correlation between the 8 sub scales was weak, with a range of, r = 0.282, p<.0.01 - r =0.746, p<0.01. Each of the subscales within the Appreciation Scale on their own don't correlate to an extremely high level with the GQ-6 and GRAT, with a range of, r = 0.312, p<0.01 - r = 0.676, p<0.01. The subscales however do correlate much higher with the total of the Appreciation Scale, with a range of r =0.606, p<0.01 - r =0.884, p<0.01. The relationship between the 'Awe' subscale and the 'Gratitude' subscale, shows a weak correlation r =0.363, p<0.01. The relationship between 'Self Social' subscale and the 'Gratitude' subscale was also weak, r =0.372, p<0.01. The internal validity of the 'Self Social' subscale was seen to be low with coefficient alpha reporting 0.647. The 'Interpersonal' subscale and 'Gratitude' subscale had a weak correlation, r =0.282, p<0.01. 'Interpersonal' and the GRAT total correlated weakly, r =0.342, p<0.01, as did the 'Interpersonal' with the GQ-6 total, r =0.423, p<0.01. 'Interpersonal' and the 'Appreciation of Others' subscale from the GRAT are also weakly correlated r =0.362, p<0.01. The correlation between the 'Gratitude' subscale and the GQ-6 total is weak r =0.511, p<0.01, as is the correlation between 'Gratitude' and the GRAT total r =0.533. <heading>THE GRATITUDE, RESENTMENT AND APPRECIATION TEST</heading>The GRAT has a very high overall internal validity, coefficient alpha =0.918. It also has an extremely high internal validity within the three subscales. Sense of Abundance subscale showed coefficient alpha =0.886, Simple Appreciation showed coefficient alpha =0.880 and Appreciation of Others showed coefficient alpha =0.804. The inter-correlation between the subscales is shown as being relatively low, with a range of r =0.388, p<0.01 - r =0.524, p<0.01. The 'Sense of Abundance' subscale and 'Self/Social Comparison' subscale from the Appreciation Scale showed a non significant correlation r =0.131. All the GRAT subscales correlated relatively weakly with the 'Gratitude' subscale from the Appreciation Scale, with a range of r =0.295, p<0.01 - r =0.554, p<0.01. The correlation between the three subscales and the GQ-6 were also relatively weak, r =0.591, p<0.01, r =0.483, p<0.01 and r =0.526, p<0.01. The correlations between the subscales and the Appreciation Scale total were weak, r =0.358, p<0.01, r =0.690, p<0.01 and r =0.606. The 'Appreciation of Others' subscale is weakly correlated with the 'Interpersonal' subscale of the Appreciation Scale, r =0.362, p<0.01. <heading>GQ-6</heading>The GQ-6 has no subscales as it measures a single construct, it is shown to have good internal validity, coefficient alpha =0.751. <heading>DISCUSSION</heading>The fairly high correlation between the three measures (see Table 2) suggests they are a measuring a similar concept but not the same thing, the concept they are measuring is not identical. This high correlation can be related to their similar definitions of what gratitude is, they all agree on the disposition of gratitude but differ on what they see as the make-up of gratitude. The high internal validity of the three measures (see Table 1) also suggests they are measuring a similar concept as Cronbach's alpha measures how well a set of items measures one similar construct. The high internal validity between the eight sub-scales of the Appreciation Scale suggests that they are measuring a similar concept. However the 'Self/Social' subscale had the lowest internal validity at, Cronbach's alpha =0.647 (see Table 1), this would suggest it is measuring something slightly different to the other seven sub scales. The inter-correlation between the sub scales was weak though (see Table 2), showing that they are measuring different ideas, questioning the need for a single score at the end. Each of the subscales on their own don't correlate highly with the GQ-6 and the GRAT, this shows that on their own each of the subscales are not measuring gratitude as defined by the GRAT and the GQ-6. 'Awe' and 'Gratitude' subscales you would expect to correlate highly, as the definition given for 'Awe' is that it is the appreciation of feeling a deep, emotional, spiritual, or transcendental connection to something, (Adler & Fageley 2005). This is similar to the definition of 'Gratitude' which states it as an emotional connection to something, an acknowledgement of a benefit received by a person or a diety, (Adler & Fagley 2005). Obviously their questions in these subscales have not been related well to the definitions they have given. The definition of 'Gratitude' is also similar to the definition given for the 'Interpersonal' subscale, which is defined as acknowledging and feeling positively towards people in our lives, (Adler & Fagley 2005). These similar definitions would suggest a strong correlation, however the correlation is in fact weak which would not be expected. Once again the questions have not been related well to the definitions. The 'Self/Social' subscale correlated at a low level as well, with the 'Gratitude' subscale which is defined as feeling positively about things in reaction to downward self or social comparisons. Once again there is some overlap in the two definitions. The 'Gratitude' subscale also unexpectedly had a low correlation with the GRAT total and the GQ-6 total, this is a major point of discussion. The GQ-6 defined gratitude as a disposition that involved a generalized tendency to recognize and respond with grateful emotion to the roles of other people's benevolence in the positive experiences and outcomes that one obtains, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). This is very similar to the definition of the 'Gratitude' subscale, as is the GRAT's definition of which also sees it as a disposition of appreciation (Watkins 2003). The questions are incredibly similar (see Appendix 1). This shows the Appreciation Scale's subscale of 'Gratitude' is measuring a different concept of gratitude to that of GQ-6 and the GRAT. The internal validity of the GRAT subscales is high (see Table 1), showing that they are all measuring a similar concept or construct. The inter-correlation of the subscales is low (see Table 2), showing there are not measuring the same idea, meaning that there shouldn't be a single score at the end. The non significant correlation of the 'Sense of Abundance' subscale with the Appreciation Scales 'Self/Social' subscale was not expected. These two scales look at 'resentment' as being a part of gratitude, so the non-significant correlation suggests that 'resentment' is in fact not a part of gratitude, (Watkins 2003). This shows their subscale to be unconvincing and their overall definition of gratitude as questionable. Self Social also has the lowest correlations with the other two subscales, but yet the highest with the GRAT total. This puts doubt over the GRAT overall, as a measurement of gratitude. The correlation between the 'Appreciation of Others' subscale, and the Appreciation Scales 'Interpersonal' subscale was lower than expected. This is because the definition of 'Interpersonal' is stated as noticing, acknowledging and appreciating people in our lives, this definition could be summed up as 'Appreciation of Others', (Adler & Fagley 2005). Either their definition of 'Appreciation of Others' is wrong, or their questions have been badly phrased. The results overall put question over the GRAT as a reliable measure of gratitude. The internal validity of the GQ-6 was the lowest of the three measures (see Table 1), however by definition Cronbach's alpha is affected by two different things. The correlation between items and the number of items, therefore the GQ-6 will appear lower. It was the most reliable of our measures, due to the previous research done, with a coefficient alpha of 0.82, this is not significantly different to our own alpha score. The three measures of gratitude do correlate quite highly, which suggests they are measuring a similar concept. However it seems the measures are in fact measuring different concepts of gratitude, this could be explained by their disagreement over the make-up of gratitude not it's definition. Future research could be done by looking at re-defining the subscales to make sure the same concept of 'gratitude' is being measured. To conclude the GRAT and the Appreciation Scale seem to be unreliable measures of gratitude. 