<abstract><heading>Summary:</heading>Drag plays an important role in vehicle design. There a two types of drag mechanism whose significance depends on the type of body that the fluid must flow past. In all cases we seek to reduce the drag. For a racing car this is particularly important along with generating downforce. </abstract><heading>Introduction:</heading>Drag is a force that is generated as a result of a body blocking the path of a fluid flow. This force can be expressed by the following equation:  FORMULA  <fnote>"Engineering Data Book" AJ Cartwright (ed) 4th ed. 2001 University of Warwick, School of Engineering </fnote>The coefficient of drag (C D) can be analysed using dimensional analysis. We assume that drag is a function of fluid density ρ, viscosity μ, free stream velocity U 0, a linear dimension of the body l, weight of the body per unit mass g (acceleration due to gravity), surface tension σ and bulk modulus K.  <fnote>Analysis from JF Douglas, JM Gasiorek, JA Swaffield "Fluid mechanics" 3rd ed. 1995 Longman group Ltd </fnote> FORMULA   FORMULA . Substituting in the dimensions:  FORMULA . Equating indices:  FORMULA , therefore  FORMULA .  FORMULA , therefore  FORMULA .  FORMULA . From which  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . Therefore  FORMULA   FORMULA .  FORMULA ,  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  so that:  FORMULA . Compare with our original equation for drag:  FORMULA . Since for a body of a fixed shape  FORMULA , where l is a numerical constant and incorporating the constant ½ as well as l into the function  FORMULA  such that  FORMULA , we obtain  FORMULA   FORMULA  The drag coefficient is therefore a dimensionless quantity that is determined by four dimensionless groups. <heading>Design Solutions:</heading>The level and type of drag depends on the shape of the body. Bluff and streamlined bodies are both subject to drag forces, but of a different nature. For bluff bodies it is pressure drag that dominates. This is caused by adverse pressure gradients resulting in a low pressure area at the rear of the body. The adverse pressure gradient causes the boundary layer to separate (see figure 1) and a wake forms. The wake exists in the form of eddies that flow in a rotary manner and where the fluid pressure is low. The size of the wake depends on the point at which the boundary layer separates. It is desirable to delay the separation so that the wake is as small as possible and hence the pressure drag will be lower because the pressure difference between the front and rear of the body will be smaller. <figure/>In the case of streamlined bodies the boundary layer separation takes place very near to the rear of the body. The pressure drag is not that significant (although still a factor). In this case it is the skin friction drag that is dominant. This type of drag is caused by the action of viscosity in the boundary layer setting up shear forces that act on the body. We can relate the two mechanisms to a coach and a racing car. The coach is not at all aerodynamic and therefore the pressure drag will be dominant. A racing car is designed to minimise drag and maximise downforce. The car is made with stream lining in mind and therefore skin friction is an important factor. The generation of negative lift does however cause a separation of the boundary layer and so pressure drag is of more significance to a racing car than to a purely streamlined body that does not need to generate downforce. <figure/>The relationship between drag and turbulence has been touched upon above. The turbulence in the wake causes the low pressure and hence pressure drag. The turbulent boundary layer is also important. The turbulent boundary layer separates less easily than the laminar boundary layer. The turbulence in the boundary layer causes the streamlines to move closer together at the rear of the body thus increasing the pressure at the rear of the body hence reducing pressure drag. The design of a car is completely under the control of engineers working on different aspects such as chassis, engine, suspension, tyres, aerodynamics etc. The aesthetics are important because a car needs to look good to sell but also it must be aerodynamically efficient. There is a compromise that must be reached. We can estimate the drag force exerted on a coach by modelling it as a rectangular cross section. We will assume that the cross section is 2.5m x 3.5m. Existing data for drag coefficients gives a value of 1.1 for such a body. <fnote>Streeter, Wiley, Bedford "Fluid Mechanics". 1998 McGraw Hill </fnote>Calculation of drag force and power required to travel at 50 mph:  FORMULA  The density of air is  FORMULA .  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . The most aerodynamically efficient design for a racing car is shown on the right below and a calculation for the drag force and power output required to attain a speed of 150 mph follows. Existing data for the design on the right gives a value for C D of 0.12. The cross section can be modelled as an ellipse with an area of about 3.5 m 2. <fnote>JA Roberson, Clayton T Crowe "Fluid Mechanics" 6th ed. 1997 Wiley </fnote> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA . Scale models can be used in a wind tunnel to model the air flow over a prototype design. The conditions for model testing are geometric similarity, kinematic similarity and dynamic similarity  FORMULA . This is hard to achieve. A huge wind tunnel is needed which must also be pressurised in order to achieve the same Reynolds number for model and prototype. Other techniques would be by the use of computer programs using computational fluid dynamics. This reduces amount of wind tunnel testing but is not yet advanced enough to allow for no physical testing at all. <heading>Conclusions:</heading>Drag occurs as a result of the interruption of a flow by a body. It is a function primarily of the Reynolds number and also of other dimensionless numbers. In vehicle design it is desirable to reduce drag but there is always a compromise between the best aerodynamic solution and the aesthetics. 