With the benefit of hindsight it is possible to look back on the Biennio Rosso, the two 'red years' of 1919-20, and see them as a failed revolutionary period where many of the pieces were in place to produce a revolution similar to that which had occurred in Russia only two years previously. However it was fascism which took hold in Italy and anti-liberalism which prevailed as the ideology. Benito Mussolini and others like him played on the people's fears about economic and political stability and attracted supporters from many backgrounds. Nonetheless, despite the speed and strength with which fascism appeared in Italy I am going to argue that this was only possible due to the huge divisions within the left and if the left had come together as a united force then they may well have had their revolution and stopped fascism at its roots. Firstly though, I am going to explore the fascist counter-offensive and evaluate exactly how they were able to overcome both the Socialists and the Liberals. Despite the anti-liberal ideology behind fascism the Italian people were by no means forced into accepting it in 1919-20 and chose to support it due to a number of factors. Firstly, the aftermath of World War I had an immediate effect with Italy staking claim to the areas of Fiume and Dalmatia, something which American president Woodrow Wilson would not accept. The Italians actually walked out of the talks and this led to strong public support in pursuit of these areas and the real beginnings of a powerful nationalist sentiment. These feelings were intensified when Gabriele D'Annunzio went against the allies and marched on Fiume occupying it for over a year. Martin Clark writes that "the plight of Fiume and Dalmatia provided slogans for all kinds of super-militant patriotic groups; it kept the spirit of 'interventionism' alive throughout the post-war years." <fnote>Martin Clark, Modern Italy 1871-1995 (London, 1996) p. 205. </fnote>The fascists cause was further helped by the subsequent fall of Fiume and the Treaty of Rapallo signed in 1920 which stated that Fiume was to be a free state and ensured that Italy renounced their claims to Dalmatia. "The Treaty of Rapallo was good propaganda for nationalists," as it made the Italians felt hard done by in a War which they had supposedly won. This, coupled with an economic recession which hit Italy in late 1920, deepened the industrialists gloom and "some of them became more willing to finance strike breakers and Right-wing extremists". Obviously these circumstances were not under the control of the fascists but they made sure that they took advantage of the national mood. Mussolini's paper, the Popolo d'Italia, was successfully turned into a "spokesman for all the discontented extreme 'interventionists'," and they were able to portray the occupation of the factories as a second rate priority. <fnote>Clark, Modern Italy, p. 215. </fnote><fnote>Clark, Modern Italy, p. 208. </fnote><fnote>Clark, Modern Italy, p. 215. </fnote>One of the main successes of the fascists was their ability to attract such diverse groups. Until 1919 the Fascist program was still seen as very radical but having failed to make inroads into the left electorate Mussolini began to make deals with landowners and industrialists. "Small leaseholders and owners, farm managers and artisans, share-croppers in Emilia, those who had bought or hoped to buy land, joined the squads and joined the Fasci." Also attracted to Mussolini's policies were some sons of economic elites, right wing and nationalist students and some returning troops who were angered by the socialist anti-war stance. Although many of the troops returning from the war had become anti-war themselves, they resented the fact that some socialists saw it as having been for nothing, that it was pointless and the pain and suffering which had occurred had been in vein. The Socialists lost out in many ways because of the cross section of people Mussolini appealed to; "He was the enemy of the Socialist party, but the friend of the trade unions and the working-class."  <fnote>Clark, Modern Italy, p. 216. </fnote><fnote>C. Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism to Fascism, 1870-1925 (London, 1967) p. 518. </fnote>It was with this support that Fascist expansion took place in the winter and spring of 1920-1 where the squadristi were able to conduct a "systematic campaign of terror against the Socialists and their local institutions (communal councils, party branches, trade unions, co-operatives and even cultural circles.)" One example of this is on January 11 th 1920 when Mussolini organised the wreckage of Bissolati's meeting at the Scala; "this was the first planned violence in post-war Italy." The main reason that they got away with such behaviour is that "above all, the Giolitti government seemed soft on militancy." By taking advantage of this and perpetuating the climate of civil war, they themselves helped to heighten the yearning for authority, order and an end to perpetual crisis, which was to allow Mussolini to present himself as the saviour of the nation. <fnote>Adrian Lyttelton, The Seizure of Power: Fascism in Italy 1919-1929 (London, 1987) p. 38. </fnote><fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 518. </fnote><fnote>Clark, Modern Italy, p. 215. </fnote>All of those who were involved with the squads believed in their own righteousness; they believed that they were restoring law and order, rescuing their country from tyranny, and that they were avenging their fallen wartime friends. This is why so many people actively took part in the violence and why so few people seemed to try and hault it. They were helped by the fact that "the growth of the fasci in 1920-1 was powerfully assisted and sometimes even initiated by the regular Army." However, despite all of the above ways the fascists were able to gain support they may not have been able to get away with methods such as the squadristi if the Socialists had shown themselves to be a viable alternative. <fnote>Lyttelton, The Seizure of Power, p. 39. </fnote>In 1919 the Socialist Party was 200,000 people strong and they took control of 2,800 communes which was around 24 per cent of the total. On top of this they directed thousands of co-operatives and opened over 2,000 local sections throughout the country. The stage was set for a left-wing revolution but the problem was that the workers had "brought the 'machine' of the bourgeois power shuddering to its foundations but did not bring it to collapse." This occurred for a variety of reasons which I will explore below but the point needs to be illustrated of how close Italy came to a real worker revolution and how especially in the years 1919-20 they encountered little real resistance. This was partly because the government were not entirely sure how to cope with the labour unrest, in particular the occupation of the factories in Turin. Additionally, even as late as 1919, "the activities of the Fascist or Nationalist squads remained sporadic and usually marginal in their immediate political effects." <fnote>Spriano, Paolo, The Occupation of the Factories: Italy 1920 (London, 1975) p. 25. </fnote><fnote>Spriano, The Occupation of the Factories, p. 127. </fnote><fnote>Lyttelton, The Seizure of Power, p. 35. </fnote>The overriding reason for the failure of the workers unrest is that there was no united front to tie all the left-wing sections together either ideologically or organisationally. The historian Seton-Watson claims that "out of all this ferment in town and countryside a Lenin could perhaps have created a truly revolutionary movement," but the Socialists had no-one of Lenin's stature or personality that could lead the Party in such a way. The leaders of both the P.S.I (the Italian Socialist Party) and the C.G.L. (the Italian Trade Union Congress) were essentially reformist and the rest of the members were "paralysed by the rivalry between the maximalists and the reformists, neither of whom were strong enough to get their own way." Even when the occupation of the factories was in full swing in 1920 the movement proved incapable of improvising a structure which had not previously existed, it was only in Turin where some effort towards doing so was made but it was too little, too late. <fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 524. </fnote><fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 524. </fnote>The reformists were, as their name suggests, much more willing to negotiate with the government and did not support the riots and strikes which were taking place. The maximalists too, were suspicious of popular initiative but their main concerns were "their blueprints for soviets and the socialisation of the land, and wrangling over correct revolutionary tactics," and they could not see why the reformists could even consider listening to the bourgeois establishment. However the maximalists were never successful, perhaps due to the fact that they had a rather soft core and they "provided only revolutionary talk as a substitute for revolution." They also isolated themselves by denouncing nationalists as warmongers and attacking the war in which so many had died or come back to find that their efforts had not been fully supported. In fact many soldiers were not only suspected of being reactionaries but "were despised for their gullibility and often barred from party membership." <fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 524. </fnote><fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 526. </fnote><fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 512. </fnote>The Maximalists were led by Serrati who was very much in favour of the trade unions and did not approve of the factory councils taking away their authority. He believed that all existing working class institutions had to be preserved and strengthened, "for otherwise Socialists would not be able to control the revolution once it had started, or administer society after it had occurred." This was another point of contention within the left as the anarchists and their main leader, Malatesta, did not agree with Serrati. The anarchists and indeed the syndicalists supported the factory councils because they saw them as a means of overcoming the reformism of the C.G.L. Even when Malatesta realised that without support the anarchists could do little, his overtures for a united front were rejected by the both the socialists and the C.G.L. and the split between the groups could not be reconciled. <fnote>Martin Clark, Antonio Gramsci and the Revolution that Failed (London, 1977) p. 125. </fnote>There were other groups, also, which contributed to the divisions within the left; the abstentionists were also anti the trade unions believing that they were "anti-revolutionary bodies controlled by reformists." They were against the C.G.L's proposal for a Constituent Assembly elected by professional categories on the grounds that the proletariat could only be represented on a political basis, not on the basis of any kind of trade organisation. Bordiga and the abstentionists gained a lot of support from the unskilled particularly in Naples and the poorer regions in the south but they were critical of the Turin 'labour aristocracy' and so could not join forces with the Maximalists or anarchists. Bordiga believed that the failure of the Piedmontese General Strike in April 1920 confirmed all of his views; "he regarded it as proof that worker's control before the seizure of power was inconceivable." <fnote>Clark, Antonio Gramsci, p. 120. </fnote><fnote>Clark, Antonio Gramsci, p. 123. </fnote>The final group of significance was that of Antonio Gramsci in Turin and their newspaper 'L'Ordine Nuovo'. Gramsci had doubts about the possible success of the factory occupations and viewed the younger, semi-skilled workers as volatile and politically immature. However it was he and his group who were seen as young and inexperienced and "viewed with suspicion by established working class leaders, outside Turin they counted for little." Gramsci did realise though that the left needed to come together in order to have any effect but the failure to win over Bordiga and his supporters or even to achieve a working compromise with them at national level, "was perhaps the biggest political failure of the Ordine Nuovo movement."  <fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 526. </fnote><fnote>Clark, Antonio Gramsci, p. 124. </fnote>Despite the focus of this essay being mainly on the fascists and the socialists there were some other factors which may have helped defeat the labour unrest of 1919-20. The emergence of the PPI (the Catholic Party) as a significant influence hindered the socialists and took some of their potential support. The Catholic peasantry around Turin were often hostile to industrial workers and led to Turin being fairly isolated when it came to starting a revolution. Perhaps also the sheer scale and social diversity found across Italy meant that it would have been impossible to have a single coherent strategy even if the divisions of the left had been brought together at some stage. However the situation the Left had to take advantage of was near perfect and the Italian government was truly worried about the unrest. In fact it could be argued that socialism had taken hold so much that a fascism counter-offensive was actually needed to stop it. The maximalists, in particular, were so concerned with the correct revolutionary vocabulary that "they failed to see that in the peasant leagues, the cooperatives, the labour exchanges and socialist local authorities a 'second power' lay ready to their hand," ready for them to have a real chance of overturning the Italian state. If the various groups had been able, or willing, to put their differences aside and united then they had a very real chance of creating a revolution which would have seen the Left come to power and maybe then they could have worked out their differences from a much more secure position. <fnote>Seton Watson, Italy from Liberalism, p. 524. </fnote>