<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> is a right-handed 81 year old diabetic with history of regular falls, 2 previous strokes and 1 previous STEMI who was taken by ambulance to A+E at the Walsgrave hospital on the  with symptoms of slurred speech, left-sided weakness and facial palsy. He was transferred from a general medical ward (A2N) to a stroke ward on the . <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint. </heading><list>Slurred speechLeft-sided weaknessFacial palsy</list><heading>History of Presenting Complaints. </heading> collapsed at home in the 'early hours' of the  on attempting to reach the ensuite bathroom from his bedroom. He does not remember any specific events prior to the collapse, he felt 'perfectly well' and had just 'awoken to pass water' before falling suddenly without warning to the ground. He was able to describe the collapse itself in detail and didn't report any loss of consciousness, fits or muscle jerking. He was not incontinent or bit his tongue.  noticed no change in his vision or hearing following this collapse. He experienced no chest pain, shortness of breath, cough, dizziness or headaches at any point. He thinks he was on the floor for around 15 minutes but his friend with whom he has lived since  and found him on this occasion puts this time at around an hour.  was unable to get himself up from the floor and was also unable to stand with the help of his friend. He got up only with the help of the paramedics when they arrived. From the time of collapse he was unable to move both his left arm and left leg, had slurred speech and was unable to weightbear on his left side. Otherwise he felt 'all right' in himself, he didn't feel dazed or confused. This has improved slightly so that at the time of interview he was able to move both his left upper and lower limb on command, speech was intelligible but slurred, he is still unable to weightbear. He has had 2 previous cerebral infarcts in the past year affecting both his right and left sides. From these he has, regained near enough normal function of his limbs and has managed to retain a reasonable level of independence. Falls -: 6 month history of frequent falls, average frequency of 3/4 a week. He did not report any associated significant injuries and didn't describe having lost consciousness on any of these occasions prior to the current admission. No further falls since being admitted on the 09/04/06. He attributes the falls to 'not being very confident on his feet' rather than occurring as a result of dizziness or lightheadedness. <heading>Past Medical History. </heading>2 previous strokes - 2005, affecting left fronteroparietal and right basal ganglia regions. Pulmonary embolus - requiring hospital admission in . Put on wafarin following this episode. Diverticulitis - long-standing history. Gastritis Basal carcinoma nose - removed 2003, no further recurrence. Previous STEMI - 2000. Hypertension - longstanding duration. No epilepsy, asthma, jaundice, rheumatoid arthritis, cervical arthropathy, obstructive sleep apnoea, acromegaly or thyroid disease. No past history of rheumatic fever or tuberculosis. No diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolaemia. Previous pulmonary embolus and ongoing hypertension of longstanding duration. <heading>Surgical History: </heading>Surgical removal of basal carcinoma from left-side of nose in 2003. <heading>Systems Review: </heading>No other significant symptoms correlating to cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal, urinary or neurological systems. No change in appetite or weight. He has not experienced any night sweats, heartburn, indigestion, nausea, vomiting, joint stiffness/pain, bowel disturbance or rectal bleeding. <heading>Medication. </heading>Aspirin 75mg PO OD - anti-platelet agent, prophylaxis of cerebrovascular disease and MI. Rabeprazol 20mg PO OD - proton pump inhibitor, inhibits gastric acid by blocking the hydrogen-potassium adenosine triphosphatase enzyme system of the gastric parietal cell. Sotalol hydrochloride 40mg PO BD - ß-adrenoceptor blocker, management of hypertension. Isosorbide mononitrate 60mg PO OD - nitrate, coronary vasodilator and reduces venous return and left ventricular work, prophylaxis of angina and adjunct in congestive heart failure. Warfarin sodium 1mg - oral anticoagulant, antagonizes the effects of vitamin K. Felodipine 5mg OD - calcium channel blocker. Myocardial contractility is reduced , propagation of electrical impulses within heart is depressed and coronary or systemic vascular tone reduced.  takes no other alternative or over the counter medication. <heading>Allergies: </heading>No known allergies. <heading>Family History: </heading>No family history of heart disease or stroke. <heading>Social History:</heading> owns a house in , in which he hasn't lived since his previous hospital admission in  for a pulmonary embolus. Since this time he has lived with a friend. Prior to the current admission he managed his personal care independently and had reasonable mobility being able to walk into town on his own, unaided; a distance of approximately 2 miles. He has no children. Ex-smoker with 20-pack year history. Stopped smoking a year ago following his last heart attack. Alcohol intake is minimal. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Stroke. A reasonable diagnosis for the following reasons:  presents with symptoms of focal neurological deficit of greater than 24 hours in duration. Collapse was sudden, of abrupt onset. History of 2 previous cerebral strokes. Differentials for consideration. Ischaemic stroke - accounts for 80% of all strokes. Commonly occurs at night. Haemorrhagic stroke. Associated with severe, uncontrolled hypertension. Craniocerebral / cervical trauma - unlikely no known such history,  had been sleeping. Tumour - reasonable differential, can present with focal neurological deficit. However, no evidence of other presenting symptoms such as raised intracranial pressure or epilepsy. Subdural haematoma - found predominantly in the elderly. Minor head trauma such as hitting head on impact could cause haemorrhage in an elderly patient predisposed to haemtoma formation as a result of cerebral atrophy and stretching of veins in the subdural space.. Hyponatraemia - common cause is dehydration. Associated muscle weakness but no confusion or seizures. Hypoglycaemia - unlikely, although associated with symptoms of focal neurological deficit boosting blood glucose would be expected to have some effect on these symptoms. This is the not the case with , his symptoms have persisted for a number of weeks. Hyperglycaemia. Hypocalcaemia - unlikely, no associated symptoms of tetany or depression. Multiple Sclerosis - first presentations are usually monosymptomatic. Commonly presents with optic neuritis. Mean age of onset is 30 years, female preponderance. Encephalitis/Cerebral abscess - unlikely, associated signs of meningism and ↓ consciousness. Examination findings supporting a diagnosis of stroke relate to the distribution of the affected artery. Cerebral hemisphere infarcts may cause contralateral hemiplegia which is initially flaccid then spastic, contralateral sensory loss and dysphasia. Brainstem infarcts have widespread effects including quadriplegia and disturbances of vision and gaze. Lacunar infarcts affecting the basal ganglia, internal capsule, thalamus and pons may cause pure motor or sensory signs, a mixture of both or ataxia. <heading>Physical and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>An elderly man who appeared relatively comfortable at rest. He was not obviously short of breath, cyanosed nor jaundiced. He was fully conscious, cooperative and talked with some difficulty throughout the interview. <heading>General. </heading><heading>Hands. </heading>No pale palmar creases or signs of peripheral cyanosis. No palmer erythema, clubbing, cyanosis, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, kolonychia, liver flap. <heading>Face. </heading>pale palpebral conjunctivae - suggestive of anaemia. No signs of jaundice (icteus), cyanosis, xanthelasma. <heading>Mouth. </heading>No cyanosis No ulcers Not dehydrated <heading>Neck. </heading>No lymphadenopathy. Temperature - 36.5ºC - absence of systemic infection e.g. septicaemia. Temperature was 35.4ºC on admission due to a combination of the possibility that  had been on the floor for a length of time before being found and shock. <heading>Neurological system. </heading><table/>Cranial nerves: Ptosis - left eye, cranial nerve III defect. Drooping left angle of mouth - cranial nerve VII defect. Forehead sparing. All other cranial nerves intact on examination. On interview, speech was observed to be slightly slurred however words expressed were distinct and intelligible. No expressive or receptive dysphasia. Memory appeared unimpaired. Mini-mental state score of 14/15. <heading>Cardiovascular system. </heading>No signs of peripheral or central cyanosis Mild bilateral pitting oedema - indicative of congestive cardiac failure. Pulse 85 bpm - tachycardia, Blood pressure 170/82 - known hypertension of long duration, indicative of sub-optimal control. Radial pulse palpable, rate 68 bpm - (tachycardia resulting from possible anxiety), irregularly irregular - indicative of atrial fibrillation, radial and carotid pulses normal strength All other peripheral pulses palpable JVP normal Heart sounds I and II normal No murmurs or displacement of the apex beat. Blood glucose (non-fasting) - 5.7 mmol/l <heading>Respiratory system. </heading>Respiratory rate 18/min Oxygen saturation 97% on air Breathing appeared of normal depth No cough, sputum, tracheal deviation Equal chest expansion, normal vesicular breath sounds Bilateral basal crackles - indicative of chest infection or pulmonary oedema <heading>Abdomen. </heading>Symmetrical No spider naevi, caput medusa or obvious abdominal distension Liver, Spleen, kidneys and bladder impalpable No renal angle tenderness - infection unlikely No ascites or shifting dullness or palpable masses Abdomen soft and non-tender on palpation, percussion resonant, bowel sounds present. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Stroke most likely of ischaemic type, radiological imaging required for further classification. Findings from the history and examination supporting diagnosis of stroke (ischaemic type) affecting the cerebreal hemispheres - TACI are: Symptoms of focal neurological deficit e.g. weakness of limbs on the left side, slurred speech. Symptoms greater than 24 hours in duration. Ischaemic strokes often occur at night as here. Onset wasn't after exertion and unassociated with loss of consciousness as is typical of haemorrhagic stroke. Forehead sparing - with upper motor neurone lesions where the lesion is between the contralateral cerberal cortex and the pons, the muscles of the upper part of the face (especially frontalis with function of raising the eyebrow and furrowing the brow) may be spared. This is because lower motor neurones to this part of the face are bilaterally innervated by corticopontine fibres. Symptoms of TACI - higher cerebral dysfunction e.g. dysphasia and motor/sensory deficit in left arm and leg. Stroke refers to a syndrome consisting of rapidly developing symptoms and signs of loss of focal CNS function. Symptoms may develop over usually seconds or minutes. A stroke by definition is associated with symptoms lasting 24 hours or more or leading to death. Pathological mechanisms affecting vasculature resulting in stroke are classified as either infarction (embolic or thromboembolic) or haemorrhagic. <table/>A stroke may be distinguished from a transient ischaemic attack as this refers a focal neurological deficit of less than 24 hours duration. Transient episodes lasting longer than 24 hours from which an individual recovers completely are termed reversible ischaemic neurological deficits. Thrombosis of cerebral arteries or veins resulting in stroke can be caused by abnormality in individual or any combination of the components of Virchow's triad: <list>Vessel wall - degenerative disease, inflammation (e.g. vasculitis) or trauma (dissection).Blood - polycythaemia (increased viscosity predisposing to stasis).Blood flow (stasis).</list>Infarcted tissue causes oedema and associated swelling. Room for expansion within the skull is limited; any condition which causes an increase in volume within the skull cavity will cause an increase in intracranial pressure or shift one brain component thus compressing others. As intracranial pressure increases, the brain shifts or is distorted compressing neurons, nerve tracts and cerebral arteries. A sustained increase in pressure will cause persistent ischaemia and irreversible damage to the above structures. As described above the most common type of stroke is infarctive, arising typically from degenerative arterial disease either of larger vessels - atherosclerosis (with consequent thromboembolism) or small vessels (lipohyalinosis). The probability of developing significant atherosclerotic disease is increased by the following risk factors: <list>hypertensionalcoholdiabetes mellitusoral contraceptivessmokingatrial fibrillationhypercholesterolaemiaplasma fibrinogenfamily history of vascular disease</list>Annual UK incidence of stroke is 2 per 1000 population, accounting for the third most common cause of death in the UK. 80% of strokes are of infarctive origin. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical: 's progressive ischaemic heart disease and heart failure have inevitably impacted significantly on his physical exertive capacity. He is able only to walk a matter of 30 yards before having to stop and catch his breath and is virtually unable to climb stairs. He is frightened by his recurrent strokes, when they will happen and the resulting effect. Psychological:  has experienced repeated strokes and resulting progressive incapacity. The psychological impact of decreasing independence shouldn't be underestimated. He appeared frustrated at the current limitations on his ability for independent living. Social:  has a close relationship with his friend, a crucial source of support in his future care. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading>Full Blood Count - indicates normocytic anaemia of chronic disease. <table/>Results for biochemistry were all normal indicating normal renal and hepatic function. CT head  - area of old infarction seen in the left frontal operculum. Smaller old infarct seen in right basal ganglia. No recent infarct, haemorrhage or space occupying lesion. Diagnosis is largely clinical, CT scans may be insensitive to recent infarcts as in this case. Haemorrhagic strokes show up white intially on CT, ruling out this option in this patient. CT head  - established infarction in left fronteroparietal location and right basal ganglia. No mass effect or intracranial bleed. Cortical atrophy seen. Ventricles normal with no midline shift. Standard swallow screen  - poor lip control, coughing on taking sips, voice quality wet, nil by mouth recommended. Consider nasogastric nutrition. <heading>Reassurance and explanation: </heading>Your present symptoms of limb weakness and slurred speech can be explained by you having suffered a further stroke affecting your right hand side. The most common cause of stroke is when a clot lodges in one of the arteries in your brain acutely reducing the diameter of the vessel and potential for blood to flow through and reach your brain tissue. If there is no nearby blood supply to compensate for this deficit, the affected area of brain will die and infarct. The area of brain affected determines the symptoms seen. As your left hand side if affected, the infarct must be on the right side. As you have had before, a CT scan will help determine both the size, type and location of the damaged area in your brain. Factors increasing risk of clot formation include 'sluggish' blood flow, smoking, increased blood pressure and increased cholesterol, we will want to address these during your admission. Physiotherapists and Occupational therapists will also come to speak to you today/tomorrow and assess your treatment requirements. The sooner physiotherapy begins, the greater the degree of limb function you are likely to regain. Please don't hesitate to ask any questions. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention</heading><list><heading>Plan, commenced on the :</heading>Regular routine bloodsChest X-ray, ECGGeneral medical reviewUrinary catheter requiredRemain nil by mouth, nasogastric tube requiredOptimise hydration to maintain renal functionFollow-up swallow assessment with adoption of soft diet when deemed suitableReferral to occupational therapy, speech therapy and dietician.Stop warfarin on admission, restart 10 days post-infarctAspirin 300mg OD for 7 days then reduce to 75mg OD and add in dipyridamole (initial dose 25mg BD increasing up to 200mg BD).Reassess antihypertensives after 7 days - following stroke, cerebral perfusion is dependent on systemic blood pressure as cerebral autoregulation is disturbed by stroke.Start statin e.g. atorvastatin after day 7.</list><heading>Observation: </heading> was transferred to the specialist stroke unit where he should receive regular observations including oxygen saturation, heart rate and ECG monitoring. Neurological function should be regularly assessed. Respiratory, cardiovascular and renal function should be optimised prior to discharge. His pain relief should be adequate to keep him comfortable whilst in hospital. He should be closely monitored for complications of stroke e.g. emergent infections e.g. pneumonia/septicaemia, deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, heart failure, fluid imbalance.  was reasonably noursihed and hydrated prior to admission, however, since suffering his most recent stroke has not yet regained full swallowing function. On admission and transfer to the stroke unit he remained nil by mouth and was fed via a nasogastric tube. However since the 19/04/06 concerns have been raised about his ability to tolerate his NG tube. Dietary intake is currently supplemented with thickened fluids. At the time of interview he was being considered for PEG tube insertion. <heading>Referral and team working</heading><list>GP - post-discharge monitoring and supportOutpatient stroke clinic - medication review, assessment of progressCardiologist - optimise hypertension control Occupational therapy - maximise independence around the homeDietician - dietary advice and support regarding cholesterol content of dietSocial services - provision and implementation of an individualised care package on dischargeHeart failure nurse led team</list><heading>Advice and Prevention</heading>A low-fat, high-fibre diet is recommended Increase daily fluid intake Regular exercise of a tolerable intensity Continue daily aspirin Consider future use of home oxygen <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> is uncertain as to his discharge date. He was relieved as to the explanation concerning his current condition and felt he had been fully informed regarding his rehabilitation and the treatment he is receiving. Factors adversely affecting his prognosis and contributing to long-term disability include the development of: pressure sores, epilepsy, recurrent falls and fractures, depression and spasticity with pain, contractures and frozen shoulder. Discharge is to be discussed once nutrition is sorted. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Aims for treatment of  are to minimise (i) resultant impairment, (ii) disability, (iii) secondary complications, (iv) adverse effects from treatment. Concerning the management of stroke: Specialised treatment: Systematic review evidence has shown that rehabilitation provided in specialist stroke units versus that provided in less specialised, conventional care significantly reduces death rate and level of dependence after a median follow-up period of 1 year 1. Medical treatment (thrombolysis): In patients with ischaemic stroke, thrombolysis versus placebo has been shown in systematic reviews to significantly reduce the combined outcome of risk of death or dependency after a period of 1-6 months post-infarction. Thrombolysis does however, significantly increase the risk of death from intracranial haemorrhage in the first 7-10 days post-infarct or risk of death after 1-6 months 2. Aspirin: For patients in whom ischaemic stroke has been confirmed by computerised tomography scan, aspirin administered within 48 hours of the onset of stroke significantly reduces both death or dependency at 6 months and also the precentage of those making a complete recovery when compared to placebo 3. 2 large randomised controlled trials have produced indirect evidence that should an ischaemic stroke be suspected and CT scan immediately unavailable then administration of aspirin should not be delayed 4. Blood pressure reduction in acute stroke: various randomised controlled trials have suggested that people treated with antihypertensive agents may go on to have a worse clinical outcome and increased mortality. However, evidence from systematic reviews has been insufficient in comparing such effects of lowering blood pressure versus placebo 5. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>The National Service Framework for Older people was published as a guide to the treatment of Older people in the UK today. It has 5 aims, (i) to eradicate age discrimination in the health service, (ii) to provide person-centred care which is importantly (iii) intermediate and (iv) in a General Hospital environment and (v) to promote health and activity in older people 6. This framework strategy sets measurable goals to be achieved within set-time frames and as such should be incorporated into routine practice. Full, informed consent for all diagnostic and treatment proceedures is essential for all patients but especially so for an elderly individual such as . His diagnosis and crucially prognosis should be clearly and fully explained. A diagnosis of stroke for example carries a variable prognosis.  had clearly made the association between his symptoms and "something serious being wrong". He had realised his speech and motor function had been affected and was concerned as to how these would recover. He was realistic about an expected lifespan. This case highlights the ethical principles of autonomy, beneficence and non-maleficience. Type, duration and whether or not to accept treatment should be his decision. Clearly, in this case the presenting symptoms required secondary specialist hospital based care.  is extremely anxious about the possibility of having further strokes. Manipulation of his treatment regime in order to extend the time to re-infarct must be explained to him in a format he is able to understand and absorb. Facilitating patient involvement in continued rehabilitation on discharge has diffuse future healthcare implications. For example, encouraging and actively involving a patient in the management of their disability e.g. continuing physiotherapy exercises at home, taking regular medication and offering smoking-cessation support can help with acceptance of a disability state and alleviate resource strains on the NHS. Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. His family could contribute towards care and as such should be involved in his treatment and diagnosis. 's health needs to be optimised to enable him to maximise independence and quality of life. Currently evidence concerning the impact of family/social support in the rehabilitation of patients on hospital discharge and the 'critical time window' in which rehabilitation is most effective is limited and is clearly an area to address with future research. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading><list>Aetiology and natural progression of ischaemic heart disease.Factors determining prognosis.The importance of a multi-disciplinary team in patient care.Management of both chronic and acute heart disease.Impact of diagnosis of a chronic illness and unsuitability for surgery.Biopsychosocial model of health.</list>