<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> was taken to Rugby hospital by ambulance on the 09/04/06 complaining of shortness of breath and generally feeling 'unwell' for the week prior to admission. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint. </heading>'Difficulty breathing' Feeling 'unwell' - 1 week history <heading>History of Presenting Complaint. </heading> presented with shortness of breath of longstanding duration, approximately 2 years. She feels this has worsened in severity over the 2 year period, being at the time of the current admission, the worst that she can remember. In the week prior to admission she was breathless on exertion being able to walk only 20 yards before having to stop. She finds for example, walking to her ensuite toilet at home extremely difficult. She is not breathless at rest. On climbing stairs  becomes extremely breathless only managing a few steps at a time. She has to climb a flight of 15 steps to reach her home and has found this number increasingly difficult to manage over the past year. Since being in hospital  has used a frame whilst walking and although having found this has increased her confidence, it has done little to improve her shortness of breath. There is no paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea.  uses (and has done for years) 2 pillows and it was unclear whether she would be able to or chooses not to lie coompletely flat. She does not use oxygen at home. When this has been introduced during the current admission feels she has received some benefit. No use of inhalers or nebulised medication prior to admission.  attributes her dyspnoea to 'smoking problems'. She has a 60 pack year history. She has no previous respiratory history e.g. no asthma, TB. Dyspnoea had been associated with a productive cough for a week prior to coming into hospital, with white/yellow sputum. She visited her GP 4 days prior to admission but did not receive any antibiotics. Cough is unassociated with pain, haemoptysis or wheeze. She was unaware of any trigger factors such as cold weather and animal fur. Cough was constant throughout the day and couldn't be said to be worse at one time over another. She doesn't experience any chest pain, palpitations or syncope. She reports having a cough 'most days' but this recent cough is unusual as it is particularly productive. For the week prior to admission,  reported feeling 'unwell'. She felt 'cold and shivery' all the time and was unable to do anything herself to improve this. She described her health as 'poor' but was unable to elaborate further on this. She feels 'slowing down' is a problem and has been worsening over the past year. She attributed this to breathlessness but also joint pain (particularly in the lumbar region) and lack of confidence when walking. She does not regularly fall. She has experienced weight loss of approximately a stone in the past year and attributes this to poor appetite. Bowel and bladder function remain 'normal' and unaffected. She reported a longstanding history of anxiety but did not describe low mood despite having been on fluoxetine for over a year. Her mood at the time of interview seemed good, she was keen to leave hospital and more than happy to talk. <heading>Past Medical History. </heading><list>COPD - > 2 year historyHypertension - long standing duration, control over the past 5 years has been reasonable.Osteoarthritis - greatest pain experienced in the lumbar region.Anxiety - longstanding, possibly triggered by the death of her husband.</list>No diabetes, epilepsy, asthma, jaundice, strokes, heart attacks, rheumatoid arthritis, cervical arthropathy, obstructive sleep apnoea, acromegaly or thyroid disease. <heading>Surgical History. </heading>No recent surgery. <heading>Systems Review: </heading>No other significant symptoms correlating to cardiovascular, abdominal, musculoskeletal or neurological systems. <heading>Medication on admission. </heading><list>Fluoxetine 20mg PO OD - selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Management of depressive illness.Aspirin 75mg PO OD - anti-platelet agent, prophylaxis of cerebrovascular disease and MI.Calcichew D 3 BD - (calcium carbonate, cholecalciferol), oral vitamin D supplement. Minimise extent of osteoporosis.Bendrofluazide 10mg PO OD - thiazide diuretic, management of hypertension.</list> takes no other alternative or over the counter medication. <heading>Allergies: </heading>No known allergies. <heading>Family History: </heading>No known significant family history e.g.respiratory, cardiovascular. Both parents died "of a good age". She has a son who is fit and well, living nearby whom she sees fairly regularly. <heading>Social History:</heading> lives alone in a first floor flat. Her personal care is manageable but tasks such as cooking, cleaning and shopping are becoming increasingly difficult for her to manage on her own. Up until now she has received no external help in her home and is anxious about doing so in the future. She has a 60 pack year history (menthols), has smoked since the age of 20 and stopped since being in hospital. She drinks no alcohol.  is a retired shop assistant. She owns no birds and has never encountered any respiratory occupational hazards.  is understandably extremely anxious about the worsening severity of her breathlessness. She is keen to receive treatment and leave hospital, but is anxious as to how she will manage at home on discharge. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Infective exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary disease (COPD). Reasonable diagnosis for the following reasons: 60 pack year smoking history. Becomes dyspnoeic on exertion. Severity of dyspnoea has worsened over a number of years. No associated chest pain, haemoptysis, paroxsymal nocturnal dyspnoea. Possible orthopnoea. Dyspnoea eases with combivent nebulisers and oxygen. Dyspnoea associated with recent onset of malaise, productive cough, fever and shivering indicative of respiratory infection. <heading>Differentials :</heading>Congestive heart failure - reasonable as elderly, dyspnoea is chronic, progressive and associated with exertion. However, she doesn'r report any cardiovascular symptoms other than possibly orthopnoea. She has no cardiovascular history such as MI or angina. There is no evidence of pulmonary oedema e.g. froathy sputum. Valvular heart disease - dyspnoea is chronic and progressive as would be expected. No associated symptoms of chest pain, syncope and palpitations. Chest infection - unlikely to contribute entirely to the presenting symptoms. No purulent sputum indicative of chronic infection such as bronchiectasis. Lung cancer - needs to be investigated given the symptoms of malaise, weight loss and the extensive smoking history. No haemoptysis however. Pulmonary fibrosis - no history of exposure to environmental/occupational triggers. Presents with chronic dyspnoea of progressively worsening severity so should be considered. <heading>Findings to be looked for on examination to confirm a diagnosis of COPD are :</heading><list>Nicotine staining of the fingersIncreased respiratory rateFlapping tremor - sign of carbon dioxide retention due to respiratory failure.Cyanosis - central.Breathing pattern - pursed lips, accessory muscle use, leaning forward with hands on knees.Chest appearance - barrel chestEarly inspiratory crackles</list><heading>Physical and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>A thin elderly lady who appeared comfortable at rest. She was not obviously jaundiced or cannulated but had a nebuliser at her bedside which she had to stop the interview to use.  was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely. <heading>General. </heading><heading>Hands. </heading>No pale palmar creases - suggesting absence of signficant anaemia. No palmar erythema, clubbing, cyanosis, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, kolonychia, liver flap. <heading>Face. </heading>No pale palpebral conjunctivae, jaundice (icteus) <heading>Mouth. </heading>Central cyanosis Pursing of lips No ulcers Not dehydrated <heading>Neck. </heading>No lymphadenopathy. Temperature - 38.2ºC - indicative of current infection. <list>Glucose 6.9 mmol/LGCS 15/15</list><heading>Abdomen. </heading>No organomegaly No renal angle tenderness - infection unlikely No ascites, shifting dullness, spider naevi, caput medusa, abdominal distension Bladder impalpable Abdomen soft and nontender Bowel sounds present A PR exam was not performed at the time of examination, as supervision was unavailable. <heading>Cardiovascular system. </heading>Central cyanosis No peripheral oedema Pulse 90bpm -tachycardia, Blood pressure 143/70 - known hypertensive, indicates reasonable control. Radial pulse palpable, regular, radial and carotid pulses normal strength All other peripheral pulses palpable JVP normal Heart sounds I and II normal No murmurs or displacement of the apex beat. <heading>Respiratory system. </heading>Respiratory rate 22/min - tachypnoea, associated with respiratory infection and hypoxia. Use of accessory muscles to assist respiration, barrel chest Oxygen saturation 99% on air Breathing appeared to be reduced in depth,  was breathless on exertion and on changing position at the time of admission. No tracheal deviation Productive cough - white/yellow sputum Equal chest expansion, bronchial breathing - indicates consolidation Basal crepitations - indicative of respiratory infection Widespread rhonci - indicates small airway obstruction Chest generally hyperresonant to percussion - as found with hyperinflation typical in COPD Dullness to percussion in left lower lobe - indicates consolidation <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Infective exacerbation (bronchopneumonia) of COPD. Findings from the history and examination which support this diagnosis are: Fever, productive cough with yellow sputum, dullness to percussion, bronchial breathing and basal crepitations all indicate consolidation which is associated with bronchopneumonia. Tachypnoea, signs of hyperinflation and malnutrition such as thin body, barrel chest, pursing of lips and use of accessory muscles to aid respiration are all found in the 'pink puffer' (type A fighter) morphology associated with emphysema. In bronchial breathing, noise from the larger airways predominates producing a harsher sound than that produced by normal breath sounds originating in the small airways and alveoli. The sounds increase through inspiration, stop near the end of inspiration and restart after a gap when air flows back through the larger airways during expiration. Rhonchi or wheeze is defined as a continuous whistling sound due to the vibration of opposing walls of narrowed airways as air passes through them. Due usually to small airway obstruction as in COPD. 60 pack year smoking history. Cigarette smoking is the single most important risk factor for the development of COPD. COPD patients typically demonstrate a progressive decline in lung function (as seen here) interposed with intermittent acute exacerbations leading to progressive respiratory symptoms, disability and respiratory failure. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) defines a group of chronic diseases characterised by reduced expiratory airflow and increased work of breathing. Reduction in airflow can be due to decreased lung elastic recoil, increased airway resistance or a combination of both. COPD encompasses chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Chronic bronchitis is a clinical diagnosis with symptoms of cough and excessive mucus production for most days out of 3 months for > 2 years. Clearly  fufills this definition. Emphysema is caused by progressive destruction of alveolar septa and capillaries leading to development of enlarged airways and airspaces, decreased lung elastic recoil and increased airway collapsibility. As detailed above,  fufils the 'pink puffer' appearance associated with this condition. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical-:  didn't appear overly frail at the time of interview but has over the last 2 years become progressively more incapacitated. She is extremely breathless on exertion able to walk a distance of 20m before having to rest. She finds stairs extremely difficult also. In addition she has poor appetite and as a consequence her nutritional intake is poor. She is extremely thin and this can only contribute to lowering her energy levels, further limiting her capacity for physcial exertion. Psychological-: She is anxious about the progression of her breathlessness and is keen to find out about the impact of this on her future independence. She is anxious about returning home and how she will manage on her own but is reluctant to discuss care packages as feels this comprimises her indpendence greatly. Social-:  lives alone in a first floor flat, the 15 steps to her door posing an increasing restriction on her ability to leave the flat and thus her independence. Prior to admission she received no help in her home at all and is now considering and moving towards accepting the need for a care package on her discharge. She may benefit from additional social interaction such as that provided by a day centre. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading><table/>The above blood results show a picture of microcytic, hypochromic anaemia which may result from a combination of chronic disease and poor dietary nutritional content. <table/>The raised urea and creatinine indicate a mild degree of renal impairment as would be expected in an individual in their 80s. These results are relatively stable over a 2 week period and as such should be monitored relatively frequently in a general practice/community setting. The raised CRP supports the diagnosis of respiratory infection and concomittant C.difficile infection. Chest X-ray  - right hilum enlarged, heart size normal, area consolidation left lung base. ECG  - sinus rhythm with ventricular ectopics. <heading>Reassurance and explanation</heading>The chest x-ray and ECG you have had have supported our clinical findings and we can say with confidence that the cause of your recent decline in health prompting the current hospital admission is an infection of your lungs. As you yourself have acknowledged you do have some longterm damage to your lungs most likely as a result of your smoking and this responsible for your day-to-day breathlessness. This damage is called COPD and is a progressive condition i.e. something which gets progressively worse with time. We can treat your lung infection here successfully but unfortunately not cure the underlying disease process. As you have found in hospital oxygen at home may be useful as may a number of drugs that you take either via an inhaler or a nebuliser. We plan to start some of thee treatments during your hospital stay so that you may return home with the optimal treatment package. We acknowledge also the difficulties you have been having managing at home and will refer you to both social services and occupational therapy during your stay so that again the optimal care package can be both arranged and implemented prior to your discharge. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention</heading><list>Cefuroxime 1.5g IV every 6-8 hours - 'second generation' cephalosporin, broad-spectrum antibiotic.Fortifresh 200ml PO, BD - nutritional supplement.Flixotide 50ug BD inhaler - (fluticasone propionate), prophylaxis of asthma, COPD.Felodipine 5mg OD - calcium channel blocker, relaxes vascular smooth muscle and dilates coronary and peripheral arteries. Management of hypertension.Losartan 50mg OD - angiotensin II receptor antagonist, similar action to ACEI but don't inhibit breakdown of bradykinin so less side-effects. Management of hypertension.Saline 2.5ml QDS - used as a nebuliser diluent.Combivent inhaler 2 puffs - (ipratropium bromide, salbutamol), compound bronchodilator preparation.</list>Consider starting prednisolone. Occupational therapy referral and assessment of capacity and ability to manage at home. Physiotherapy referral - stairs assessment. Breathing exercises to help clear chest. Stop bendrofluazide - may cause a degree of hepatic and renal impairment. Clexane 100mg/ml SC - (enoxaparin sodium), low molecular weight heparin. Prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis, increased risk due to long-term immobility whilst in hospital.  - developed severe diarrhoea, tested positive for C.difficile. Treat with metronidazole, give IV fluids and check bloods and CRP at regular intervals. <heading>Observation</heading> was transferred from the medical admissions unit to a general medical ward where she should receive regular monitoring of her oxygen saturation, heart rate, blood pressure and temperature. She requires nutritional supplementation due to her poor oral intake of nutrients and weight loss which should be altered in keeping with her body mass, blood counts and biochemistry and urine output. She should begiven fluids initially and then continued if deemed appropriate. Respiratory function should be regularly assessed and optimised with oxygen therapy if required.  was extremely breathless on admission and her sats. are typical of those of someone with COPD, normal at rest and then desaturates on exertion. Care must be taken in giving oxygen as she will be dependent on hypoxic drive to breathe. For her to understand and absorb information given, this should be provided in both an appropriate environment and format. Opportunity should be made for further discussion post-diagnosis delivery should she have any additional questions. <heading>Referral and team working</heading>GP - post-discharge monitoring and support Social Services - optimise pension and benefits received. Provide at home assitance e.g. personal hygiene, cooking and cleaning needs. Provide contact details for local day centre. Occupational therapists - optimise independence on discharge Physiotherapists - breathing exercises, clear chest, optimise respiratory function Dietician - optimise dietary intake, boost calorie intake and encourage weight gain Respiratory function tests - to aid assessment of prognosis <heading>Advice and Prevention</heading>Optimise nutritional status - provide supplementation as indicated by deficit in oral intake, body mass etc. Increase daily fluid intake - maintainance of hydration status. Moderate regular exercise Stop smoking <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> is set for discharge on the  after having been in hospital for 5 weeks. Her diarrhoea had been successfully treated on the  and she was able to transfer independently and manage stairs with some confidence. Occupational therapy has identified no need for their input. A care package is in place for her discharge with which  seemed fairly happy. Her observations are all currently stable and her respiratory function stabilised also with regular combivent nebulisers. Her oxygen saturations on the  was 90% on air and it is possible she will return home on oxygen. At the ward round on the  she seemed in relatively good spirits and didn't voice any concerns. Her appetite remains poor and dietician imput has recommended continuing Fortifresh 200ml BD and high calorie diet on discharge. She currently walks with a frame and again should return home with this. Her prognosis is dependent on severity of airflow obstruction. Patients with a FEV1 <0.8L have an annual mortality of approxiamately 25%. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Cigarette smoking is the predominant risk factor for development of COPD. Other risk factors include increasing age, male gender, respiratory infections in childhood, low socio-economic status, airway hyperreactivity and α1-antitrypsin deficiency. Aims of treatment of  are to: (i) alleviate symptoms, (ii) prevent exacerbations, (iii) preserve optimal lung function and (iv) improve activities of daily living, quality of life and survival. β2 agonists: systematic review evidence has indicated that inhalation of β2 agonists over a period of 1week - 6 months significantly improves FEV 1 and symptoms of dyspnoea when compared to placebo 1. Such studies have shown that in the long-term, 2/3 of those subjects with COPD have at least 15% reversibility with β2 agonists. β2 agonists have been shown however in those with asthma to be linked to increased risk of death, worsened control of asthma and deterioration in lung function. Inhaled anticholinergics plus β2 agonists: various randomised controlled trials have shown that combining a β2 agonist e.g. albutarol with an anticholinergic such as ipratropium bromide for between 2-12 weeks has a modest but significant improvement in the degree of bronchodilation achieved when compared to either drug alone 2. Oral corticosteroids: a single systematic review of short-term (2-4 weeks treatment) randomised controlled trials has shown when compared to placebo, oral corticosteroids significantly improve lung function. There is comparable randomised controlled trial looking at long-term treatment with corticosteroids 3. Any benefit obtained with corticosteroids must be balanced against the considerable side-effects associated with these drugs such as osteoporosis and induction of diabetes and the period of their use thus minimised. Antibiotics: there are no available randomised controlled trials looking at the use of antibiotics in the short-term treatment of stable COPD. No signficant difference has been found between antibiotics versus placebo in either reducing the frequency of exacerbations or decline in lung function over a 5 year period 4. The trials concerned are of poor quality however so the results should be interpreted with caution. No specific recruitment criteria were applied. Domiciliary oxygen treatment: over a 2 year period, domiciliary oxygen has been shown to improve survival when compared to receiving no oxygen in those patients with COPD and hypoxaemia 5. Various randomised controlled trials have demonstrated that continuous delivery of oxygen versus nocturnal treatment significantly reduces mortality over a year long period 6. The National Service Framework for Older people was published as a guide to the treatment of Older people in the UK today. It has 5 aims, (i) to eradicate age discrimination in the health service, (ii) to provide person-centred care which is importantly (iii) intermediate and (iv) in a General Hospital environment and (v) to promote health and activity in older people 6. This framework strategy sets measurable goals to be achieved within set-time frames and as such should be incorporated into routine practice. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>COPD affects mainly middle-aged and elderly patients. UK prevalence between 1990-1997 was 2% in men and 1% in women. As seen in the USA, this has certainly risen since then. Smoking cessation reduces the rate of decline in lung function back to that of non-smokers 6. COPD is diagnosed by airflow obstruction indicated on respiratory function tests by a reduced FEV1:FVC ratio of <0.70 or a FEV1 2 standard deviations below predicted provided restrictive disease is excluded. Many asymptomatic smokers however have lung function abnormalities that predate symptoms which may be prevented by early smoking cessation. Screening healthy smokers to identify subclinical airway obstruction is however controversial. Whilst clearly, should they have abnomalities the benefits of giving up smoking is known, many patients will choose not to give up despite this. They then carry the burden of a progressive disease for which there is no cure for possibly many more years than would be the case if screening weren't in place. Far more individuals would be identified by screening placing increased demands on an already stretched healthservice. An individual such as  may be managed effectively in a community setting with a multi-disciplinary team led care approach. Her needs comprise respiratory, dietary, mobility and social demands which for optimal care can only be met by individual specialties. General care and referrals can be managed by a general practitioner but acute exacerbation such as her presenting episode require specialist attention in a secondary care setting. Full, informed consent for all diagnostic and treatment proceedures is essential for all patients but especially so for an elderly individual such as . Her diagnosis, progressive nature of COPD and crucially prognosis should be clearly and fully explained.  had clearly made the association between her symptoms and the limitation they place on her mobility and subsequent independence. She was realistic about an expected lifespan. This case highlights the ethical principles of autonomy, beneficence and non-maleficience.  had recognised the causation of her COPD but didn't want to give up smoking. Other than presenting her with the statisitcs and the clear evidence that smoking cessation can reverse some of the limitation in lung function the decision to quit must be hers. Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. She clearly has contact with her son who should be encoraged to contribute towards her care and as such should be involved in her treatment and diagnosis. 's health needs to be optimised to enable her to maximise independence and quality of life. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading><list>Factors determining prognosisThe importance of a multi-disciplinary team in patient careCo-morbidity and impact on patient's lifestyleBiopsychosocial model of health</list>