<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading>A 73 year old diabetic lady referred and admitted from an outpatient rheumatology clinic on the  with symptoms of shortness of breath and raised D-dimer (taken and reported in clinic). <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting complaints. </heading><list>Swelling of left footShortness of breathRight-sided chest pain</list> presented to a routine rheumatology outpatient clinic with symptoms of swelling of her left foot, shortness of breath and right-sided chest pain. Chest pain: she has a 14 week history of a sharp pain in the right side of her chest which radiates to the bust. It has stayed at the same intensity throughout this period and is exacerbated on inspiration and sneezing. Rated at 9/10 severity the pain can be relieved to some extent by paracetamol and was described  'like lightning'. It regularly causes her to wake from her sleep. Pain is unassociated with nausea, vomiting or sweating and is unaffected by exertion. Shortness of breath: onset coincided with the start of chest pain. Described as 'difficulty catching my breath' this has progressively worsened in severity since onset. Immediately prior to admission she was able to walk approximately 50 yards on the flat before having to rest to catch her breath.  is breathless primarily on exertion but had become dyspnoeic on changing position in a chair prior to admission to hospital. Her dyspnoea was associated with the chest pain above but otherwise no haemoptysis, fever, wheeze or syncope. 1 week history of nonproductive cough. She felt otherwise 'fairly well'. She has no previous history of respiratory disease. Left foot swelling: first noticed a year ago around the ankle. Since then swelling has spread to the rest of the foot but has not reached past the ankle. It is tender but not noticeably more so now than a year ago. The swelling is unassociated with erythema, heat, joint stiffness or impairment of movement of the ankle joint and doesn't dissipate much during the day. She suffers occasional swelling of both wrists, other joints are unaffected. An ultrasound scan performed of both legs a year ago resulted in nothing abnormal being detected. No recent falls. Systems review: no symptoms of significance affecting cardiovascular, abdominal or neurological systems. No recent disturbance of either bowel or bladder function. <list><heading>Past Medical History:</heading>Attended rheumatology outpatients for 1 year - complaint swelling of left foot.Diabetes type II - now insulin dependent. Diagnosed .Psoriasis - longstanding history, primarily affects knees.Hyperparathyroidism - surgically treated .Ischaemic heart disease - longstanding duration, Acute Coronary Syndrome .Renal impairment - 1 year history.Hypertension - longstanding.Dyslipidaemia</list>No asthma, TB, rheumatic heart disease, rheumatoid arthritis, stroke, jaundice. <list><heading>Surgical History:</heading>Angioplasty + stent insertion , .Parathyroidectomy .</list><list><heading>Medication on admission. </heading>Aspirin 75mg OD PO - anti-platelet agent, prophylaxis of cerebrovascular disease and MI.Metformin 500mg BD - biguanide, decreases gluconeogenesis, increases peripheral utilisation glucose. Management of diabetes.Insulin Mixtard - 34 units AM, 26 units PM.Losartan 50mg BD - angiotensin II receptor antagonist, anti-hypertensive.Atenolol 50mg OD - beta-adrenoceptor blocker, anti-hypertensive.Ezetimibe 10mg nocte - inhibits intestinal absorption of cholesterol.Furosemide 20mg OD - loop diuretic.Clopidrogel 75mg OD - antiplatelet agent, prevention of atherosclerotic events in peripheral arterial disease.</list>Allergies: No known drug allergies. Allergic to pollen. Family history: No known significant family history. Social history:  lives with her husband in their privately owned house in . Prior to admission she was fully independent and managed all her cleaning, cooking and personal care. She has 2 children and 2 grandchildren with whom she maintains regular contact. She is a non-smoker and drinks no alcohol. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Given the presenting complaints of shortness of breath, pleuritic chest pain and raised D-dimer, pulmonary embolus is the most likely cause of 's presentation. Clinical features to be looked for on physical examination to support such a diagnosis are: <list>Erythema and warmth of the affected leg (found in 30% cases)Swelling and tenderness (75% cases)Thrombosed vein may be palpable</list>Clinical presentation of a pulmonary embolus is dependent on the size of the embolus. Small emboli may present with transient faints, dyspnoea and slight pyrexia. Medium emboli resulting in infarction present with; in addition to the above, haemoptysis, pleurisy and pleural effusion. Larger emboli affecting over 60% of the pulmonary bed present with acute cor pulmonale with sudden dyspnoea and shock. Clearly,  has both selling and tenderness of her left foot, she is in addition dyspnoeic. A small pulmonary embolus is thus suggested by these symptoms. Further differentials for the presenting combination of pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath to be considered: Musculoskeletal - e.g. rib fracture, reasonable suggestion, elderly may have osteoporosis. Pneumothorax - unlikely, history is usually of sudden onset one-sided pleuritic chest pain and/or dyspnoea not over 14 weeks as in this case. Pneumonia - Associated symptoms of productive cough, pleurisy and dyspnoea are less common in the elderly, 80% of patients with pneumonia present with fever clearly not the case here. Connective tissue disease - no known history. Malignancy involving pleura or pathology under the diaphragm - no history of weight loss, malaise. Pericarditis - Extremely unlikely, clinical features include central, poorly localized chest tightness that varies with movement, posture and respiration. <heading>Physical examination and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>An elderly lady who appeared fit and well. She wasn't obviously jaundiced, cyanosed or cannulated and had no accompanying respiratory or mobility aids.  was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely. <heading>General. </heading>Hands: No pale palmar creases - suggesting absence of signficant anaemia. No peripheral cyanosis. No palmar erythema, clubbing, cyanosis, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, kolonychia, liver flap. Face: No pale palpebral conjunctivae or signs of jaundice or cyanosis. Mouth: No cyanosis, ulcers, dehydration. Neck: No lymphadenopathy. Temperature - 35.9°C, apyreixal indicating absence of infection or flare-up of active inflammatory process. Blood glucose (fasting) - 7.8 mmol/L. GCS 15/15, MEWS 1 - due to tachypnoea <heading>Respiratory system. </heading>Respiratory rate 28 bpm - tachypnoea Blood gases: O2 sats. 99% on air, pCO2 4.35 (↓), pO2 11.93, pH 7.487 (↑) - respiratory alkalosis due to hyperventilation. Breathing appeared to be reduced in depth, was breathless on exertion and changing position No cough, sputum, tracheal deviation Equal chest expansion, normal vesicular breath sounds No crackles <heading>Lower limbs. </heading>No muscle wasting, fasiculation, tremor, no difference in temperature or colour between the 2 legs. Normal tone, power, reflexes, proprioception Loss of sensation (light touch, pain) in big toe of L. foot, disturbance of sensation in S1 dermatome - possibily due to polyneuropathy associated with diabetes. <heading>Cardiovascular system: </heading>No signs of peripheral or central cyanosis, no peripheral oedema Pulse 64 bpm, regular. Blood pressure 134/73 - good control of hypertension. No sacral oedema Oedema of left ankle and foot, non-pitting and tender JVP normal Heart sounds I and II normal No murmurs or displacement of the apex beat. <heading>Abdomen: </heading>No organomegaly No renal angle tenderness No ascites, shifting dullness, spider naevi, caput medusa Abdomen soft and tender in right upper quadrant A PR exam was not performed at the time of examination, as supervision was unavailable. For sake of completion a full future neurological exam should time allow. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Pulmonary embolus. The principal cause of which is a deep vein thrombosis. Venous thromboembolism refers to any thromboembolic event occurring within the venous system including deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. Pulmonary embolism is radiologically confirmed partial or total thromboembolic occlusion of pulmonary arteries sufficient to cause symptoms of breathlessness, chest pain or both. Clearly,  presented with both of these symptoms supporting such a diagnosis. On presentation, she had pleuritic chest pain exacerbated by laughing and sneezing. Her left foot and ankle were swollen suggestive of a deep venous thrombosis, there was however, no associated erythema or warmth. VQ scanning, chest x-ray and D-dimer level will help clarify the diagnosis. An ECG may also be useful, T wave inversion in leads V1-3 may be seen with pulmonary emboli. Risk factors for deep vein thrombosis include: <list>ImmobilitySurgery (especially orthopaedic)Older age - the only risk factor represented by this case.MalignancyCardiac failure - of relevance, cardiac history, requires outpatient investigation on discharge.SmokingPregnancyInherited or acquired prothrombotic clotting disordersOral contraceptive pill</list>As  presents with one of these risk factors, duration of chest pain is unusual. Previous differentials e.g. musculoskeletal cause such as rib fracture must be considered and investigated. Pathology: Thromboembolism occurs when a mass of thrombus breaks off from its site of formation, entering the blood stream where it circulates until reaches a vessel with lumen diameter insufficient to let it pass. At this point it impacts usually blocking the vessel lumen. Pulmonary embolism results when such thromboemboli impact into the pulmonary arterial system. The majority of emboli arise from thrombosis of deep leg veins (e.g. calf, popliteal, femoral and iliac veins). The 2 main consequences of embolization in the pulmonary arterial tree are (i) increased pulmonary arterial pressure (increases strain on the right side of the heart) and (ii) ischaemia of the lung where ventilated areas of the lung aren't perfused with blood. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical:  has experienced increasing disability over the past year attributed to the swelling of her left foot. This has only been compounded by the recent chest pain and associated shortness of breath. Psychological: She has become increasingly concerned and anxious about the cause of her symptoms over the month prior to admission and is keen to receive a diagnosis. Social:  keeps close contact with members of her family, their support and involvement in her care on discharge are essential in speeding recovery and optimising future independence. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading>Abnormal blood results - . Low Hb and normal MCV are suggestive of a normocytic hypochromic anaemia e.g. of chronic disease. <table/>Abnormal biochemistry . Known renal impairment since . Current postulated diagnosis renal artery sclerosis. Due for outpatient clinic attendance. <table/> - NM Lung ventilation/perfusion scan (VQ) - no evidence of pulmonary embolus seen.  - NM Bone Scan Whole Body - no significant abnormal uptake seen in joints or bones. ECG - T wave inversion in leads V2 + V3 Chest x- ray Arterial blood gas - hypocapnia and hypoxaemia expected. Sensitivity for PE on ABG is however low.  was on air at the time the result was taken, results interpreted therefore with caution. Given the negative VQ scan result, further consideration must be given to diagnosis. VQ scans are conventionally reported as a probability of pulomary embolus and should be interpreted in the context of the history, examination and other investigations. Supporting a pulmonary embolus are presenting symptoms of pleuritic chest pain and dyspnoea. On examination pleuritic pain was demonstrated, she was hypocapnic and T wave inversion was seen in leads V2 and V3. As such until further examination of her foot in an outpatient setting, diagnosis of pulmonary embolus is reasonable and the management here will concentrate on such. <heading>Reassurance and explanation: </heading>A possible explanation for your symptoms of chest pain and breathlessness is a clot originating in your legs (a DVT) which has travelled over a period of time to your lungs - a pulmonary embolus. Such a clot forms due to a combination of sluggish blood flow, local injury or compression of a vein and slightly 'thicker' blood than normal. All your observations (BP, HR) are stable and that is reassuring. I appreciate the degree of your chest pain and we shall be able to effectively control that in hospital. The plan is to do a number of investigations to confirm this diagnosis and to assess how best to treat you. We would like to take a number of blood tests, a chest x-ray and a more detailed scan of your lungs which will look at how well supplied with blood your lungs are. It will also be useful to take a tracing of the activity of your heart. We will give you some painkillers and adjust this analgesia until your pain is under control. There is a risk after having a first clot that further clots may from, this risk can be reduced by thinning your blood with a drug called heparin. It is possible you may need to return home on another drug with similar action that you take orally, warfarin. Should you have any questions, please ask. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention. </heading><list>Enoxaparin sodium (Clexane) 100mg/mL - (low molecular weight heparin), prevention of further venous thrombo-embolism.High-flow oxygen (60-100%).Regular U + Es - to monitor renal impairment.LFTsTrop. T - indicated by ECG result, reading negative, absence of current myocardial ischaemia.Begin Warfarin after 48 hours, taper heparin off as oral anticoagulant becomes effective. Continue for up to 6 months.</list><heading>Observation : </heading> was transferred from the medical admissions unit to a general medical ward where she should receive regular monitoring of her oxygen saturation, blood gases, heart rate, blood pressure and temperature. Given her renal impairment fluid balance should be monitored and fluids supplemented as indicated. Respiratory function should be regularly assessed and optimised with oxygen therapy if required.  was breathless on admission and her sats. when off air require close monitoring.  appeared a highly intelligent women informed about her health however information when given, should be provided in both an appropriate environment and format. Opportunity should be made for further discussion post-diagnosis delivery should she have any additional questions. <heading>Referral. </heading>GP - post discharge monitoring and support. Continued rheumatology outpatient consultation to investigate and monitor foot swelling. Diabetic nurse -  has had 2 'hypos' during her current admission and reported not having seen a specialist nurse for a while. She may benefit from further advice and information concerning diet, insulin dose and encouragement with compliance on discharge. Physiotherapy - optimise mobility of left lower limb and ankle. Cardiology - monitor cardiac function. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> was discharged on the  having been given an outpatient follow-up appointment for 8 weeks post-discharge. She was happy to go home and reassured as to the explanation given concerning her condition. She was fully independent on discharge, it was felt there was no need for immediate implementation of a social services care package. It was decided she should continue to be followed up in rheumatology as the underlying cause for the chronic swelling of her left foot is still unclear. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>As the single most likely explanation for the presenting symptoms in this case, I have chosen to present evidence for the management of pulmonary embolism and also generalised thromboembolic disease. Treatment of thromboembolism aims to (i) reduce acute symptoms of deep vein thrombosis, (ii) prevent morbidity and mortality associated with thrombus extension, post-thrombotic syndrome and pulmonary embolisation, (iii) reduce recurrence and (iv) minimise any adverse effects of treatment. <heading>Thromboembolic disease. </heading>Unfractionated and low molecular weight heparin: systematic reviews have shown that a low molecular weight heaprin such as clexane reduces incidence of recurrent thromboembolic disease 1. Risk of major haemorrhage is decreased when compared with unfractionated heparin 2. A further systematic review has demonstrated no significant difference in recurrent thromboembolism, major haemorrhage or mortality between long term use of low molecular weight heparin and oral anticoagulation. Warfarin: for the treatment of isolated calf vein thrombosis, there is no available randomised controlled evidence comparing efficacy of warfarin versus placebo. Clearly this is an area for future research. A single unblinded randomised controlled trial has found no signficant difference between rate of either recurrent thromboembolism or major haemorrhage between 6 and 12 weeks of treatment with warfarin 3. <heading>Pulmonary embolism. </heading>Anticoagulation: randomised controlled trial evidence has shown that heparin plus warfarin significantly reduces mortality in people with pulmonary embolism when compared to receiving no anticoagulation 4. There is no direct evidence available concerning the optimum duration and intensity of anticoagulation in the management of pulmonary embolus, clearly this is a focus for future research. Evidence concerning duration and intensity of treatment is extrapolated from randomised controlled trial data concerning venous thromboembolism or proximal DVT. Thrombolysis: Systematic reviews have indicated that there is no significant difference in mortality between thrombolysis plus heparin and the use of heparin alone. It has been suggested that the combination of thrombolysis and heparin may reduce mortality in the case of shock associated with massive pulmonary embolism 5. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading> demonstrates the complex co-morbidity which becomes more common as individuals age. Concerning aetiology of the presenting diagnosis of thromboembolism, she is of older age, has history of ischaemic cardiac disease, is overweight and fairly immobile. In addition she is diabetic, anaemic and has renal impairment. This highlights the need in such a patient that whilst addressing the presenting symptoms her comorbidity also needs to treated and the functioning of the respective systems optimised. Whilst such a patient when 'well' can be managed effectively in the community with a combination of GP and outpatient centred treatment any exacerbation in their condition such as the presenting symptoms can have a knock-on effect on the control of diabetes or renal function requiring secondary care attention in their own right. Her comorbidity demonstrates the usefulness of specialist nurse provided care e.g. diabetes nurses. Providing information and advice concerning the relevant condition can only help to optimise compliance and patient self-management of the said condition relieving strain on both outpatient and inpatient NHS resources. However, as with all resources; demand far outweighs supply, this must be addressed in the future to increase quality of patient care. This case also highlights the importance of considering the clinical impression, examination findings and investigation results as a whole when making a diagnosis. It is impossible to rely totally on the results of a single investigation such as a VQ scan as these may totally contradict your clinical findings as in this case.  presented with typical symptoms of a pulmonary embolus which was supported by the findings on examination and also other investigations such as ECG but not the VQ scan. In this situation clinical experience must be called upon. The National Service Framework for Older people was published as a guide to the treatment of Older people in the UK today. It has 5 aims, (i) to eradicate age discrimination in the health service, (ii) to provide person-centred care which is importantly (iii) intermediate and (iv) in a General Hospital environment and (v) to promote health and activity in older people 6. This framework strategy sets measurable goals to be achieved within set-time frames and as such should be incorporated into routine practice. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading>Use of multi-disciplinary team led care in patient treatment. Complexity of comorbidity and its impact on management. Interplay between clinical impression, physical examination and investigations. Need for outpatient follow-up on discharge. Management of a chronic disease in both secondary and primary care. The biopsychosocial model of health. 