<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> is a right-handed 35 year old male referred to  on the  with presenting complaints of jaundice, deranged liver function tests and unsteadiness. Longstanding depression and anxiety. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint. </heading>Jaundice ('my eyes are yellow') Unsteady when walking <heading>History of Presenting Complaint. </heading>2 week history of progressively worsening yellowing of sclerae first noticed by 's partner.  also thought his skin might have changed colour being more grey than yellow, and has noticed generalised skin itching over the same period.  frequently uses sun beds however and normally has some associated darkening in pigmentation. Both  and his partner wondered if him having swopped antidepressant from fluoxetine to mirtazepine 3 weeks prior to admission may have caused his jaundice. Over the same 2 week period prior to admission he has noticed a lightening of his stools and some dark discolouration of his urine. His stools are of normal consistency with no increased frequency in bowel movements. He passes no blood or mucus. He has no past history of IV drug abuse, foreign travel, contact with jaundiced people, past blood transfusions, intercourse with people with known hepatitis or tatoos. He does however, drink heavily currently consuming approxiamtely 42 units a week. Alcohol intake consists only of strong cider (7%).  doesn't consider his intake excessive, says he only drinks in the evenings; never during the day and has never been aware of other people commenting on his intake as excessive or alcohol causing him to do something he regreted when sober.  has lost 1 stone in weight over the past 4 months and attributes this to poor appetite as a result of depression. He has experienced no recent abdominal pain, distension or vomiting but does frequently feel nauseated when anxious.  described being 'unsteady' on occasions having fallen a few times in the fortnight prior to admission but has never received significant injury from such episodes. His unsteadiness has not worsened over this period, he walks without any aid but finds himself having to frequently stop to steady himself. There are no associated headaches, vertigo, dizziness, fits, diplopia or loss of consciousness described. He was unaware of any factors, which either relieved or exacerbated his unsteadiness. He did not describe any cardiovascular symptoms of chest pain, palpitations, breathlessness, oedema or sweating. <heading>Past Medical History. </heading>Depression - 10 year history, since the death of his mother. Anxiety - longstanding duration. Asthma - since childhood. No, epilepsy, jaundice, diabetes, strokes, heart attacks, cervical arthropathy, obstructive sleep apnoea or acromegaly. No recent surgical history. <heading>Systems Review: </heading>No other significant symptoms reported for cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal, neurological or genitourinary systems. <heading>Medication. </heading>Salbutamol 100-200ug (1-2 puffs) prn - selective β2 agonist, management of mild to moderate symptoms of asthma. Mirtazapine - presynaptic α2-antagonist, increases central noradrenergic and serotonergic neurotransmission. Has few antimuscarinic effects.  takes no other prescribed or over the counter medication. No known allergies. <heading>Family History: </heading>Mother died at 48 from an asthma attack. Father alive, fit and well. Both parents have past history of depression, father's requiring electroconvulsive therapy. No brothers and sisters. <heading>Social History: </heading> lives with his partner in . He has no children. He was sacked from his last permanent employment 2 years ago, reason for dismissal was unclear. He has since had a number of short-term employments including delivering yellow pages locally. He is a non-smoker who drinks heavily (see above). His last drink was the night before admission. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>The most likely diagnosis given his alcohol history is a hepatocellular jaundice. Disease causing generalised damage to hepatocytes such as that caused by chronic excessive ethanol intake results in a predominant conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. The main rate-limiting step in bilirubin metabolism is excretion by the canaliculi rather than conjugation. Disturbance of the passage of conjugated bilirubin through the biliary tree causes bilirubin to leak into the circulation. Conjugated bilirubin is soluble and thus excreted into the urine making it dark in colour as seen here. It also prevents the conversion of urobilinogen to stercobilinogen (pigment), faeces are consequently pale (also seen here). Hyperbilirubinaemia also cause puritus. Further differentials for the presenting complaint of jaundice: Alcoholic hepatitis - reasonable given alcohol intake. Cirrhosis - unlikely given no description of ascites. Hepatic malignancy or metastases - needs consideration given weight loss and malaise. Viral infection - e.g. hepatitis B, C, no identifiable risk factors e.g. receipt of blood transfusions or sharing of IV needles. Haemochromatosis - presents with grey skin pigmentation. Side-effect of Mirtazapine Findings on examination which would support a diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease: <list>HepatomegalyHands - palmar erythema, clubbing, Dupuytren's contracture, xanthomas.Scratch marks from pruritusJaundice Liver flapAscitesSpider naevi and striae</list>Alcohol dependence and associated withdrawal should be considered in this case . <list><heading>Diagnostic criteria for alcohol withdrawal syndrome:</heading>tremor of outstretched hands, tongue, eyelidstransient visual, tactile or auditory hallucinations or illusionssweatinginsomnianausea, retching or vomitingmalaise or weaknesstachycardia or hypertensionheadacheanxietygrand mal convulsionspsychomotor agitation</list>Clearly,  fulfils the criteria of anxiety, malaise and general weakness. Findings expected on physical examination to confirm this diagnosis are tachycardia, hypotension, tremor, fits and hallucinations. Delirium tremens comprises the most serious alcohol withdrawal state; managed as a medical priority. <heading>Physical and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>A young gentleman who appeared fit and well. He was obviously jaundiced, skin had a 'greyish' tinge. He was cannulated and had no respiratory aids around his bedside. There was a zimmer frame at the bedside without which  is unable to walk. He was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely. He was fairly anxious, fidgeting throughout the interview. <heading>General. </heading><heading>Hands. </heading>No palmer erythema, clubbing, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, kolonychia - absence of chronic liver disease. Fine tremor at rest - suggestive of delirium tremens. Liver flap - when arms outstretched associated with chronic excessive alcohol intake and hepatic encephalopathy. <heading>Face. </heading>Jaundice (icteus) - yellow sclerae, alcoholic hepatitis. Jaundice of hepatocellular type. <heading>Mouth. </heading>No cyanosis, no ulcers, not dehydrated <heading>Neck. </heading>No lymphadenopathy. Temperature - 36.9ºC - apyrexial, absence of systemic infection. <heading>Abdomen. </heading>Symmetrical No spider naevi, or obvious abdominal distension. 'greyish' tinge - suggestive of haemochromatosis. Hepatomegaly - 5-6 finger enlargement, important, most likely alcohol related Abdomen non-tender, hard to palpate, hard to differentiate between tone and guarding. Spleen and kidneys impalpable. No liver bruit No caput medusae, ascites or shifting dullness - presence would suggest chronic liver disease percussion resonant, normal bowel sounds A PR exam was not performed at the time of examination, as supervision was unavailable. <heading>Cardiovascular system. </heading>No peripheral or central cyanosis No peripheral oedema Pulse 98bpm - tachycardia, Blood pressure 130/94 - absence of hypotension. Radial pulse palpable, regular, normal strength, all other pulses palpable. JVP normal Heart sounds I and II normal, no murmurs or displacement of the apex beat. <heading>Respiratory system. </heading>Respiratory rate 20/min - hyperventilation due to ? anxiety Oxygen saturation 94% on air Blood gas results: pH 7.486, pCO2 4.22 (↓), pO2 (↑) - hypocapnia due to hyperventilation, hyperoxaemia result of additional oxygen received. No cough, sputum, tracheal deviation, crackles Equal chest expansion, normal vesicular breath sounds, no added sounds For sake of completion, a future full neurological examination should ideally be performed, however the examination was interupted at this point. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Most likely cause of the presentation is alcoholic hepatitis. Excess ingestion of alcohol can cause a wide spectrum of liver disease ranging from fatty liver to alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Fatty liver is often asymptomatic. Factors supporting a diagnosis of acloholic hepatitis for  are: a chronic intake of excess alcohol mild to moderate symptoms of ill health such as generalised weakness and malaise. he is jaundiced and has some signs of chronic liver disease such as hepatomegaly and liver flap. he also presented with derangement of liver function tests. Grey colouring of skin suggests haemochromatosis - look at serum ferritin. His symptoms of anxiety, tachycardia, weakenss and resting tremor suggest delirium tremens resulting from alcohol withdrawal. The tremor of delirium tremens is due to balancing of extensor and flexor muscle contraction and could be enhanced by asking  to hyperextend his palms against my own. Approximately 40% of people who misuse alcohol develop an acute withdrawal syndrome when they either abruptly stop or substantially reduce their alcohol consumption. Less than 5% of these develop delirium tremens. Hyperpyrexia, ketoacidosis, profound circulatory collapse, seizures, precipitation/enhancement of cardiac arrhythmias (relevant here) and injury to self or others are complications associated with such a withdrawal state. He should be monitored closely whilst an inpatient for emergence of these potential complications. In alcoholic hepatitis, in addition to fatty changes within the liver there is infiltration by polymorphonuclear leucocytes and hepatocyte necrosis, particularly in zone 3. Additional features include Mallory bodies and giant mitochondria. If alcohol consumption continues alcoholic hepatitis may progress to cirrhosis. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical: Alcohol dependence can be defined as a physical dependence on or an addiction to alcohol.  appeared of slim build, he has a poor appetite which he associates with depression. Poor appetite is a common finding in heavy drinkers. He did not demonstrate any signs of chronic alcoholic liver disease such as caput medusae and ascites. Psychological: Dependence on alcohol may also be psychological.  had associated the start of him drinking heavily with his mother's death. It is crucial he recognises such triggers to his drinking and finds alternative ways of coping in order to stop drinking. Social: The social contributory factors to 's drinking must be acknowledged and addressed. His father and uncle drink heavily. He is relatively socially isolated and must be assisted in finding alternative opportunities for social interaction and activities. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading>FBC - abnormal results obtained : indicating a picture of macrocytic normoblastic anaemia. Likely cause of this anaemia is excess alcohol intake. Consider blood loss from gastric ulcer or varices. Prothrombin time is a marker of synthetic function and as such is prolonged in both acute and chronic liver disease. INR is a further marker of hepatic function, if raised as in this case it indicates thinning of the blood and thus impaired clotting. <table/>Pancytopenia (decreased red + white cells, platelets) possibly secondary to mirtazapine. <table/>Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), a transaminase present in hepatocytes leaks into the blood with liver damage. It is a cytosol enzyme specific to the liver, a rise as seen here only occurs in liver disease. Increased serum bilirubin is seen in liver disease as is raised vitamin B12. Serum albumin is a marker of hepatic synthetic function and is a useful index of severity of chronic liver disease. Raised serum ferritin is seen in hereditary haemochromatosis. Raised CRP may be associated with tissue (liver) necrosis. Blood picture indicates hepatic impairment with associated pancytopenia and rising INR primarily caused by alcoholic hepatitis and secondary to mirtazapine or haemochromatosis. Blood cultures - negative. Hepatitis A, B, C surface antigens not detected. EBV IgG antibody detected - unlikely to be single cause of presenting symptoms. Urine bilirubin detected, urobilinogen - no excess detected. Indicative of hepatocellular jaundice. Chest X-ray  - heart size normal, lungs appear clear. Abdominal X-ray  - non-dilated gaseous filled small bowel loops noted on left side. Ultrasound abdomen + pelvis  - liver appears prominent and brighter than normal suggestive of fatty infiltration. Gallbladder is dilated, no stones, common bile duct appears normal. No other abnormality seen. CT head - marked cerebral atrophy and cerebellar atrophy. No space occupying lesion.  - continued tremor in hands, delirium tremens.  - disorientated, incontinent of faeces, mobile but extremely unsteady on feet. Suggestive of thiamin deficiency, common in chronic alcohol dependent patients. Associated with this deficiency is Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (thiamine-responsive encephalopathy) due to ischaemic damage in the brainstem and its connections. On examination - Cerebellar signs present - dysdiadokokinesis, ataxic gait (wide-based unsteady gait, requires frame), intention tremor, impaired heel to shin test. <heading>Reassurance and explanation</heading>The yellowing of your skin you are experiencing is most likely due to you drinking over the last few years. Excess intake of alcohol can over time cause damage to your liver which affects the processing of the pigment bilirubin causing an increase in serum bilirubin concentration. This damage has been indicated by a number of the blood tests we have done yesterday. Withdrawing from alcohol particularly if your intake has been heavy for a period of time can cause a number of symptoms including the 'shakes', anxiety and agitation you have experienced over the past few days. It is also most likely responsible for the fast heart rate and breathing you have at the moment. We will give you some medication to help with your tremors and you should feel much better fairly quickly. Clearly, it would be of huge benefit to you to reduce your alcohol intake, ideally stopping altogether for the time being. We can provide you with some contact details of people who may be able to help you in doing this as I can appreciate it isn't easy. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention</heading><list>Chlordiazepoxide 20mg QDS PRN - benzodiazepine, management acute alcohol withdrawal.Ciprofloxacin 500mg BD - quinolone antinbiotic. Lactulose 60ml TDS - Discourages proliferation of ammonia-producing organisms, therefore useful in treatment of hepatic encephalopathy.Omeprazole 40mg OD - proton pump inhibitor. Thiamine 100mg BD - reaplacement therapy, management of Wernicke's encephalopathy.Becotide 60 II BD - (beclomethasone dipropionate) - corticosteroid, reduce airway inflammation.Fortisips 200ml TDS - nutritional supplement if anorexia and nausea continue.Vitamin B Costrong II OD - replacement therapy.As required - Salbutamol 2.5mg neb, paracetamol 500mg every 4-6 hours.? stop mirtazapine.</list>To avoid undue accumulation and over sedation chlordiazepoxide should be administered in daily reducing doses. Accumulation could be a particular problem in , where his degree of liver impairment may alter both metabolism of and cerebral sensitivity to benzodiazepines. <list> - blood transfusion. Blood group A positive.5% Dextrose replacement - monitor BM.Catheterise - temporary measure given cerebellar symptoms.Alcohol screening questionnaire - assess degree of dependence/alcoholism</list><heading>Observation</heading> should be monitored in the Critical Care Unit for 24 hours. Monitor closely for exacerbation of Wernicke's encephalopathy indicated by pyrexia, worsening tachycardia and tachypnoea, fitting and development of either visual or auditory hallucinations. Level of confusion, disorientation and consciousness should be regularly assessed with Glasgow Coma Scale. Treat emergent convulsions with intravenous diazepam (10-20mg) every 4 hours by slow intravenous injection/infusion or phenytoin. He is poorly nourished. Emergent dehydration should be corrected with oral rather than intravenous fluids to avoid over hydration and associated electrolyte disturbance. Although  was keen to leave hospital detoxification at home is unsuitable for patients in established withdrawal. Prior to discharge a 'drying out' period should be suggested and the practicalities of this discussed. Input required will incorporate psychological interventions, support groups and behavioural modification strategies. <heading>Referral and team working</heading>GP - post-discharge monitoring and support Community Alcohol Service - obtain advice and support for both  and his partner regarding alcoholism and cessation of drinking. Peer support agencies e.g. Alcoholics Anonymous. Gastroenterology - address complications of chronic alcohol abuse e.g. alcoholic liver disease, clotting disorders, alcoholic neuropathy and cardiomyopathy and Wernicke's Korsakoff syndrome Psychologist <heading>Advice and Prevention</heading>A low-fat, high-fibre diet is recommended Increase daily fluid intake Moderate regular exercise Avoid situations in which alcohol is readily available and excess consumption encouraged <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> remains in hospital. He was relieved as to his diagnosis and felt he had been fully informed regarding his condition and the treatment he is receiving. He is no longer experiencing tremors and is feeling stronger daily. He should be provided with advice and support concerning alcohol cessation. He must however be proactive in this process; long-term remission will only be achieved should he play an involved, active and committed part in his rehabilitation. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Alcohol abuse and dependence has wide reaching detrimental impact. It adversely affects all the major body systems, with prolonged excess associated with many psychological/psychiatric problems and impacts on society in terms of interpersonal relationship and work difficulties, criminal behaviour and loss of social position e.g. homelessness. The government document 'Health of the Nation' set 'safe' levels of alcohol consumption at 21 units per week for men and 14 for women. In 2004, this was exceeded by an estimated 28% of UK men and 11% women 1. Alcohol intake of more than 160g of ethanol per day for men and 80g per day for women over a 10 year period is likely to lead to cirrhosis 2. Ethanol is metabolized in the liver by 2 pathways resulting in an increased NADH/NAD ratio. This results in both increased hepatic fatty acid synthesis and decreased fatty acid oxidation with resultant hepatic accumulation of fatty acids and esterification to glycerides. Acetaldehyde formed by ethanol oxidation may contribute to producing liver cell damage. Biopsy is the definitive diagnostic method but isn't typically carried out as the results are unlikely to alter the diagnosis or therapy. Up to 30% of patients with clinical features of severe alcoholic hepatitis haven't been found to have alcoholic hepatitis on biopsy 3. Mild to moderate cases of alcoholic hepatitis most usually recover without specific treatment, management in these cases is aimed at the underlying dependency. Corticosteroids: Beneficial in alcoholic hepatitis as inhibits cytokine production and suppresses extracellular matrix collagen synthesis producing both an anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic effect 4. Gastrointestinal bleeding has been reported by a number of studies. There is huge variation in efficacy of published results, this has been attributed to small study numbers, different treatment regimens and different measures of outcomes. Nutritional supplementation: Alcohol provides 30kj energy/gram but lacks in protein, vitamins and minerals. Nutritional supplementation providing a positive nitrogen balance and correcting this deficiency has been found to improve outcome 5 but in reality is fairly difficult to maintain on discharge from hospital. Future advances in the management of alcoholic hepatitis include S-adenosylmethionine, polyenylphosphatidylcholine and N-acetyl cysteine (alcohol toxicity involves glutathione depletion). Genetic predisposition to alcoholism is an area of current research for example regarding disturbance of patterns of the main isoenzymes that metabolise alcohol such as aldehyde dehydrogenase and the individuals' reaction to ethanol. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>The World Health Organisation defines dependence as a cluster of physiological, behavioural and cognitive components of variable intensity in which a psychoactive drug takes on high priority. Although many individuals particularly those with early alcohol-related problems can be effectively treated in primary care, those such as Mr P with alcohol-related complications and long-term alcohol abuse require specialist help. A multi-disciplinary team-led approach is often necessary. A GP can monitor progress long-term with regular monitoring of liver function tests for example. Specialist consultant care is required for those who experience severe withdrawal symptoms or who have impaired physical health. Specialist agencies such as Alcoholics Anonymous provide additional input. An important ethical issue associated with the treatment of alcohol dependence is liver transplantation. For those patients with alcoholic liver disease, clinical outcomes of liver transplantation are comparable to those receiving transplants for other liver diseases 6. The ethical impact is concerned with the lack of donor organs. There is a risk that recurrent alcohol abuse will lead to alcoholic liver disease in the grafted organ and the additional problem of non-compliance with immunosuppression. This has to be considered when allocating limited numbers of organs. However, many patients will achieve and maintain abstinence and should recover with transplantation. Most UK transplant units require a 6 month abstinence period for consideration for transplantation,  would not therefore qualify. He had been drinking until the time of admission. In many parts of the UK, specialist NHS services provide specific, individually tailored care for individuals with drinking problems and other forms of substance misuse. Although there is clearly the need and willingness to provide such care in a general NHS hospital setting, there is more often than not insufficient funding to provide the appropriate resources and services for such comprehensive care. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading>Alcohol dependence - syndrome characterized by 3 or more of the following: strong desire or compulsion to drink, difficulty in controlling onset or termination of drinking or levels of alcohol use, physiological withdrawal state on cessation of alcohol or its use to avoid withdrawal symptoms, increasing tolerance to alcohol, progressive neglect of other interests, persisting use of alcohol despite clear evidence and awareness of nature and extent of harm it is causing. Factors determining prognosis The importance of a multi-disciplinary team in patient care Co-morbidity and impact on patient's lifestyle Biopsychosocial model of health 