<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> was admitted to  Hospital on the  for arthroscopic subacromial decompression of the right shoulder with minor open rotator cuff repair and distal clavicular resection. This was performed on the same day. He has a long-standing history of right shoulder pain and impaired movement. He has suffered from ME for 8 years and as a consequence has had to take early retirement through ill health. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint. </heading>"Severe" right shoulder pain <heading>History of Presenting Complaint. Shoulder Pain. </heading> is a right-handed gentleman with a 16-year history of right shoulder pain. He thinks the pain started as a cumulative result of repetitive heavy straining and lifting whilst doing DIY one weekend at home. Pain was gradual in onset over a period of a week, of moderate intensity and experienced only when lifting the arm out to the side or front. It was focused at the tip of the shoulder and scapula and associated with extensive swelling of the right shoulder going down into the arm. Pain was described as "stabbing" in nature. Since the onset  has continued to experience constant "dull, aching" shoulder pain with "progressive worsening in severity". Immediately prior to the current admission intensity was rated at 8/9 out of 10 compared to 5/6 at the time of injury. Pain experienced since the initial episode has radiated from the shoulder to the elbow and hand. He feels pain also radiates upwards causing neck pain and frequent headaches. Pain limits movement of the affected shoulder, this is compounded by stiffness resulting from reduced use over the 16 year period. He is unable to raise his right arm to the side (abduction) by more than approximately 50˚, as pain limiting further movement, or to lift his arm above his head or to put it behind his back. Movement in front of his body is less painful but limited to approx. 100˚. This makes manual work, carrying shopping and gardening extremely difficult. He also has difficulty brushing his hair and washing his back. Pain is exacerbated by the aforementioned movements but is continually present. Co-codamol and paracetamol provide some relief but this is currently minimal.  first sought medical advice immediately after the original injury. He was told he had "damaged a shoulder ligament" and advised to rest the arm, which provided little relief. Over the past 16 years he has received numerous episodes of physiotherapy, electrotherapy, steroid injections (most recent in 2004) and worn a shoulder sling, which have provided no long-term benefit, "nothing has cured it". In January 2001, he had an arthroscopic washout, which provided both pain relief and improvement in shoulder function for a period of approximately a year. Following this time however, pain returned in the right shoulder and has been present since. He regularly sees a chiropractor for treatment of his shoulder however, feels of late this also provides little benefit. He has crepitus in his shoulder on movement but has experienced little swelling since the original injury. He has an additional 6 year history of bilateral knee pain. This is of moderate intensity at 4 out of 10 and has remained at constant intensity since onset. His left knee clicks and "grinds" regularly.  finds his knee pain "manageable" but experiences associated difficulty climbing stairs. He has had a number of x-rays taken of both knees since 1999, which have shown only early lenticular changes. He also experienced a transient 6 month period of moderately severe backache 8 years ago at the time of developing ME but has suffered no further backpain since. He feels his shoulder injury has taken "far too long to get to surgery, I've been lost in the system somewhere". His constant pain and limited mobility have caused "quality of life to decrease" and for  to become quite depressed particularly over the last 2/3 years as severity of pain has progressively increased. He is on long-term antidepressant medication prescribed by his GP but has received no psychological/psychiatric intervention. His sleeping has been disturbed particularly over the last year as the level of pain experienced causes him to wake frequently and to have difficulty getting comfortable. On average  gets 5/6 broken hours sleep a night. A combination of immobility through inability to exercise and comfort eating have caused  to put on approximately 2 stone in weight over the past 2 years about which he is unhappy. <heading>Past Medical History. </heading>"Virus, like severe flu" - 1998 after which believes contracted post-viral fatigue syndrome or ME. Hypertension - 3-month duration, thinks may have been caused by sinusitis treatment. Hayfever - 10-15 year history Whiplash - 2000 following a road traffic accident Frequent episodes of sinnusitis, 2 year history No diabetes, epilepsy, jaundice, heart disease, strokes, angina, dyspnoea or thyroid disease. <heading>Surgical History. </heading>Attempted right shoulder arthroscopy 2001 - difficult insertion of posterior port due to fibrosis of capsule. Poor views of shoulder joint and subacromial space after insertion of anterior port due to blood. Appendectomy - in childhood. Minor surgery to nose - 21 years. <heading>Systems Review: </heading> has regular headaches with frequency of 4/5 a week. These are short-lived and respond to paracetamol. There is no associated dizziness, impairment of vision, nausea or loss of consciousness. He has sought no medical treatment for these. No significant findings for cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal or neurological systems. His medication can make him constipated but this was not the case at the time of current admission. <heading>Medication. </heading>Bendroflumethazide 2-5mg OD PO - thiazide diuretic, inhibits sodium reabsorption at the start of the distal convoluted tubule. Used in the management of hypertension. Zopiclone 7.5mg x 1 nocte - non-benzodiazepine hypnotic acting at the benzodiazepine receptor. Treatment of insomnia. Amitriptyline 25mg OD - tricyclic antidepressant. Arthrotec 50, (diclofenac sodium 50mg - non-steroidal anti-inflammatory with misoprostol 200μg for prophylaxis against NSAID-induced gastroduodenal ulceration). Co-codamol 8/500 - codeine phosphate 8mg, paracetamol 500mg. Non-opioid analgesic. Cortisol 10mg OD, PO. Testosterone injection 3 monthly - replacement therapy in hypogonadism.  takes no other alternative or over the counter medication. <heading>Allergies: </heading>Micropore dressings. Causes skin rashes on contact. No known drug allergies. <heading>Family History: </heading>Both parents died in their "70s" from heart disease. No family history of arthritis, other type of musculoskeletal disease or diabetes. Positive family history of hypertension.  has no children. <heading>Social History: </heading> is married and has lived in the same 2-storey house in  for many years. His wife is currently fit and well and assists him both with aspects of personal care and day-to-day living. He retired from warehouse work 8 years ago through ill-health. He is a non-smoker, never having tried smoking and doesn't drink any alcohol. Previous interests included cycling, gardening and swimming but ability to perform these is limited by his shoulder pain. He has few local friends with whom he "socialises" with on occasions. He receives financial assistance in the form of benefits, his wife works part-time.  was understandably frustrated at the limitation placed on his mobility and ability to perform daily tasks and was anxious about the success and outcome of his proposed shoulder surgery. He is keen to regain his prior mobility and dexterity and optimise his independence and fitness. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Incomplete tear of the tendinous (rotator) cuff. This injury commonly affects individuals of 's age particularly males; very occasionally is a younger patient affected. The most common cause of a rotator cuff tear is for it to give way under a sudden strain. For , the tendon may well have weakened due to age-related degeneration and the long-term, repetitive, heavy-lifting inherent to warehouse work and was thus predisposed to tear when subjected to additional stress such as that involved in the DIY he was carrying out at the time of injury. The tear is mainly of degenerate fibres of the relatively avascular supraspinatus tendon occurring near its insertion, but may extend into the adjacent subscapularis or infraspinatus tendons. Additional involvement of the capsule is also common. Tearing causes an inflammatory reaction with local swelling as seen with . Such an injury is a cause of painful arc or supraspinatus syndrome, characterised by shoulder and upper arm pain during the mid-range 70-120˚ of arm abduction as for . Severity of pain is reduced at extremes of the range of abduction. Differential diagnoses: Complete tear of rotator cuff - serious impairment of power and ability to abduct the shoulder and power. 'Frozen' shoulder - characteristic severe aching pain in the shoulder and upper arm, typically of gradual onset. However, there is normally uniform limitation of all gleno-humeral movements. Abduction is most significantly impaired for . Osteoarthritis of the acromioclavicular joint - uncommon in the shoulder due to its non-weightbearing function. Affected individuals are generally elderly however, does present with shoulder pain radiating to the upper arm as for . In acromio-clavicular arthritis pain begins past 90˚ abduction and increases rather than decreases as the full extent of elevation is reached. Rheumatoid Arthritis - the shoulder is commonly affected by rheumatoid arthritis. Principal clinical features are local pain, stiffness and impairment of movement as seen in this patient. Unlikely cause however as  has no history of rheumatoid arthritis. Often both shoulders are affected simultaneously with additional involvement of other upper limb joints. Muscular neck pain - however pain of such a type does not radiate to the upper arm. Findings to be looked for on physical examination to confirm diagnosis of an incomplete rotator cuff tear are: Local tenderness below the margin of the acromion. Active movement - when attempts to abduct the arm, there is no movement at the glenohumeral joint with a complete rotator cuff tear, 45-60˚ of abduction can be achieved entirely by scapular movement. In incomplete tears or painful arc syndrome power of abduction is retained but movement is painful. Contrastingly, there is a full range of passive movement. Swelling - indicative of an inflammatory process or resulting from synovial thickening. Crepitus on movement - loss of hyaline cartilage, reduction in joint space as seen in osteoarthritis. AP radiological examination is of most benefit in differentiating between the various causes of painful arc syndrome other than rotator cuff tears such as calcified deposits or fractures of the greater tuberosity. X-rays are generally only necessary for persistent rotator cuff tendonitis or when the diagnosis is uncertain. MRI scanning and ultrasound imaging techniques can be utilised to assist in clarifying a diagnosis. <heading>Physical and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading> is a middle-aged male who appeared relatively comfortable but of fairly low mood at the time of interview. There were no obvious signs of pallor, cyanosis or jaundice. He was not cannulated or using respiratory or mobility aids. He was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely. <heading>General. </heading>No pale palmar creases, signs of peripheral cyanosis, palmer erythema, clubbing, cyanosis, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, kolonychia, or liver flap. No pale palpebral conjunctivae, indication of dehydration or lymphadenopathy. Temperature - 37ºC - absence of systemic infection, fit for surgery. <heading>Musculoskeletal. </heading>2 arthroscopic scars (anterior and posterior ports) from previous examination on the anterior and posterior aspects of the shoulder. Wasting of right shoulder musculature especially supraspinatus and infraspinatus. No erythema, swelling, bruising Tenderness over the bicipital groove and acromioclavicular joint Crepitus on flexion and extension No palpable effusion Reduced scapula control Internal rotation - 40˚ (reduced), External rotation - 20˚ (reduced), Flexion - 90˚, Extension - 30˚ (reduced) Weakness of early abduction (0-80˚), painful arc of movement between 50-110˚ abduction. Movement improved by supination of hand. Positive impingement sign. Adduction unaffected. No neurovascular deficit <heading>Abdomen. </heading>Symmetrical No spider naevi, caput medusa, obvious abdominal distension, hepatomegaly, ascites, palpable masses No renal angle tenderness - infection unlikely Abdomen soft and non-tender on palpation, percussion resonant, normal bowel sounds <heading>Cardiovascular system. </heading>No peripheral or central cyanosis, no peripheral oedema Pulse 88bpm; Blood pressure 138/73 - known hypertension of long duration, currently treated with bendroflumethazide. Radial pulse palpable, regular, radial, brachial and carotid pulses normal strength JVP normal Heart sounds I and II normal No murmurs or displacement of the apex beat. <heading>Respiratory system. </heading>Respiratory rate 15/min Breathing appeared to be of normal depth No cough, sputum, tracheal deviation, crackles Equal chest expansion, normal vesicular breath sounds Future examination should include a full psychiatric assessment to monitor presence and severity of his depressive illness. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Incomplete tear of the tendinous (rotator) cuff. The rotator cuff is comprised of the tendons of supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor and subscapularis muscles and forms a musculotendinous cuff for the glenohumeral joint. Tonic muscular contraction holds the humeral head in the glenoid cavity of the scapula, stabilising the glenohumeral joint. Frequent microtrauma of the shoulder joint such as that resulting from heavy lifting and stretching as required in  previous occupation can cause injury and tearing of the rotator cuff. Tenderness over the bicipital groove on examination is typically attributed to frictional irritation of the long tendon of biceps but can also be associated with degeneration of the rotator cuff as is the case for . The pattern on impairment of abduction can be explained as follows. The first 90˚ of abduction occurs at the glenohumeral joint involving first contraction of supraspinatus achieving 0-30˚ and then of deltoid effecting 30-90˚ abduction. Beyond 90˚ requires rotation of the scapula produced by contraction of trapezius. The painful arc of movement observed particularly between 5-80˚ occurs when the inflamed area of the supraspinatus tendon (in the proximity of the tear) comes into contact with the undersurface of the acromion. Adduction is unaffected as it is principally achieved by pectoralis major and lattisimus dorsi. Reduction of both internal and external rotation can be explained in part by spasm and stiffness resulting from chronic inflammation and pain. External rotation is impaired to a greater degree than internal rotation as it is accomplished by infraspinatus, which was clearly wasted in  whereas internal rotation is achieved by pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi and deltoid, muscles appearing to be unaffected. Causative factors associated with rotator cuff disorders: Excessive overloading - contributory factor for , cumulative, repetitive shoulder stress Cuff degeneration with ageing - imaging study evidence for  of arthritic degeneration of acromioclavicular joint Cuff degeneration with ischaemia Anatomical features e.g. narrow coracoacromial arch, hooked acromion Instability of the glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints Musculoskeletal disease resulting in wasting of the cuff muscles <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading> is a middle-aged gentleman admitted for elective shoulder surgery. He was understandably in significant pain at the time of interview and very anxious about his impeding surgery and the damage he had done to his shoulder. Physical:  has experienced progressive deterioration in mobility of his shoulder and right arm and increasing amounts of pain. He has wasting of the musculature of his right shoulder and as such has reduced power of abduction and external rotation. Difficulty performing tasks such as carrying shopping, dressing himself and brushing his hair has meant  has lost a significant amount of his independence, something he attributes great importance to.  is at present able to drive and keen to continue doing so. Psychological: The psychological impact of enduring chronic progressively increasing intensity of orthopaedic pain must not be underestimated. The pain and associated reduction in mobility and independence has caused  to become sufficiently depressed to warrant antidepressant medication. His depression and efficacy of treatment must be closely monitored to optimise prognosis and compliance with treatment and rehabilitation. Anxiety concerning his musculoskeletal injury is compounded by the psychological 'ill-effects' resulting from long-standing chronic fatigue syndrome. He must receive support from an appropriate specialist in both addressing and alleviating this anxiety. Social:  has a close relationship with his wife and receives extensive support from her. She will continue to provide care for her husband on his hospital discharge. Additional support is provided by a few close local friends. External support crucially must be encouraged and maintained both during the hospital stay and future rehabilitation to optimise prognosis.  may benefit from further social interaction in the form of clubs e.g. cycling or gardening (past interests) on discharge and membership should be both encouraged and facilitated. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Immediate (preoperative) management. </heading>Hydration and electrolyte balance - iv access, initiation of appropriate fluid replacement regime. Pain - achieve adequate level of analgesia with combination of paracetamol and NSAIDs. Continence - consider intraoperative catheterisation. Continue taking arthrotec and cortisol prior to surgery. <heading>Investigations</heading><table/>The decreased lymphocyte count may be explained as a result of the long-term steroid therapy  receives. Biochemistry - results obtained , all parameters within normal ranges. MRI scan 1995 - right supraspinatus impingement, absence of glenohumeral arthritic disease, narrowing of the acromioclavicular joint space. Arthroscopy 2001 - reduced efficacy of procedure due to difficult port insertion and poor visibility due to bleeding. Fibrosis of capsule noted. X-rays 2003 - demonstrate moderate degenerative/osteoarthritic changes of the right acromioclavicular joint, reduced joint space and sclerosis of the subchondral bone. No osteophytes or periarticular cysts visible. <heading>Reassurance and explanation</heading>The MRI scan you had taken sometime ago has indicated a small tear in the rotator cuff of your right shoulder. The rotator cuff is a cuff of muscles, which provides stability to your shoulder. One of the muscles comprising this cuff is relatively avascular and prone to rupture if stressed by repetitive strain such as may have been exerted with your DIY or weakened by degenerative change as you age. Both causative mechanisms were possibly active in you. You have in addition signs of wear and tear or osteoarthritis, such as a reduction in the joint space between 2 of the bones in your shoulder, the acromion and clavicle. This is a common finding as individuals age. We plan to insert a small camera into your shoulder joint under general anaesthetic, whilst you are asleep. This will allow us to visualise the damage and make any appropriate repair. It is possible the tendon of the supraspinatus muscle may have become detached from its point of insertion on the humerus and if so will require reattaching. At the same time we will also wash out your shoulder joint as this has been proven to be beneficial in relieving pain. It is important that you mobilise quickly to optimise functioning of your shoulder joint, we will refer you to the physiotherapy department and give you some exercises to do at home. You will need to wear a special sling full-time for 6-8 weeks after surgery to avoid rupture of the repair. We will continue your pain-relief both during and after your surgery, if this is insufficient please tell us and we can alter the dosage you are receiving. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention</heading>Surgery - Arthroscopic subacromial decompression of the right shoulder with minor open rotator cuff repair and distal clavicular resection performed on the . General anaesthetic and interscalene block administered. Supraspinatus tear visualised and partial avulsion of most of the muscle from its point of insertion. A mini open exposure technique was used involving partial detachment of the deltoid. Medication administered in addition to regular drugs on : <list><heading>Pre-operative:</heading>Hydrocortisone 100mg IV - prophylaxis against acute adrenal insufficiency on administration of anaesthesia/surgery.Propofol 250mg (Induction agent)Cetrizine 10mg PO - non-sedating antihistamine, used for symptomatic relief of hayfever.Forceval PO - multivitamin and mineral supplement preparations.</list><list><heading>Post-operative:</heading>Mucodyne capsules (carbocisteine) PO 375mg - mucolytic, facilitate expectoration by reducing sputum viscosity. Reduce likelihood of repair/stitches rupture.Morphine 10mg IM - opioid analgesic.Cyclizine 50mg IM - antihistamine, used as prophylaxis for nausea and vomiting.</list>Continue current medication, to optimise cardiovascular function and for prophylactic benefit. <heading>Observation</heading> will be transferred to recovery and then a general orthopaedic ward immediately following surgery where he should receive regular monitoring of oxygen saturation, heart rate, blood pressure and respiratory rate during his recovery from the general anaesthesia. Regular observations should be continued and altered as appropriate for a 24-hour period following anaesthesia. 2 x doses iv antibiotics e.g. cefuroxime 250mg - prophylaxis against post-operative infection. Wear a full-time shoulder sling and splint for 6-8 weeks following surgery. Check FBC, U+Es 24 hours postoperatively. Wear splint with passive mobilisation only for first 6 weeks postoperatively. Gentle, active, assisted mobilisation for further 2 weeks postoperatively. Mobilise fingers, practice movements such as clenching the fist.  should be able to be discharged the day after surgery when pain-free, able to mobilise and when has regained a satisfactory level of independence. He is well nourished and hydrated and is unlikely to require special supplementation during her hospital stay. <heading>Referral and team working</heading>GP - post-discharge monitoring and support. Physiotherapy team - restore shoulder function, rebuild shoulder muscle bulk. Orthopaedic surgeon - perform reparative surgery, monitor recovery and restoration of function. Cardiologist - optimise cardiovascular function and assess exercise tolerance. ME specialists - early, appropriate intervention optimises prognosis. Psychiatric/psychologist referral - optimise antidepressant medication and address underlying causation. <heading>Advice and Prevention</heading>Wear supportive splint and sling for 6-8 weeks postoperatively. Encourage regular, gentle exercise after 6 weeks. Continue NSAIDs for arthritic pain. Continue chiropractic treatment if is felt to be beneficial. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> was able to take both fluids and solids the night of surgery () and returned to a normal dietary intake the day after surgery (). He was comfortable the morning following surgery whilst on 4-hourly painkillers but became progressively more uncomfortable and dizzy when they were "wearing off". He in fact fainted twice early on the morning of the  in the bathroom and attributed this to "feeling hot and perhaps standing too quickly". Following this, there was no further loss of consciousness, headache or feelings of dizziness. He was to be discharged that afternoon after lunch providing he was pain-free on oral analgesia, able to weight-bear, mobilise and manage stairs safely. On discharge  should receive urgent physiotherapy to permit passive mobilisation of his shoulder for the first 6 weeks following surgery and then gentle assisted mobilisation for 2 further weeks. He should be followed up as an outpatient at 3 weeks, then 8 weeks following surgery and then at regular intervals for a year. Success of arthroscopic rotator cuff tear repair surgery is excellent however the progressive degenerative process of osteoarthritis in this gentleman must be acknowledged. He has radiological evidence of reduction in the acromioclavicular joint space and involvement of the knee joints also, which will progressively deteriorate further with age. He should be made aware of the referral route from his GP to orthopaedic secondary services should he feel increasing joint pain becomes a pressing issue in the future. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Shoulder pain is that arising in or around the shoulder from either the glenohumeral, acromioclavicular, sternoclavicular, subacromial or scapulothoracic joints and surrounding soft tissues. Pain is the most common presenting symptom of any sort of shoulder pathology. Evidence regarding efficacy of analgesia in the shoulder is extremely limited and certainly an area to address with future research. No systematic reviews or randomised controlled trials have looked at the effects of either topical or intra-articular administration of NSAIDs or that of paracetamol or opiates in people with shoulder pain. One RCT found no significant reduction in pain between oral NSAIDs such as diclofenac or naproxen when compared to placebo 1. Evidence for such interventions is thought to be limited by a lack of standardised approaches, the diverse nature of disorders encompassed under the title of shoulder pain and huge variation in the types of NSAIDs used. There is insufficient evidence comparing efficacy of inarticular corticosteroid injections +/- local anaesthetic or physiotherapy with placebo or physiotherapy alone. One small RCT found no significance difference in either pain score or change in function/mobility achieved after 3 weeks treatment with injections of triamcinolone versus saline 2. Future research should focus on increasing trial size (reducing error factor), and optimising accuracy of injection with techniques such as ultrasound or fluroscopy as evidence suggests clinical outcome is associated with accuracy of injection. Physiotherapy in the form of a supervised exercise regime in addition to providing advice regarding pain management has been found to improve both pain and shoulder function when compared to placebo at intervals of 6 months and 2.5 years following rotator cuff injury 3. Laser treatment is a useful adjunct and has been shown to improve pain and speed recovery compared to placebo. Its efficacy in a chronic injury such as that of  is uncertain however 4. Surgical intervention such as arthroscopic decompression with post-operative physiotherapy improves pain and shoulder joint function when compared to placebo 5. Future research is required to establish comparative efficacy of arthroscopic laser subacromial decompression. Multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation incorporating physiotherapy, surgery, psychological, behavioural and educational interventions has been proposed as a treatment method for achieving an improved range of movement and function in rotator cuff disease 6. Systemic review evidence for such an intervention is of poor quality however for reasons such as dissimilar treatment groups at baseline and not ensuring blinding of therapists. This rehabilitative approach should clearly be addressed in the future. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>Each year, approximately 1% of UK adults over the age of 45 present to primary care with new onset shoulder pain 7. Prevalence is estimated at between 4-20%. Various community studies have shown shoulder pain to have higher frequency in women but age distribution is unclear 8. Development of chronic pain is common and typically requires referral to secondary care services. 's case is complicated by the co-existing chronic fatigue syndrome characterised by disabling fatigue with additional symptoms of musculoskeletal pain and headaches, 2 of his presenting symptoms. Careful examination is required to differentiate symptoms of musculoskeletal and functional/psychosomatic disease. The psychological impact of managing his chronic, severe pain has clearly resulted in a clinical depression, which has been additionally influenced by his chronic fatigue syndrome. Whilst his current surgery will go some way to improving his mental state, by restoring function and reducing pain it is essential  receives treatment from a specialist clinic for his chronic fatigue as depression and anxiety will have detrimental impact on prognosis. Outcome of chronic fatigue syndrome is poor without treatment and influenced by duration of disease, co-morbid mood disorders (his depression), increasing age and conviction that the illness is physical ('s was "brought on by a virus, I've never been the same since). 's case highlights the practice of patients receiving treatment at any hospital within a trust. His outpatient consultations, pre-operative investigations and treatment have been performed at the  hospital but he was able to receive his surgery at . Referral to different hospitals within a trust can speed up treatment, thus decreasing waiting lists and optimising delivery of patient care. Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. His wife should be encouraged to continue supporting her husband but also facilitate a gradual increase in his physical activity once recovered from his shoulder surgery. Challenging the illness behaviour that develops in chronic fatigue syndrome is essential in optimising prognosis. Maximising additional, external social interaction should be encouraged and facilitated. <heading>Impact on your learning</heading><list>Factors determining prognosisThe importance of a multi-disciplinary team in patient careCo-morbidity and impact on patient's lifestyleBiopsychosocial model of health</list>