<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> was referred to  Medical Admissions Unit (MAU) on the  from his General Practitioner (GP) due to recurrent chest infections and a reduced response to antibiotics.  had a productive cough that was not improving following three courses of antibiotics. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint</heading>On presentation to the MAU,  had a 4 week history of recurrent chest infections.  presented with a productive cough, white phlegm, breathlessness and lethargy. <heading>History of Presenting Complaint</heading> had taken 3 courses of antibiotics prior to presentation, which had been prescribed by his GP. There had been little improvement from this medication and  was becoming progressively more breathless and fatigued.  had a productive cough for at least 3 weeks, which was white phlegm with no blood or mucus present. His phlegm had not been frothy.  had no associated pain with his cough and did not experience any chest pain. His breathlessness had been present for many weeks, and he was now only able to walk approximately 100 yards without getting breathless. There was no history of a wheeze or any palpitations.  also had associated nausea and poor appetite and had lost 1 stone in weight over the preceding months.  had been admitted to the  Hospital in , again for a chest infection that would not resolve.  had had a total of 3 admissions in the last 2 years for recurrent chest infections.  was also receiving 2 units of blood 3-4 times a week.  had no gastrointestinal symptoms and no urinary symptoms. <heading>Past Medical History</heading><list>Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia - Left total knee replacement - 1998No history of diabetes, thyroid problems, rheumatoid arthritis, epilepsy, asthma, myocardial infarction, stroke or TB. </list><heading>Current Medication</heading><list>Metoclopramide - anti-emeticCo-trimaxazole - 400mg bd - anti-bacterialPrednisolone - 5mg od - (a steroid; immunosuppressant, widely used in oncology, marked antitumour effect in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, hodgkin's &non-hodgkin's lymphoma. Has a role in the palliation of symptomatic end-stage malignant disease where it may enhance appetite and feeling of well being.)Lansoprazole - 30mg od - PPICitalopram - 20mg od - SSRISalamol (salbutamol) inhaler - 100mg Allopurinol - 100mg odAugmentin - 750mg tdsCiprofloxacin - 500mg bdParacetamol - 1g tdsFortisips</list><heading>No known allergies</heading><heading>Family History</heading>No significant familial illness <heading>Social History</heading> lives with his partner in . He is retired.  is a non-smoker and drinks no alcohol. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading> has previously been diagnosed with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia (CLL) based upon clinical examination findings, blood results (an increase in lymphocyte count to at least 5x10 9/L) and film investigations.  is being treated for the symptomatic relief of his condition, having undergone a course of chemotherapy. He is being treated with an anti-emetic, an immunosuppressant and a selective-serotonin receptor inhibitor (anti-depressant).  has previously been treated with Chlorambucil, an alkylating drug, commonly used to treat CLL and a common chemotherapy drug. Despite all treatments,  has had a steadily increasing WCC and bone marrow failure with a transfusion dependency and has been suffering from recurrent respiratory infections over the last year. The most likely single cause of the presentation is therefore a respiratory tract infection, unresolved by oral antibiotics, secondary to a reduced immune response due to CLL and marrow failure +/-chemotherapy. The differential diagnoses for this presentation still need to be considered. These include: Pleural effusion. Fluid in the pleural space, this can be exudate in origin, which is mostly due to increased leakiness of pleural capillaries secondary to infection, inflammation or malignancy. This can be caused by pneumonia, TB, pulmonary infarction or malignant metastases. The symptoms of pleural effusions dyspnoea, pleuritic chest pain or it can be asymptomatic. Bronchial carcinoma. The symptoms of which include cough (80%), haemoptysis (70%), dyspnoea (60%), recurrent or slowly resolving pneumonia, anorexia and weight loss. Pulmonary tuberculosis. This can be silent or cause a cough, sputum, pneumonia, pleurisy, haemoptysis or pleural effusion. Pulmonary Embolus. CLL results in polycythaemia (high white cell count) which causes a hypercoagulable state. This predisposes to pulmonary embolus and hence shortness of breath. Recurrent pneumonia. Secondary to bronchial compression from enlarged metastatic lymph nodes, as a result of CLL. On physical examination I will look for signs of a fever (tachycardia, sweating, confusion), cyanosis, tachypnoea, hypotension, signs of consolidation (diminished expansion, dull percussion note, increased tactile vocal fremitus, bronchial breathing) and a pleural rub. <heading>Physical examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>On general examination,  was alert, orientated and breathless at rest. There were no signs of jaundice, clubbing, cyanosis, oedema or lymphadenopathy.  had pale conjunctiva and pallor, indicative of anaemia. <list><heading>Cardiovascular System</heading>Pulse 100 regularBlood pressure 118/60Temperature 37.6oCHeart Sounds I + II + 0JVP - not raised</list><list><heading>Respiratory System</heading>Respiratory rate 25 breaths per minute. Expiratory wheezes present bilaterally. Coarse basal crackles bilaterally. Good air entry bilaterally. Short of breath at rest. Vesicular breath sounds were present. No chest pain present. </list><list><heading>Gastrointestinal System</heading>Abdomen was soft and non-tender. Splenomegaly present. No other masses palpated. Bowel sounds present. </list><heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading> has been becoming progressively more debilitated by his CLL and has had recurrent respiratory infections over the last year with a steadily increasing WCC and bone marrow failure. He has had regular courses of augmentin and is continuing to suffer with infection. Despite medical therapy,  is suffering from a progressive disease that is now not responding to treatment, including a course of chlorambucil and fludarabine. 's recurrent respiratory infections are a result of both his disease and the treatment he has undergone, and coupled with his age,  is highly susceptible to infections. 's signs on examination (tachypnoea, tachycardia, basal crackles and an expiratory wheeze) all indicate that he has contracted another respiratory tract infection. 's splenomegaly is an indication that his CLL is quite advanced. At this stage it is important to investigate 's blood results (get a blood culture, mid-stream urine and sputum culture), arterial blood gases and order a chest X-ray to look for areas of consolidation, multilobar infiltrates, cavitation and pleural effusion in order to confirm diagnosis. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical - Prior to 's diagnosis of CLL in , he had been a healthy man with no other medical problems. However, since his diagnosis, he says he has been finding it progressively more difficult to carry out the tasks and jobs he used to manage and is relying on the help of his partner to help him.  has found his recurrent respiratory infections leave him very breathless and unable to walk as far as he used to prior to him being unwell. Associated with his increased breathlessness is his constant feeling of lethargy as a result of his CLL. Over the last year  has felt his physical health deteriorate and his regular admissions to hospital to treat his infections have limited his physical activities. He is now unable to walk more than 100 yards without getting breathless. Psychological -  has found his deteriorating health difficult to come to terms with and admitted to 'feeling very low' at times.  has been prescribed a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor in order to help elevate his mood and help him come to terms with his diagnosis. Social - On a social level,  has full-time help from his partner, with whom he lives. He has limited contacts with others because he finds it difficult to go out when he is feeling so tired and breathless. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading><table/><table/><table/>'s blood gas results are indicative of a respiratory alkalosis. 's ECG and chest X-ray were normal. No cryoglobulin was detected as at . No results have confirmed the presence of infective organisms. Blood culture, MSU and sputum culture results are yet to reported. <heading>Reassurance and Explanation</heading>To appropriately reassure the patient I would say: "As you know you have the disease Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia, which affects your immune system and leaves you at a greater risk of contracting infections. Your have had a number of infections over the last year, which have in the past responded to antibiotics. Your presentation at the moment indicates that you have another respiratory tract infection that we will aim to treat here to help make you feel better. We would like to keep you in hospital until we know the cause of the infection and to make sure that the medication we give you improves your current condition". To explain the nature of the 's condition I would say: "CLL is a form of cancer that affects the blood producing cells in your bone marrow. It becomes progressively more likely that someone gets this condition as you get older but the majority of patients have a slowly progressing form which can have a survival of 10 years or more. CLL is not a curable condition and we do not tend to treat patients until they show signs of the disease or their blood results indicate that their disease is progressing. We have found from your blood results that your disease is progressing, which is why you have been taking the medication you have been over the last year. Because this disease affects the immune system, you are much more prone to infections, particularly respiratory tract infections, which you have been suffering from. These infections can be life-threatening which is why we need to keep you in hospital until you and ourselves are comfortable that you are feeling better and have got rid of your infection". To describe the management plan I would say: "At the moment, we would like to keep you in hospital so that we can check your blood results, screen you for infections and treat you here so that we can monitor your recovery from the infection. Your haemoglobin levels are still quite low and this will be exacerbating your feeling of breathlessness. We would therefore also like to give you a blood transfusion, as you have had in the past, to try and increase you haemoglobin levels. We are going to carry out some tests on the phlegm that you are bringing up with your cough to see if it is infected with anything and we would also like to check your urine for any infections in your water works too. Initially, we will give you something to help you with your breathing and an antibiotic to help you fight any infection. We will also monitor your temperature to rule our any sepsis that you may get through infection. We are not sure how long you will be hospital for but we will allow you to go home when you are feeling better and we are happy that any infections are treated and your haemoglobin levels are not getting lower. We will refer to back to the care of your haematologist who your have outpatient appointments with and inform her about what has been happening". <heading>Prescription/Medical Intervention</heading>On admission to ,  was prescribed augmentin (a broad-spectrum penicillin, which is a mixture of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid and is used to treat infections due to beta-lactamase producing strains, which include respiratory tract infections) in order to treat his respiratory symptoms.  was also prescribed ciprofloxacin, which is effective against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and is used for respiratory tract infections, excluding pneumococcal pneumonia. Allopurinol was also given, which is used as a prophylaxis of hyperuricaemia associated with cancer chemotherapy. Hyperuricaemia can also be caused by the rapid destruction of cells in leukaemia.  also received a blood transfusion in order to try and increase his haemoglobin level. <heading>Observation</heading>Short-term observation includes regularly monitoring  in order to check or signs of improvement in his symptoms. If the antibiotics do not improve his breathlessness and cough, further management will be required. It is initially important, over the first few days of admission to check for signs of sepsis and a worsening infection. Regular monitoring of 's blood results and getting culture and sensitivities is important in order to prescribe the correct antibiotics specific to the organism.  has a complicated clinical picture and recurrent infections in a CLL sufferer are very common. In  immunoglobulins intravenously in order to treat and prevent infections.  is still contracting a number of infections and not being able to fight them. Such infections can be life-threatening in CLL patients and consequently detailed monitoring of his clinical signs (pyrexia, worsening cough, change in sputum colour, confusion) and blood results are important. <heading>Referral and Team Working</heading> is already under the care of the haematologists at the  Hospital and a referral back to their care was made in order to notify them of this change in 's health. At present 's health is deteriorating and it is important that both himself and his partner are given enough information about his prognosis. It may be necessary to refer  to the community services in order for himself and his partner to get help at home. <heading>Advice and Prevention</heading>Once  is discharged from , it is important that he is advised not to delay in receiving medical help if his respiratory symptoms return or if he feels that his health is deteriorating further. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> was admitted to the ward at  Hospital on  and has remains an inpatient there (). His bloods are being continuously monitored and his breathlessness has reduced, with his presenting symptoms being stabilised with intravenous antibiotics. As at the , he was awaiting the results of blood cultures, mid-stream urine, sputum culture and blood results, if these were stable and his temperature had lowered, discharge was to be considered. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a form of leukaemia in which there is an excess number of mature but poorly functioning lymphocytes in the circulating blood. The excess number of lymphocytes (in CLL B-cells are affected) is primarily due to the failure of lymphocytes to die at the end of their normal lifespan. CLL is more often a disease of later life and makes up 40% of all leukaemias in patients over 65 years (1). The overall incidence is about 3/100,000 per year, with a median age of onset of 65 to 70 years (1). In black and white populations the incidence is approximately equal but in Asian populations the condition is rare. The majority of all new cases of CLL (70-80%) are chance findings on a blood test and about 40-60% of patients are symptom-free at the time they are diagnosed. Many cases are also found on the presentation of an enlarged lymph node during a routine check-up. The most common symptoms in those patients who have symptoms at the time of diagnosis include weakness, fatigue, night sweats or proneness to repeated infections. On examination, such patients may have enlarged, non-tender lymph nodes, an enlarged live and/or spleen. Anaemia is present in about 15% of patients as well as the presence of a low platelet count, indicating that the disease has affected the normal production of blood cells in the bone marrow or that there has been auto-immune damage to the red cells or platelets. Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is not considered a medical emergency unlike acute leukaemia and if it is diagnosed early treatment does not usually start immediately. Diagnosis of CLL is made on a lymphocyte count of at least 5x109/L and immunophenotyping, along with other features of CLL present. New developments in the prognosis of CLL include the use of detecting a rearrangement (mutation) of certain genes (immunoglobulin genes) but the laboratory tests required for diagnosis by this method are not available in most hospital setting. Other tests that can be used in the hospital setting include markers on the surface of CLL cells, associating their levels with the disease outcome but the importance of such tests remains in largely unknown. Currently there is no curative treatment for CLL but most patients remain well for a long time and have a long survival. The three basic elements of treatment are: <list>Treatment of the newly diagnosed patient if requiredTreatment of patients with progressive disease or disease resistant to standard treatmentsTreatment of complications, such as infections or autoimmune disease. </list>The main drugs used in CLL treatment includes; Alkylating agents (commonly used Chlorambucil), Anthracyclines, Purine analogues (fludarabine and cladribine; preventing the formation of DNA therefore preventing cell division), Monoclonal antibodies (rituximab; an antibody binding specifically to an antigen in lymphocytes, which helps kill the cell with the help of the body's immune system) and Steroids (only in patients with advanced disease or to control auto-immune complications). Management of CLL depends largely on the signs and symptoms of each individual. Having received the diagnosis of CLL, patients are regularly followed up by their general practitioner and following the Department of Health guidelines, individuals are referred for specialist investigations when: A high white count with excessive numbers of lymphocytes (particularly in the presence of anaemia or low platelet count) Presence of enlarged spleen, liver or lymph nodes Symptomatic disease, i.e. weight loss of over 10% in the last 6 months, fewer over 38oC for 2 or more weeks and extreme fatigue or night sweats. When CLL patients do require treatment, there will be few occasions when they would require in-patient treatment. Generally, a patient will require in-patient treatment only if they develop a severe infection. If an individual has no significant symptoms at the time of diagnosis, they will attend regular check-ups without going on medication. Currently there is no conclusive evidence that suggests early treatment prolongs survival. The criteria for beginning therapy are: <list>Progressive marrow failureMassive or progressive lymph node enlargementMassive or progressive enlargement of the spleenProgressive lymphocytosisSystemic symptoms (weight loss in the last 10 months, fever above 38oC for 2 weeks or more, extreme fatigue, night sweats and auto-immune haemolytic anaemia). </list>In summary, CLL is a form of cancer affecting blood producing cells in the bone marrow, with increasing incidence as you get older. The majority of patients have a slowly progressing disease with a survival of 10 years or more. CLL is not considered curable and indeed patients are not treated until they become symptomatic or when blood results indicate that the disease is progressing. The mainstay of treatment is chemotherapy, usually taken orally, and the majority of patients continue to have a good quality of life for many years. Areas of development currently are ways in which to diagnose CLL and how this may correlate to disease progression. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>The important issues raised by 's case include the issues of the quality of his life and how best to improve it as his CLL becomes progressively more developed. Over the last year  has had recurrent respiratory tract infections for which he has had 3 admissions to hospital. It is important to consider if his CLL is progressing how best to mange him whilst he is in hospital and what can be done for him in the community. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading><list>Presentation of respiratory tract infections and relevant history details. Investigations required to make respiratory diagnoses. Clinical features of CLL and the disease pathology. Practical skills to obtain an arterial blood gas. Management of respiratory tract infections. </list>