<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>Michael Smith is an experienced audio engineer with many years involved with companies pioneering the leading technology. He wishes to pursue a niche in the market for audio consultancy in the expanding hi-fi separates market. The proposal seeks to offer advice and calibration of high-end systems, both demonstrating and offering for sale many accessories at discounted costs. The hi-fi separates sector of the audio-visual market is continually expanding, whilst sought after personal advice and service is becoming harder to come by. Michael Smith has the training and expertise to improve and properly calibrate hi-fi systems to allow them to perform to their fullest extent. Business experience both during top degree at , and assisting in running an existing plastics factory, provide necessary skills and foresight into running and managing a business. No investment is required as initial costs are low, and sufficient funds are available to Michael Smith. Costs in following years are low enough to be covered easily by the previous years profits. Partnership is intended for growth within the second year, with Michael Smith maintaining ultimate control over the company. </abstract><heading>Background</heading>A significant share of the audio-visual market has, for the last three decades, been commanded by hi-fi separates. Consumer research suggests that this sector of the market is still in continued growth, whilst specialised independent audio stores are on the decline. This leaves an increasing consumer base without personal and specialised service and advice. 'PRIONICS' believes a niche is developing for a consultancy-based service to offer advice and knock down products to better configure the ever more expensive systems. <heading>The Proposal</heading>'PRIONICS' proposes to offer a consultancy service for Hifi separates users, configuring systems and offering advised products to bring the most out of their cherished systems. Using diagnostic tools and years of experience in the trade, the levels can be optimised, and speaker placement adjusted to maximise stereo separation and minimise reflections. A collection of sample products could be auditioned within the system to illustrate any benefits, the client being left with the option of purchasing these products. Various room treatment options will be also available a minimum cost, these could be fitted by the company at a later date. The team would demonstrate their benefit during consultancy. Clients have the option of being added to the newsletter highlighting the latest and best deals on various accessories and second hand products. There is little mention of home-call services in the Hi-fi industry at all, so if competition exists they cannot have a successful marketing strategy and 'PRIONICS' wishes to profit out of this niche. Once a client base is established, satisfied customers would through word of mouth spread the word bringing in a larger clientele. The nature of this sector of the market, high-end 'audiophile' listeners enjoy the constant refinement of their system, and 'PRIONICS' would be able to assist them in this strife. Good reviews would help market the service in itself as these are heavily relied upon by this small sector. Regular customers can then be established, some wishing to upgrade almost habitually, opening the door for part exchange and second hand dealings in the future. 'Specialist' Hi-fi retailers such as Sevenoaks and Richer sounds have had success beyond their mainstream electrical retail rivals within the audio-visual market. They touch upon the mid-range of this market, picking up from the budget that high-street retailers offers. This illustrates the growth of the sector, and the success has come in particular from the accessibility and the realisation of how low costs can really be. As bonds strengthen within the audio community, 'PRIONICS' will expand their services at first within the existing client base. Building upon the already successful trade of second hand wares by the owner, the company can introduce a part exchange and second hand range of products. Few retailers can now accept second hand items, including Richer sounds, especially regarding speakers. 'PRIONICS' would be uniquely qualified to offer a true price for quality second's bettering the prices offered to Hi-fi enthusiasts at present, whilst increasing stock and the choice available to other clients. In the second year, 'PRIONICS' plans to expand and take on a partner to increase the amount of consultancy possible and expand the client base. Another employee shall be recruited to help manage administrative, promotional and marketing aspects of the business. 'PRIONICS' hopes within 3 years to open a sister store specialising in the knockdown accessories and second hand components build up and maintained by PRIONICS' consultancy services. <heading>Risk</heading>Initially creating a good client base is foremost, as there is no store as such to attract attention; this venture relies heavily upon word of mouth and initial promotional work. The value of the service then has to be gauged and judged by the consumer, whilst the personal touch may be the edge, some clients may not be comfortable with letting strangers into their homes regarding the cost of the systems in question, and also the idea of 'PRIONICS' touching the system and offering advice on that which they take so much pride in. <heading>Sales and Marketing</heading>The following information has been collected to validate the idea that PRIONICS can run as a viable business opportunity. The ownership of CD an Hi-fi separates accounts for nearly a quarter of the adult population. This percentage is ever increasing even today as the products filter through ever more accessible outlets. <quote>"There is a clear trend towards both music centres and CD and hi-fi separates, mainly at the expense of racked systems and midi/mini systems..." Source: Mintel</quote><figure/>Hi-fi separates are still leading the way in the growth of the hi-fi/stereo sector. Their sale a significant contribution for over three decades. The advent of AV has only served to increase their sales, as for true musicality, separates still offer the best solution. The sale of AV products is rising sharply, however high end AV products exist, requiring the same style of configuration, possibly more crucially to get the desired effects. This should then not be considered as competition, only additional custom as the same principles need be applied. Price erosion has merely served to expand the consumer base interested in the sector, whilst high-end products continue to expand. Speakers are the most affluent and buoyant subsection fo the market, making up 40% of total hi-fi sales. DVD and AV has had a positive effect on the speaker market, the sale of additional speakers in the form of centre speakers and subwoofers has risen by double digits in 2000. Amps occupy about 35% of the market, and a further 30% is taken by CD separates, however CD separates have the lowest value, only commanding 15% of the market in terms of total expenditure. <figure/>This suggests that the Hi-fi market is set to increase rapidly, so 'PRIONICS' can fill this niche whilst it exists, riding the wave of interest from new consumers and establishing 'PRIONICS' as a leader in it's field. <table/>Richer Sounds has taken full advantage of this boom, their Company Report revealing the steep increase in success of this sector within the last few years. <table/>This shows that owners of Hi-fi separates are more interested in the technological developments and new products than other sectors. This translates into an interest in improving their system, and 'PRIONICS' can take advantage of this to advise and offer advantageous products to improve their separates system. <figure/><figure/>'PRIONICS' shall be based in the South, the most affluent area of the UK clearly has the greatest interest in purchasing audio good from specialist stores and retailers. Berkshire will serve as the ideal focal point of the company; initially running from a home office until the sister store can be created. <heading>Promotion</heading>'PRIONICS' hopes to expand upon friendships with Richer Sounds Sevenoaks, and a few other private specialists who have expressed interest in this venture. The intention is that initially, in exchange for the store's recommendation, 'PRIONICS' can offer products from these selected outlets at 10% discount from their usual store price. This benefits both parties as PRIONICS gains exposure, and association with already successful market leaders, whilst the audio outlets receive an increase in sales from recommendations made to my clients. In time, PRIONICS aspires to form the necessary links to sell the accessories in their own right. This would then form the staple of Prionic's store based venture. At this time, customers of the consultancy service will receive the chance to purchase the recommended accessories at discounted prices from our store. The store in turn will have very competitive prices, ideally undercutting conventional stores due to low costs and small staff base. Word of mouth coupled with the association with larger retailers, and exhibitions at local audio shows should ensure the smooth initiation of PRIONICS as a successful audio consultancy. <heading>PRIONICS Consumer Survey:</heading><table/>As 'PRIONICS' will focus solely on owners of hi-fi separates, only owners of such systems were questioned in this survey. The results have been filled in, and subsequently, pricing has been suggested at £40 merely for consultancy services. <heading>Financial Report</heading>The cash flow for 'PRIONICS' is forecast for the first two years in Appendix 1. The cash flow is negative for the first couple of months; therefore 'PRIONICS' needs enough capital to cover these losses. The custom should quickly pick up, along with the total revenue. Tax is calculated for the projected Gross profits for both years. As a sole trader, 'PRIONICS' pays income tax on any taxable profits, and National Insurance at a rate of 8%. The second year however a partner will come on board, and 'PRIONICS' therefore is subject to corporation tax, and National Insurance costs of £2.05 per week. <heading>Resource Plan</heading>Personal qualifications for Michael Smith are listed in the CV, included in Appendix 2.No property needs to be purchased for the first year, as the consultancy shall be run from home. In the second year however, premises need to be rented to conduct sales from. Costs for this would be approximately: <list>Lease Hold: £20,000Renting of property: £15,000</list>This would be an annual cost, coupled with the cost of staff to run the store. Initially my partner and myself would alternate shifts managing the store and making consultancy calls. The partner and a secretary shall be hired from the beginning of the second year if the business lifts off as least as well as predicted. No premises are required for this as all work can be centred at the expanded home-office that I shall invest in within the first year, and if preferable, in the back of the store in the second year. A company van needs to be bought to transport equipment and sample stock to clients on consultancy trips. This would cost around £5000 for a smart second hand plain van. A further £500 would print the company logo and contacts around the outside of the vehicle. Depreciation maintenance and petrol costs are covered within the cash flow calculations. A second van with similar costs would then be purchased to expand the 'fleet' for the partner to use. Diagnostic equipment costing little over £5000 must be purchased, including high-powered laptop and sensory instruments. The second year would again require a duplicate set of instruments. Total expenditure therefore in the first year: £5,500 Rising in the second year to: £50,000 Savings, endorsement from such companies and Chord, Monster and Coalesce, as well as reasonable profits within the first year should account for costs in the second year, allowing a larger loyal client base to develop to start receiving greater profits in the third year. <heading>Assumptions</heading><heading>Costs:</heading>Consultancy fees charged at a flat rate of £40 per visit. This will probably be reviewed, price varying for the specific jobs, and a higher cost for home cinema applications or those requiring the most advanced analysis. <heading>Customers:</heading>The rate at which customers increase over the initial months is a conservative estimate, but it is assumed that the number will plateau at around 200 a month whilst operating as a sole trader, this eventually doubling upon the arrival of the partner. <heading>Sales:</heading>Sales are calculated at an assumed average of £50 per consultancy, with accessories charged at only 40% above cost. <heading>Promotion:</heading>It is assumed that promotional deals with Richer sounds and individual hi-fi specialists do not break down, and that as described, in exchange for free advertisement, 'PRIONICS' recommends their products with the opportunity to receive a 10% discount. Also, that these retailers would offer a selection of their merchandise as samples for 'PRIONICS' to demonstrate on home calls. <heading>Industry Favour:</heading>PRIONICS intends to form strong bonds with leading manufacturers to begin trading in their wares after the first six months. It is supposed that the manufactures can issue samples to demonstrate, as well as offering incentives to promote their products. <heading>Word of mouth:</heading>To help get the business off the ground, good reception is required, and customer increase is based on the assumption that clients will spread word of their satisfaction and the great services that PRIONICS can offer. <heading>Vehicle Maintenance:</heading>Petrol and depreciation is calculated using a combined estimate of 50p per mile. A further £10 per month is budgeted for additional repairs to the vehicles. Each home-call has been taken to average a 10 mile round trip. This would probably expand through the beginning of the second year. <heading>Advertising and Promotional work:</heading>This has been budgeted including various Audio and Hi-fi shows, as well as local radio advertising and vehicle decoration. A website will also be created professing the value of PRIONICS services and products. In either the second or third year products shall become available online via Prionic's website. <heading>Partner's and Secretary's wage:</heading>The Partner's wage has been estimated at £48,000 per annum, whilst the secretary, who in addition would handle the marketing and promotional side of the company is budgeted as £24,000 per annum. 