<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>This investigation assesses the usefulness of experimental data obtained from this experiment, to distinguish noticeable differences in a materials properties. The specimens were tested using a Hounsfield Type W Hand Tensometer, where an extension was applied via a worm gear, and the resistive force plotted on a graph. The results were obtained from two batches, and by multiple individuals in the years of 1995 and 1998. The materials tested were: <list>0.1% normalised carbon steel (normalised at 900 oC), type AN.0.8% normalised carbon steel (normalised at 830 oC), type N.</list>Statistical analysis of these results showed that whilst significant errors had lead to a wide range of values for yield points, tensile strength and ductility, there was sufficient difference in the magnitude of these values to distinguish the two materials. These results confirm predictions laid down in theory, that increased carbon content leads to increased tensile strength, but a decrease in ductility. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>This investigation assesses whether a real variation in the properties of selected carbon steel specimens, can be identified from experimental data. The values were derived from experiments using the Hounsfield Type W Hand Tensometer. Many groups working on separate experiments, in the years of 1995 and 1998, collected the data analysed within this report. The results however were obtained using the same methods as this year's laboratory. The following materials were tested: <list>0.1% normalised carbon steel (normalised at 900 oC), type AN.0.8% normalised carbon steel (normalised at 830 oC), type N.</list>Whilst the materials were the same in each year, they belonged to different batches so composition would not be identical. <heading>Theory</heading>The constituent of steels believed to have the greatest effect upon the properties of the material is carbon. The properties of the steel can therefore be honed to desirable characteristics by increasing or decreasing the percentage of carbon in the steel. Increasing the carbon content results in: <list>Increased strengthIncreased hardnessBrittlenessDecrease in ductility</list>And conversely, low carbon steels have the following properties: <list>Decreased strengthLess hardnessLess brittleMore ductile</list>Therefore Type AN steel is expected to extend a greater amount than the N steel, however also to peak and fracture at lower forces. The statistical analysis uses the following processes: <list>Arithmetic mean (sum of all the terms, divided by the number of terms)Median (the middle term)Mode (the most common value)Standard deviation (the deviation of values from the arithmetic mean)</list>The mean and mode are more likely to offer the best representative value for the group, as the arithmetic mean can be greatly affected by anomalous values. The standard deviation returns the deviation from the arithmetic mean, however this is proportionate to the values being analysed. Therefore the standard deviation is calculated also, as a percentage of the arithmetic mean. This offers a comparable value between all fields. <heading>Apparatus and Method</heading>The specimens were tested using 'The Tensometer Type W Testing Machine'. The specimen is held in place by specimen chucks that fit around the neck of the specimen, effectively holding the head of the material. One pair of chucks is fixed at the measuring end, connected by a force-measuring system. The other is fixed to the end of a worm gear, which when turned, applies a tensile force, and thus an extension to the specimen. The extension under load is transmitted from the measuring system via a lever and is displayed with a mercury system. As the level rose along the tube, the cursor was manually aligned, and the pricking device pushed down onto the rotating spool of graph paper. A magnifying glass is incorporated in the cursor allowing the level of mercury to be observed with a little more precision. The worm gear was turned slowly, allowing greater number of points to be traced. The rate at which the wheel was turned could not be monitored accurately, nor regulated so a degree of error was introduced. The applied strain rate governs how the crystal structure of the specimen reacts and ultimately fails so the rate was kept as constant as could be achieved. <heading>Observations and Results</heading>When turning the handle, sometimes the force required would decrease. This occurred at the yield points, and as the material approached fracturing. At point of change such as the yield points, if enough points were not plotted close enough together then the exact point of change could not be later observed. Missing yield points in tables 1 and 2 can be attributed to poor recording of points around this area. Just before fracture, the force required to turn the wheel drops off. As a result of this, the point of failure can easily be poorly recorded if not enough care is taken. <heading>Measurement:</heading>The results for the specimens are collated in the year they were taken and displayed in 'Figures, Tables and Graphs': <table/><table/><table/><table/><heading>Analysis</heading>According to the statistical analysis, the 1998 batch of Type AN carbon steel tends to have lower values for yield points and tensile strengths as compared to the 1995 batch. The ductility however appears more consistent. The standard deviations as a percentage of the arithmetic mean are higher in 1998 indicating a greater discrepancy and therefore greater range of results. This would be synonymous with a greater occurrence of errors. Both batches should produce the same values; however manufacturing variances in the composition could explain this. Within a batch however, all the specimens should yield identical values, as their chemical constituency is identical. In general the standard deviation as a percentage of the mean tends to be lower for values of tensile strength than those of the yield points. This might suggest that this might be easier to identify from the graph. The differences between the averages for ductility between the two years appear to be very small. Examining the results for the Type N steel a greater discrepancy between recordings can be observed compared to the Type AN steel. <table/>The 1998 batch generally has higher values for yield points and tensile strength and ductility does not appear very consistent between the years. The 1995 recordings have much higher errors as indicated by the greater value of the standard deviation, as a percentage of the arithmetic mean. The tensile strength appears to be closer in value between the years than the other properties and the range of values is small, again possibility indicating the ease with which this value can be identified. Including the values at the extremes of the ranges for the yield points, tensile strength and ductility, a sufficient difference in magnitude can be noticed as to distinguish between materials. Despite discrepancies with results, the values for these properties do not overlap between materials, so type AN is clearly different to type N. <heading>Errors:</heading>Opportunities for the introduction of errors occur throughout the experiment. When loading the specimen, determining the start point is very subjective. The specimen must be held taught, but not with any force. This cannot be repeated by any individual to the exact same point, so it can be expected that an appreciable range of starting values was adopted. This has the potential to affect the result by 5 MPa. When loading the graph paper upon the spool, the paper might not have been sitting straight; this would introduce an increasing error as the experiment continued. The pin on the slider might not have been set properly to the origin of the graph either, adding an additional constant error to the plot. To plot the points on the graph, the slider had to be moved manually. The mercury was prone to jumping as the extension was applied at a relatively steady rate. The exact value at any one time therefore was difficult to fathom. Coupled with this, the mercury could have had bubbles in it. When lining up the slider with the mercury level, parallax would have attributed to errors, as well as reaction speed. This combined probably attributes the greatest error to the results, up to around 20 MPa. The rate at which the extension was applied could be kept fairly constant, however it would not have been consistent between individuals, and would probably have varied between specimens also. If points were not plotted with enough frequency, then key points such as the yield points could be missed. This would account for missing yield points in some of the tables. If the individual applying the extension did not stop quick enough after fracture, and the point was not recorded fast enough, then the fracture point could lead to the ductility being conceivably 0.05 out. When reading the graph, the scale does not allow for very accurate values to be read off, and if points are not plotted accurately, values could be as much as ±10MPa out. Manufacturing allowances of the materials accounts for discrepancies between batches, as constituents must fall within a range in terms of percentage of the overall volume of steel. The Tensometers and specimen chucks undergo limited deformation themselves as force is applied, however this would remain fairly constant between experiments, and shouldn't affect the precision of the results obtained upon them. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The Hounsfield Type W Hand Tensometer can clearly provide sufficient accuracy and precision when testing materials to allow identification of some properties of materials tested. The analysis shows this is generally true. The standard deviation as a percentage of the arithmetic mean, indicating the presence of errors, shows that this may not be the best method to measure these values. However this machine does allow materials to be distinguished from one another. The myriad of errors associated with this procedure prohibits exact values for yield points, tensile strength and ductility to be derived but provides a range within which the value almost certainly lies. The two steels can be identified from results obtained despite the range of values recorded. From these values the effect that carbon content has upon the properties of steel can be ascertained. In accordance with predictions made within the 'Theory' section, steel containing a greater percentage of carbon has a greater tensile strength but reduced ductility. 