<abstract></abstract><heading>Theory and Calculations</heading>The experiment requires that Reynolds number, and Darcy friction factor are determined for examples of laminar and turbulent flow of oil through a circular pipe. The data collected consists of the change in height of mercury levels in the manometer at intervals along the pipe, as well as the time taken for the oil in the tank to reach set weights. The times taken for the tank to fill with oil are included in the results section (Tables 2-5). The weights used on the scales on the tank were measured in pounds (lb). These values were multiplied by, 0.4536  (), to convert them into kilograms. As the oil was timed to increase in increments of 10 lb, the mass rate,  FORMULA  is found by <fnote> URL  as accessed 8/03/05 </fnote> FORMULA  From mass flow rate, volumetric flow rate can be calculated, by dividing the mass flow rate by the density of the oil  FORMULA , where the density of oil, , equals 861 kg/m 3 at a temperature of 300K. By dividing the volumetric flow rate, Q, by the cross-sectional area of the pipe, velocity of the oil is found. So  FORMULA  where d is the diameter of the pipe, 19mm. The velocity of the oil within the pipe is then used to find the Reynolds number for the flow. This is a non-dimensional ratio of the inertial forces against the viscous forces in the fluid. Reynolds number is given by  FORMULA , where is the absolute viscosity of oil, 0.01743 Ns/m 2. To determine the Darcy friction factor, the pressure drop along the pipe must be considered. The diagram below does not in fact illustrate the apparatus used in the experiment, however as each U bend was connected to the same reservoir of mercury, the same model can be applied. <figure/>The hydrostatic pressure formula can be applied to evaluate pressures at points 1 and 2,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . substituting in the densities of mercury and oil gives  FORMULA  or  FORMULA  By taking the gradient of the lines on the curve of graph 1, the value for  FORMULA  can be related to a distance, L  FORMULA  L is the distance along the pipe that the change in mercury height, and subsequently pressure, can be modelled linearly. Darcy friction factor is given by  FORMULA  For horizontal pipe flow  FORMULA   FORMULA  Substituting w into the equation for f and replace radius with diameter, gives  FORMULA   FORMULA  where Um is the mean velocity of the flow through the pipe. Poiseuille's Law dictates that in the case of laminar flow, the volumetric flowrate is given by the pressure difference divided by the viscous resistance. This resistance depends linearly upon the viscosity of the fluid and the length of the pipe, but dependence upon the radius is to the power of four. Poiseuille's law gives reasonable approximation to experimental data for Newtonian fluids in cases where there is no appreciable turbulence.  <fnote> URL  as accessed 8/03/05 </fnote> FORMULA  Applying this law, a simpler model can be made to find the Darcy friction factor from merely the Reynolds number. <fnote>ES252 Fluid Mechanics lecture notes, week 14, PJT </fnote> FORMULA  This model only applies where Poiseuille's Law applies, for laminar flow. From the Darcy friction factor, the skin friction coefficient can easily be found, as the two are similar in pipe flow:  FORMULA  so  FORMULA  for laminar flow only. <heading>Apparatus and Method</heading>A pump was configured so that it pumped a laminar flow of oil through a horizontal circular pipe of uniform cross-section and with a diameter of 19mm. The pump pushed oil through the pipe at a constant, but variable flow rate. Along this pipe were seventeen holes at different distances along the pipe. These distances are tabulated below. <table/>Each of these holes was connected with thin tubes to individual 'U' bends in a display case. The other ends of these pipes were connected to a mercury reservoir. A change in height of one mercury column to the next represents a pressure difference between the two locations along the pipe. As oil was pumped through the pipe, the height of each of the seventeen mercury levels was recorded, allowing calculations to be made to determine the pressure drop along the pipe. At the other end of the pipe to the pump, a tank was in place to catch the oil as it left the pipe. The tank had a valve on it so that when closed, the tank would fill, and once opened, all the oil would escape and flow freely through it. The tank was connected to a set of balances, which could be calibrated to several weights. The time taken for the tank to reach a number of weights was recorded from the point when the valve was closed. This data would, with a little calculation, give the mass flow rate through the pipe. The two sets of data were obtained twice for laminar flow, and twice when turbulent flow was induced. This was done simply by placing a pin across the diameter of the pipe, near the entrance. This created a turbulent affect that disrupted the laminar flow through the pipe. By timing the tank to fill up to set weights, the rate at which it fills can be deduced. From this, the mass flow rate, volumetric flow rate, and subsequently the velocity could be calculated. The Reynolds number could then be worked out from this. By measuring the change in height of the mercury columns along the pipe, the pressure change can be taken. This in turn, along with the velocity and density of the fluid, was used to calculate the Darcy friction factor, f, and the skin friction coefficient, Cf, about which this experiment is centred. The values of Reynolds number and Darcy friction factor were calculated for both laminar and turbulent flow, and compared against one another, as well as against established data plotted on the Moody Diagram. <heading>Observations and Results</heading><heading>Laminar flow, run 1:</heading><table/>When calculating the average time to fill, the first two times must be discounted, as the weight of the tank alone can not be guaranteed to be 80 lb, therefore we can only time from the point it reaches 90 lb. The average time taken for 10 lb of oil to flow through the pipe is 6.4 s.  FORMULA  Volumetric flow rate,  FORMULA  Mean velocity of the oil flowing through the pipe  FORMULA  Reynolds number for this flow is given by  FORMULA  Using the model derived from Poiseuille's Law  FORMULA  Reading the gradient of the laminar plot for the first run of experiments (graph 1), the change in height with respect to the length is found. This is converted into a change in pressure  FORMULA  The formal method to find Darcy friction factor gives  FORMULA  This value is very close to the value calculated using the simpler model above. This shows its use for calculating the Darcy friction factor simply for laminar flow. The skin friction coefficient is a quarter of this value, 0.0053. <heading>Laminar flow, run 2:</heading><table/>The same calculations are made, giving the following results:  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  As these results are the same as for the first run, the Reynolds number, and modelled value for Darcy friction factor will also be the same. The rate at which the height of mercury changed with the length of the pipe was slightly different however, giving the following values  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Turbulent flow, run 1</heading><table/>The same calculations were made as with the other two runs, however no estimation of the Darcy friction factor can be made, as this model only applies to laminar flow. The following were calculated  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA # <heading>Turbulent flow, run 2</heading><table/>This experimental run yields the same values for mass flow rate, volumetric flow rate, velocity and Reynolds number. The change in pressure is slightly different however, so the Darcy friction factor and skin friction coefficient become  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Discussion</heading>The Reynolds numbers were the same for two runs of each flow type, however was lower for turbulent flow compared to the experiments with laminar flow. As the only variable associated with this parameter in this experiment, the velocity was lower for turbulent flow. This is because the molecules within turbulent flow travel further than those of laminar flow, for the same net distance, thus incurring greater losses. The flow velocity through a pipe of laminar flow can be modelled parametrically, with maximum velocity in the centre, with zero velocity at the walls as a result of the no-slip condition. Flow within a turbulent flow cannot be modelled using this, nor any other simple model as the flow is much more complicated and unpredictable. Particles flow in very different directions and at different velocities to one another, and subsequently the viscosity of the fluid resists some flow. The friction within the boundary layer for turbulent flow is greater than that of laminar flow. Although different, the Reynolds numbers produced for both laminar and turbulent flow were close. This can be appreciated better by looking at the Moody diagram. This is because the Reynolds number is proportional to the velocity, and there isn't a great fall in velocity from laminar flow (2.9 m/s) to turbulent flow (2.48 m/s).  FORMULA  The Darcy friction factor however differs considerably between the laminar and turbulent flows, from around 0.022 to 0.040 respectively. This results from a combination of the change in mean velocity of the two flows, and the steeper pressure gradient associated with the turbulent flow. The pressure dropped a greater amount over the length of the pipe, this fits in well with the higher friction factor, as the extra losses inherent within turbulent flow increase the resistance to flow, particularly in the boundary layer. As the Reynolds number does not differ greatly, it can be observed that for similar values, turbulent flow experiences much higher friction within the pipe, resulting in the greater pressure over the length of the pipe. Plotting the results for laminar flow on the Moody diagram, the mark does not fall far from the established experimental results for laminar flow. This shows that the experiment was relatively accurate, however the accuracy must be considered. Turbulent flow does not fall upon any recognised curve for turbulent flow, so a comparison cannot be drawn for this flow type. <fnote> URL  as accessed 8/03/05 </fnote>The accuracy of this experiment depended upon three sets of measurements, weight, time and height. The scales can be assumed to be accurate, leaving only the height of the mercury levels, and the timing of the oil flow as the sources of error. The height of the mercury columns was not subject to parallax, however determining the top of the mercury column was extremely difficult in some cases as many bubbles had formed within the column over time. The top of each column could usually be assumed with reasonable confidence, however without removing the bubbles, a true reading could not be taken. As the experiment was only concerned with a change in pressure, only the trend need be considered. With this in mind, as each column was subject to comparable degradation, a fairly accurate trend could be identified from the gradient of the full seventeen columns, as errors tended to cancel due to the averaging effect. This leaves the collection of timings for the tank to fill to set weights. This was done with a stopwatch accurate only to 0.1s. As seen in tables 2-5, the timings for each interval are fairly constant. The error here lies within the human reactions to when the balance was triggered. Whilst reaction time is not very fast, it is consistent, and the balance was deemed to have tripped at a consistent point. The error therefore can be taken as 0.1s for the beginning and end of each interval. The errors cancel from one interval to another however except for the total time period considered. The associated error is greatly reduced as a result. The error associated with the timing for laminar and turbulent flow is given below: <list>Laminar = 0.39 %Turbulent = 0.33 %</list>The error is larger for laminar flow, as the mean flow velocity was greater, and so the period of timing was in fact shorter, accentuating the effect the timing error has. The equation to calculate Reynolds number is  FORMULA  The relationship is linear, and as the other parameters can be assumed correct, the errors can be taken as above for the two flows. To calculate the Darcy friction factor the following was used  FORMULA  The two variables being the change in pressure and the velocity. The error associated with the pressure gradient is very difficult to quantify, but is decreased due to the averaging effect of taking the gradient over length L. The significance of the errors for velocity and pressure can be noted from the equation above, which can be simplified to  FORMULA  Whilst the Darcy friction factor behaves linearly with a change in pressure, the error inherent in the value for velocity is more influential as f is inversely proportional to the square of this value, and so the error in the reading has double the effect in determining f. Assuming that the pressure gradient has a lower error within the readings than the velocity, the model derived from Poiseuille's Law  FORMULA  should in fact be more accurate as less errors are involved within the calculations. To improve the accuracy of the results and calculations, the two areas of readings should be addressed. The mercury columns should be renewed as the inaccuracy lies within the spread of bubbles in the mercury. The mass flow rate could be better determined by using a larger tank, and so allowing the timings to be collected over a longer time period reducing the effect of errors with timing. The stopwatch should also be updated to collect timings to greater precision. Funds allowing, the scales could be configured so that once triggered at each weight, the time would be logged straight into a spreadsheet, either as a contact is made, or a beam interrupted. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The friction against the pipe walls, and the resistance to flow is greater for flow of turbulent nature than laminar flows. This is proven by the higher Darcy friction factor, about double the size of that for laminar flow. The Reynolds number remained similar between the two flows, lower for that of turbulent due to the higher losses and resistance to flow resulting in a lower mean velocity. Other parameters were not altered during this experiment, diameter of the pipe, inclination of the pipe (horizontal) and the power of the pump remained constant for each flow. Velocity and pressure drop were the two parameters that changed, caused by sets of results obtained, those taken from the manometer and the timings taken for the tank to fill with oil. Despite the manometer being difficult to read, the trend could be taken as reasonably accurate due to the averaging of the gradient. The velocity however was less accurate, and because of it's relationship with friction factor, where  FORMULA  any errors within the calculation of velocity is greatened my multiplication, making the error more influential in the resultant friction factor. The velocity was also the sole variable in the calculation of Reynolds number, and therefore reducing errors in this variable are most important. However to improve accuracy, both sets of readings must be improved. This can be achieved by replacing the mercury columns in the manometer, removing the bubbles within the liquid to make it easier to read, and produce a more accurate pressure gradient. The timings should be taken with a more accurate timepiece, even taken automatically and logged by a computer to remove the human inconsistency at this point. 