Erving Goffman, writing in the post-war period, is one of the last century's most acclaimed sociological writers. The accessible style of his work has made it some of the most widely read, providing insight into the vast symbolic significance of social interaction. Characteristics shared with Simmel's style of essayism are clear; Goffman's assertions, like his, are not generally backed up with empirical evidence. This is not necessarily a criticism however, as it allows his style the charm that has made the pieces so popular and comprehensible. Goffman's work hinges on the notion that 'all human beings are vulnerable to the constraint of social interaction' (Fisher and Strauss, 1979, p.479). As a result, his work is often cited as part of the Chicago school tradition of symbolic interactionism. Their concern was to investigate those social actions that have an 'immediately reciprocal orientation' (Joas, 1987, p.84), on the basis that such actions have a symbolic character. Mead's conception that individuals partaking in interaction both give out and receive gestures and signals, was one important work to come out of the Chicago school, which one would perhaps tend to associate as the basis of Goffman's concern with the construction of 'self'. However, Goffman's work stands at the very margin of this tradition. He made up part of the third generation and radically altered the perspective, drawing as much from Durkheim as from Mead (Meltzer et al, 1975, p.68). Although his focus is indeed upon how the 'self' is negotiated through interaction, his perspective is more dramaturgical then that of the Chicago school theorists, bringing in conceptions of the 'performance', the 'audience' and the knowledge of 'stagecraft'. Goffman's primary concern is with situations of 'focused interaction', when individuals are, for a portion of time, directly involved in attending to what one another is saying and doing (Giddens, 1987, p.115). It is this emphasis on co-presence that leads to his focus upon the body and how its display is the anchor of communication. Like Mead, he sees interaction as a 'conversation of gestures' (Joas, 1987, p.174). Goffman's interest rarely appears within formal situations of interaction and this is related to the fact that within such settings, the 'self' is at its least likely to be negotiable. Within formalised situations one is most strictly adhering to the expectations of the particular 'role' laid out. Formal settings are also the places least likely to have defined 'back regions', the areas crucial to the production of 'performances', which are sheltered from involvement in interaction. These ideas come out of Goffman's most influential work, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, which presents life as a 'stage'. It suggests that each individual within an interaction encounter has an 'audience', to whom he or she must 'perform'. 'Performance' is delivered through a 'front' or 'face' designed to outline the individual's conception of 'self', which is fundamental because it supplies information concerning the social identity currently operated under. Some argue that Goffman infers that one chooses the 'front' that best allows one to have management of the impression of others and thus to define the encounter (Hewitt, 2003, p.125). For example, as a result of the individual's awareness that his or her expression of 'self' is constantly being judged, one is likely to dress very smartly and speak in more polished tones when at a job interview. During an interactional encounter, it could be argued, neither party ever knows the true 'reality' of the situation, that is, whether the 'face' being presented is misleading. Goffman argues that it is always 'in his [the individual's] interests to control the conduct of the others' (Goffman, 1959, p.3). Thus perhaps he suggests that individuals tend to hide their true feelings behind a 'face' that allows for the best impression management. Given only this idea, one might draw the conclusion that our 'selves' tend to be deceptive and/or misleading and that Goffman saw individuals' true 'selves' as being 'alienated' (Alexander, 1987, p.233). It suggests the somewhat depressing opinion that the impressions we hold of others are in fact false, being the product of a constant manipulation of how their 'self' is presented. However, Goffman clearly states that the management of 'self' during 'performance' is not a static, one-way process: each individual constantly interprets the display and response to his or her 'performance' given out by the 'audience'. 'Audiences' are aware of the potential for deception in 'performance' (Cahill, 1998, p.193) and assesses them using the 'sign-vehicles' given out, both consciously and unconsciously, by the individual. These allow plausible conclusions about the nature of the 'performance' to be drawn (Goffman, 1959,p.1). Goffman seems to suggest that the 'self' the 'front' is intended to represent is then modified in accordance with this 'audience' reaction. In short, interaction is a constant process of monitoring, by each party involved, of others responses in relation to the 'self' they are attempting to represent (Giddens, 1987, p.117). One can conclude that this process turns us into 'self-regulating' individuals, as one learns, from the respect, or lack of, given to one's 'performance' whether it is acceptable for gaining the 'audience's' support in negotiating a viable 'self' (Cahill, 1998, p.197). For example, if a boy is ridiculed for crying when he is hurt he learns that this 'performance' is not a suitable version of his 'self'. One can draw the conclusion then that it is through this process of reciprocal interaction and interpretation that Goffman believes that the 'picture' of 'self' is completed, and acceptable versions of 'self' are maintained (Goffman, 1967, p.85). The 'audience' have the potential to redefine the 'self' through their responses towards the individual, making it something of "collaborative manufacture" (Goffman, 1959, cited in Cahill, 1998, p.192). Hence, the 'self' of any given individual is never something concrete or resolutely owned, instead something constantly under negotiation. In addition, Goffman seems keen to point out that the 'face' one presents is not the product of merely the actor's whims and desires but is constrained by factors like setting and appearance (Alexander, 1987, p.234). These form the 'props' of the 'performance' and must validate the conception of 'self' being portrayed by the individual, if it is to be accepted by the 'audience' (Meltzer et al, 1975, p.68). Some settings are easier than others from which to present an acceptable version of 'self', for example the mental instititution does not provide the individual with the required resources (Cahill, 1998, p.199). The 'front', then, is restricted by culture, and as 'roles' are defined by their 'front', when actors move into them they often find that an expected version of 'performance' is already prescribed. People tend to have a strong desire to meet such expectations in what Goffman describes as 'idealised performances' (1959, p.31). Individuals become attached to the 'fronts' that earn the respect of the 'audience' because they enable the production of a positive 'self'. As a result one tends not to infer misleading ideas about ourselves for fear that we might be exposed as deceptive 'performers', thus comprising the established version of 'self'. Perhaps one can draw the conclusion therefore that Goffman's view of the 'self' does not focus merely around the cynical manipulation of 'performance' to one's own interest, as some writers seem to suggest, because he shows how this is dangerous to its very collaborative production. Mitchell's description of the most effective actor in social interaction is one who is not simply 'rewarded for good performances by the acceptance of his audience, but is also one who comes to see a continuity of essentials in his performances' (Mitchell, 1978, p.112, cited in Joas, 1987, p.79). This has implications for the conclusions one should draw concerning the 'performance' given when people enact different social 'roles'. It suggests that while 'roles' created for the individual specify generalised expectations to which behaviour has to conform, all of them can be 'performed' in a way that allows for the incorporation of personality (Giddens, 1987, p.118) or situation. 'Roles' do not 'become' the individual's 'self', or compare exactly to him or her, because the 'self' is not structurally determined, but is created through the process of interaction. Equally no 'situated 'performance' of a 'role' is exhaustive of what that 'role' entails, and the display of 'self' given might even seem sometimes to contradict the 'role' expectations. In Encounters, for example, Goffman describes a parent's 'performance' when riding a merry-go-round and how, having been caught up in the spirit of shared experience with other riders, their 'situated 'role'' becomes contradictory to what is expected of their wider 'role' of parent (1961b, p.97). This should lead once again to the conclusion that the presentation of 'self' is the product of negotiation, not a mere reflection of a situated role. This leads to the consideration of another idea one can draw about the 'self' from Goffman's work, the issue of whether he means to question whether there is some form of natural 'self' standing behind the array of 'roles' that all individuals play during interaction. There seems to be disagreement among writers on Goffman as to the answer. Alexander seems to suggest yes, arguing that Goffman describes 'personality as if it were completely separated from social system and cultural life' (1987, p.233). The true 'self', Goffman perhaps seems to suggest, has no space to be displayed within the social roles one 'performs'. However, others, Cahill for example, disagree that this is one of Goffman's preoccupations. He argues instead that Goffman did not intend his readers to draw conclusions about the 'self-concept' that individuals are continually in possession of, but the 'socially situated self' that is related to the 'roles' we take on each time we interact (1998, p.192). Giddens is also quick to point out that Goffman does not suggest that the 'self' acts as the 'puppet-master' of 'role' 'performances'. Perhaps one could conclude out of this debate that the 'self' within Goffman, has a unique task. It creates a way in which one can relate the social 'roles' performed in day-to-day life to personal biography, by creating an awareness that the latter becomes part of, and adapts slightly, all 'roles' as they are entered into. It also 'furnishes a set of dispositions for managing the transactions between motives and the expectations 'scripted' by the particular 'role'' (Giddens, 1987, p.118), that is, it allows a means of converging one's unique aims with what is expected within a given social situation. That the 'self' and the social role being 'performed' are separate, Alexander would view as a necessary factor for 'role distance' to occur, something that Goffman is at pains to discuss in his work. An individual in the 'role' of surgeon may at times move outside the boundaries of what is expected, for example by chatting about his domestic life while performing an operation. It could be concluded that this implies the existence of a 'self' separate from, and not being negotiated within, the 'performance'. However, Cahill argues instead that the 'graceful gliding in and out of social role' is simply a 'dramatic effect' (1998, p.194), that is, part of the 'performance' being delivered, that will help negotiate a positive 'self' for the surgeon. Demonstrating that the individual is capable of distancing his or herself in this way can thus be a means of validating that he or she is suitable for and capable of performing the 'role' (Giddens, 1987, p.119). The surgeon who discusses other areas of his social existence reaffirms that he capable of the job because he does not have to be totally absorbed in the 'role' to 'play' it effectively. 'Role distance' then, is another means by which individual's can present the most positive versions of 'self' and have these legitimated, as it seems to offer authentication to a 'performance' (Chriss, 1999, pp.75-75). When individuals find that their version of 'self' has potentially been compromised they tend to exercise what Goffman calls 'remedial behaviour' (Goffman, 1959, cited in Chriss, 1999, p.76). In illustration, if an individual trips over in the presence of another they are likely to make some form of comment on the behaviour or excuse for it, and the other party acknowledges this. This sort of interchange allows the version of 'self' attached to the person to remain intact as the observer is aware that the individual is competent. Goffman shows us that this sort of "self-work" is "continually necessary" for a "viable image" of the individual's self to be maintained in the eyes of others (Goffman, 1971, cited in Giddens, 1987, p.128). That the other party aids in retaining the projected 'self' means that one can draw the conclusion that it is in the individual's interest. It ensures the sustaining of the existing definition of the situation, a measure essential because if this is compromised then so might the 'self' this party is trying to convey (Manning, 1992, p.39). Thus in the example given, if the witness does not acknowledge the victim's comment then the image of him as an ordinary citizen might be compromised, and replaced with being seen as somehow deviant. Interaction always carries with it a potentially confrontational nature, but in most encounters this is, clearly, balanced by the available resources those involved have to ensure that their displayed conceptions of 'self' are accepted and respected (Giddens, 1987, p.118). However, Goffman had a unique interest in those instances where this is not the case; those where, for some reason, a participant is deprived of their ability to participate in the collaborative manufacture of self. His work on institutionalised mental patients in Asylums provides such an example, as does his work on stigma. Asylums (1961a) gives insight into the constant need for support from others in creating a viable 'self', by suggesting what happens when these are taken away. Total institutions are unique in that all facets of daily life become subject to a single authority, thus dissolving the opportunity for 'role distance'. With little privacy, there is no 'back stage' within which patients can form their 'performance roles' without being exposed (Gronfein, 1999, p.89). Patients are subjected to a rigorous ordeal where they lose all the accoutrements of their life outside and the markers of their personal identity, such as clothes and possessions. Goffman labels this process the 'mortification of the self' (1961a, p.25) because it means that the individual is deprived of everything needed to 'nourish and support a self with which they might wish to identify' (Gronfein, 1999, p.91). Patients are defined by their very presence in the institution and thus are deprived of the help of others in collaboratively producing an acceptable 'self' (Cahill, 1998, p.203). However, Goffman claims that preserving a valid sense of 'self' is so significant to life, that even within such conditions individuals find ways in which they can assert their personal identity. Patients might protest at their treatment by resorting to basic behaviour, such as repeatedly soiling themselves. The irony of such measures however, exists in the fact that they can be neutralised by authority as symptomatic of illness (Goffman, 1961a, p.142). This argument perhaps hints that institutions achieve exactly what they are intended to remedy, that is, they completely remove the potential for the patient to rehabilitate their sense of 'self'. This work is crucial in drawing the conclusion that Goffman certainly did not intend the production of 'self' to be a process of selfish manipulation, as it reflects the fundamental importance of mutual trust and support for it to occur. Although Goffman is sometimes criticised for being 'little more than a cynical observer of white American middle-class mores' (Giddens, 1987, p.112), it is hard to deny that his work has an impact upon how the reader views both the 'self' and society subsequently. Goffman himself never admitted to having being drawn into 'any kind of elaborated account of the psychology of the self' (Giddens, 1987, p.131), yet we cannot assume that this means his work tells one nothing about it. The fact that his ideas have been so widely consumed, both with appraisal and criticism, suggests it is at least influential in provoking people to think about the way the 'self' is formed. To many people Goffman's scheme presents a sordid, disenchanting view of individuals in society. He seems, at some points, to lead one to the conclusion that the creation of 'self' is the result of a calculated display of 'front', one that, as manipulative individuals, people 'perform' in order to retain control of interactional encounters. However, I would argue that such conclusions largely misinterpret what Goffman intended to tell us about the 'self', and ignore much of what he had to say about it. Instead, most of Goffman's work seems to lead to the conclusion that the building of 'self' is a process entirely dependent upon trust between individuals. Everything about the 'self' depends upon authentic performances and mutual support of one another's projected 'self' and 'face'. This is because together we collaborate to dramatically construct and negotiate one another's 'self'. This is clear from the cooperation we receive from other parties in acknowledging our attempts at remedial behaviour. He shows how people are rarely dishonest in their presentations of 'self' due to a fear of exposure, which would undermine their self-concept. Equally, 'fronts' hinge upon the 'props' that surround them, such as setting, and thus are not open to any great amount of manipulation. This is all evident in Goffman's work on mental institutions, where the lack of 'props' and mutual aid in supporting a viable image of 'self' leads to its 'mortification'. Individuals may learn, through the respect given to their 'performances', how to present their most viable images of 'self'. However, this cannot lead to the conclusion that the production of 'self' is an entirely selfish process, being an inherently negotiable product of interaction Goffman also seems to want us to draw conclusions about the relationship between a person's 'roles' and their 'self'. His work suggests that 'roles' are not the sum-total of any individual's 'self', something evident from the way in which situated 'performances' do not always reflect 'role' expectations. However, while he acknowledges that 'There is an inevitable gap between personality needs and social system roles' (Alexander, 1987, p.235), his focus is resolutely upon the 'self' that is constantly under negotiation. Goffman, above all, seems to indicate the fragility of the 'self'. His work shows us the great extent to which the sustaining of 'self' depends upon mutual trust, and how fundamental to social life a viable 'self' is. By showing us the inherently negotiable and collaborative nature of the 'self' his work leads logically to the conclusion that the very nature of society and social order rests upon individuals' ability to abide by the morality of the interaction order. 