As Wahrman has pointed out in Imagining the Middle Class, it is impossible to construct "the making" of the 'middle class' in the same way that one can the working class. There is no single event or time when this category emerged in either political or social life, instead an evolutionary process whereby 'middle class' over and above other terms came to represent a particular section of society and, in turn, a set of values. It is tempting to demarcate the Industrial Revolution as the point at which this conversion occurred due to the socially transforming effect it brought upon England in initiating the move from a domestic economy to one based upon the factory system. This system, one could perhaps argue, led to the increased individualisation of society whereby exploitation meant that looking out for one's own interests came to be of paramount importance. In turn, this "egoism of individuals leads to an egoism of the class they form" in that those who find they are in the same position group together to form a 'class' and fight collectively for their particular interests. To view the emergence of the term 'middle class' in this way is to see it as a very narrow process and ignores the fact that historians still argue over how lengthy and complex a process industrialisation really was in Britain. However the country's increasing urbanity should not be dismissed as a factor in the emergence of the 'middle class' as it was 'overwhelmingly from within the ranks of those involved in trade and manufacturing' that this category is seen to have emerged. It seems then that 'the industrialisation of this period could not by itself bear the responsibility for an overall restructuring of British society' (italics mine). <fnote>Wahrman, Dror, Imagining the Middle Class The Political Representation of Class in Britain, c. 1780-1840 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), p.1 </fnote><fnote>Briggs, Asa, 'The Language of 'Class' in Early Nineteenth-Century England' in Flinn, M.W. and Smout, T.C., Essays in Social History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974), p.170 </fnote><fnote>Seed, John, 'From 'middling sort' to middle class in late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century England' in Bush, M.L., Social Orders and Social Classes in Europe Since 1500: Studies in social stratification (London: Longman, 1992), p.117 </fnote><fnote>Wahrman, Imagining the Middle Class, pp.2-3 </fnote>What other issues do we therefore need to consider in order to uncover how the category 'middle class' emerged during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries? Perhaps initially one needs to look at how the term 'class' itself rose to prominence, replacing the previous use of 'rank' or 'order'. The increased use of this term in the nineteenth century 'depended on changes in the perception of social division' which had been directed by individuals like the Adam Smith and David Ricardo, who redefined such divisions on economic terms. The classification of individuals to a 'rank' in the eighteenth century depended upon merit and estate, principles that were no longer applicable in the industrial age where money was often tied up in large factory buildings. As Wallech argues, a person's role in production came to be seen as more important than their ownership of property in defining their status and thus the old system of classification was no longer of value. Unlike with 'ranks', the status of a 'class' could only be defined by its position in the overall community, thus the 'middle class' merely encompassed the breadth in between the rich and poor, the propertied elite and those with a labouring role. This links into the idea of 'class' being a 'more indefinite word' than 'rank', something that was deemed suitable in an age where the variance in available occupations increased tenfold. The 'middle class' for example, 'stretched from judges, state officials and great merchants at the top... to small farmers and semi-independent craftsmen at the bottom'. <fnote>Wallech, Steven, '"Class Versus Rank": The Transformation of Eighteenth-Century English Social Terms and Theories of Production', Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 47, No. 3 (1986), pp.409 </fnote><fnote>Wallech, "Class Versus Rank", p.412 </fnote><fnote>Briggs, 'The Language of 'Class'', pp.157 </fnote><fnote>Seed, 'From 'middling sort' to middle class', pp.116-117 </fnote>The category 'middle class' emerged through this period in very complex and ambiguous terms. Suggestions that it can be discovered via the study of occupations give merely a vague outline of who might belong to this new social group and little notion of their status within it. Some historians have denounced completely the idea of a powerful Victorian 'middle class' on the basis that little evidence of its existence can be found anywhere other than the new industrial cities. Instead it is claimed that society as a whole took on the values and way of life that we typically associate with this social group as it progressed to the modern era. However, on the contrary, there is a widely held assumption, as I outlined previously, that the period 1780-1840 did witness the transformation of a more general 'middling sort' to a new and more distinct 'middle class'. The image that we conceive of the emergence of the 'middle class' thus differs from person-to-person. Wahrman suggests that this is due to ignorance of 'the degree of freedom which in fact exists in the space between social reality and its representation'. Thus it appears that the concept of the 'middle class' is open to interpretation as there cannot be a single representation that can truly reflect a category of society so ambiguous in its characteristics and even in its objective existence. <fnote>Seed, 'From 'middling sort' to middle class', pp.119-121 </fnote><fnote>Wahrman, Imagining the Middle Class, pp.6 </fnote>Historians have tended to focus on the emergence of the 'middle class' as something that occurred initially within the political sphere because 'it is an arena where stakes are high and where collective identities count most." In this area however, their reference in the early part of this period as to being a 'progressive group' rather than a 'class' bound by shared experience is underestimated. Political language instead is particularly cited: that present in newspapers, pamphlets and the like, which reflected popular sentiments. It can be assumed therefore that when use of category 'middle class' in place of other concepts of social grouping became the norm then its emergence was certainly underway. However it seems that political thinkers of the day suffered the same problem of interpretation of the 'middle class' as historians do today, with different individuals assigning to it varying meanings, and not always ones based on economic terms as one would expect. The surfacing of this social category through politics then cannot be viewed as a simple or inevitable linear process, or its status 'as merely one possible way of representing society' forgotten. <fnote>Wahrman, Imagining the Middle Class, pp.9 </fnote><fnote>Briggs, 'The Language of Social Class', pp.160 </fnote><fnote>Wahrman, Imagining the Middle Class, pp.18 </fnote>Another key aspect in studying the emergence of the 'middle class' is its relationship to the passing of the 1832 Parliamentary Reform Act. Before 1832 it is clear that the term 'middle class' was one associated with political language and, thus it follows, with the public sphere. This, in turn, meant that it was a category whose connotations applied only to the male population, this being a time long before women began to play a role outside the familial environment. Although some of the values brought into debate by the association of the 'middle class' with public opinion were private issues, for example constraint of sexuality and importance of marriage, their very presence denoted the fact that they had been far removed from their domestic context. This image of the 'middle class' as a purely public and therefore masculine concept underwent a transformation after 1832, which resulted in its being associated with the domestic and the familial by the end of the period in question. In allowing the 'middle class' to vote, their existence had been acknowledged and their place in the public sphere moved from political language encouraging intervention to politics itself, thus the need to maintain a purely public conception was lifted. I quote John Stuart Mill in saying that by 1836 "The virtues of a middle class are those which conduce to getting rich... along with family affections". While this shift must be seen in part as due to the broader development of the category of 'middle class' over time, as can be seen the 1832 Act was a turning point in its definition and thus its emergence. In addressing the issue of what were 'middle class' values then it appears that the 1832 Act throws up yet another ambiguity in that they were not static and ascribed but altered over time, as, inherently, did any 'class' in itself. <fnote>Wahrman, Dror, '"Middle Class" Domesticity Goes Public: Gender, Class and Politics from Queen Caroline to Queen Victoria', Journal of British Studies, Vol. 32 (Oct 1993), pp.418 </fnote><fnote>Seed, 'From 'middling sort' to middle class, pp.124 </fnote>It appears therefore that the emergence of the category of 'middle class' was an extremely complex and, to some extent, unaccountable process. The evidence I have presented certainly infers the dangers of the 'weak notion of "the rise of the middle class"' as part of the industrialisation of Britain in obscuring its diversity and constantly changing nature. Its boundaries are equally no easier to define other than that it lay in between the labouring poor and the landed rich, encompassing a great variance of occupations and statuses. As Seed points out, there was 'no central institution where the middle class was embodied and its inner structure revealed' thus there is little hope in defining exactly what constituted membership of this social category in the period 1780-1840. The ways in which the category 'middle class' emerged during the age in question resorts, it seems, back to the issue of demarcating the term 'class' itself. What constitutes or causes any such social category to come into being resists explanation exactly because it is a historical process and thus changes over time and with reference to personal representation because it is not an objective reality, as is clear in this case with the transformation from a public to a domestic type. <fnote>Seed, 'From 'middling sort' to middle class, pp.125 </fnote><fnote>Seed, 'From 'middling sort' to middle class, pp.134 </fnote>