The rise of a professional medical discipline was gradual process beginning from as early as the fourteenth century. Its fate was perhaps sealed in 1858 by the Medical (Registration) Act, which enforced that all practitioners must be "legally or duly qualified" (Witz, 1992, p.73). In future all medical practitioners would have to possess what were deemed to be the necessary education and examinations in order to operate legitimately and legally. Sadly for women, this Act was also the peak of their increasing exclusion from medicine. It placed a legal barrier in the path of any woman wishing to practice, because none of the nineteen possible routes of entry into the medical register possessed examinations in which women were allowed to participate. Thus, in basic terms, the professionalisation of medicine was also its masculinisation. This masculinisation of medicine cannot and should not be seen in isolation. It reflects but also perhaps aided the dominant ideology of the time which, in being influenced by 'enlightened' thinking, saw the female gender as irrational and irresponsible, ruled by passions and emotion. In this sense, women were seen to represent everything about the past that was now incompatible with the rational and scientific modern world and, in turn, its medical discipline. The exclusion of women from the medical profession thus hinged on 'ideological tensions between superstition and tradition on the one hand and enlightenment and progress on the other' (Jordanova, 1989, p.30), and was part of a wider context of female exclusion from labour. Enlightened thinking was similarly important on how professional medicine viewed and defined the body. Authors of the day asked the reader 'to consider the human body only as "a living engine"' (Russett, 1989, p.108), a machine made up of interconnected parts, all of which need maintenance to ensure smooth running. This led to conclusions that the role of the professional practitioner was that of the engineer, someone who had mastery over and control of the machine. Jewson in his 1976 essay The Disappearance of the Sick Man, links this to the processes inherent in medicine in the modern era, where the patient's role in treatment has become negligible. We invest in medical professionals the belief that they possess the knowledge necessary for them to have complete control of the patient's body. This notion is important for women in relation to professional medicine, in both gender and class terms, because this power-giving discourse was inherently male and middle-class. It could be found only in the universities and teaching schools, which admitted only men and only those who could afford their fees. The notion existing within professional medicine of the body as a machine was perhaps crucial in the elimination of women from what might be seen as the most feminine of medical arenas, that of childbirth and midwifery. As Ann Oakley points out, 'throughout history it is women who have controlled their own reproductive function' (Oakley, 1976, p.19), meaning that its management was exclusively part of the feminine role. Childbirth was undertaken within a community of women, the midwife having learned her own skills within this very environment. Knowledge thus derived from experience remained within the female framework. However, with the rise of professional medicine came the re-definition of what was valuable knowledge. In a society in which, as we have seen, women were inferior and subordinate, men had the power to lever the importance of their 'textbook' knowledge over that of female experience. This was aided by the Church, whose powerful anti-feminism led to the denouncement of many female healers as witches. This was linked in particular to those healers who practiced midwifery because of their access to un-Christened infants (Donnison, 1993, p.17). Whilst it has been claimed that the entire impetus behind the era of witch trials was to deflect attention from the increasing criticism of the clergy, the Church remained a powerful institution because of its links to the hierarchies of the male and of the landed classes. In all three cases the traditional female healer represented a dangerous being in society, it being seen to be unnatural for a women to be in a position of power over other beings, particularly as she was generally from the class of peasants. It was perhaps for this reason why, initially, professionalisation only entailed the gaining of license via character references, which only the better-off of women healers would be able to afford (Donnison, 1993, p20). In this sense then it appears that the rich, the Church and men in general aided one another in this opportunity to suppress those women who violated their personal hierarchies, using the rise of professional medicine as their means. Take this ability to place professional (thereby male and middle-class) medical discourse over and above that of traditional female healers, alongside the vision of practitioner as the engineer of the human 'machine', and it is easy to see how the male takeover of even midwifery was large in extent. The male practitioner of modern medicine was far more invasive upon the female body, for example with the use of forceps. However, this could not only be justified by the machine analogy (forceps made the machine operate more effectively) but effectively used to promote professional medicine because it was men in society who defined the value in any process or procedure via their monopoly of medical education. Forceps are often seen as the symbol of the professionalisation of childbirth, representing the rationality of men in easing the birthing process (Moscussi, 1990, p.47). Many attribute the increase in surgical intervention (and thereby male intervention) to fashion among the elites who embraced the enlightened ideology of progress it represented. Male practitioners were more expensive than their female counterparts (Oakley, 1976, p.24) so again it was the wider context of the rise of a wealthy middle-class as a result of industriallisation that precipitated the move to the use of medical men. As is seen to be normal, fashions adopted by the higher classes would inevitably eventually filter down to the lower ranks of society. Yet despite their rise in popularity, the male takeover of childbirth was always an area of contradiction and contention because the man-midwife threatened the very gender conceptions upon which male power rested. The man-midwife was often portrayed as a 'bizarre monster' as can be seen from the frontispiece to the 1793 Man-Midwifery Dissected (Jordanova, 1989, pp.33-34). Male midwifery then is a complex issue. While its takeover was the final move in the complete exclusion of women from medicine, its role within the medical profession was not clearly defined due to existing visions of its as 'women's work'. Yet it was increasingly adopted as a way I which to enter general practice and thus continued to contribute to the ascendancy of men in the medical profession (Donnison, 1993, pp.48-52). Perhaps it has received so much attention in relation to the masculinisation of medicine because of its very ability to pose a threat to the foundations upon which the profession was built. The rise of professional medicine thus implied that women lost control of any claim they once held over the healing of the sick. Medicine became synonymous of masculinity and 'middle-classness' and the associated rational, scientific thinking. Whilst not legally excluded from professional medicine, society's institutions ensured that access to the means of inclusion was barred initially just to women of the lower classes via the gaining of a medical license, but later to all via their inability to obtain the education and qualifications required. Women even lost their once total control over the processes involved in and around childbirth, an area once 'universally regarded as a female "mystery"' (Donnison, 1993, p.11). Although this followed a different course as a result of the moral complications involved in the conception of midwifery by the medical profession, the calling of the female midwife to a woman in labour was now no longer an immediate and unquestioned response. Equally, the female patient was also affected by medical professionalisation in that she lost the negotiable control she had held over her body with the female healer, to the medical man whose claim to understand her body better than herself (Oakley, 1984, p.27) was upheld by the dominant ideology surrounding the superior role of man in society at this time. In short, the informal, unregulated domain of the female peasant healer was replaced in professional medicine by the formal one of the male practitioner whose validity was endorsed by the patriarchal institutions of education and the state. 