It was around 1980 that, much to their surprise, physicians discovered an illness that appeared to be 'new'. This was a massive turning point for modern medicine: the battle against infectious disease, which most believed had been won, was not yet over (Sontag, 1990, p.72). AIDS first came to prominence through the appearance of a number of patients marked by the experience of a cocktail of illnesses, including pneumonia, CMV (cytomegalovirus, belonging to the herpes virus family) and Karposi's sarcoma (a skin disease). These cases, initially concentrated in Los Angeles, New York and San Francisco, were highlighted as decidedly unusual without "a clinically apparent underlying immunodeficiency" (CDC report 1981, cited in Grmek, 1990, p.5). From here, Acquired Immuno-Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) was born, the latter stage of an infection 'characterised by advancing destruction of key elements of the immune system' (Alonzo and Reynolds, 1995, p.306), and later found to have the HIV virus as its root cause. The HIV virus is found in the blood, semen or vaginal fluid of the infected person. As a result, the main route of transmission is through unprotected vaginal or anal sex, although it can be passed on from mother-to-child during birth and breast-feeding, as well as in the blood via transfusions or the sharing of needles. The importance of these methods of transmission is paramount when considering social responses to AIDS. It means that this condition could not be addressed in the same manner as earlier infectious diseases, and has also thrown up a whole new set of problems linked to the stigmatisation and social comment on sufferers, which policy must also address. When considering the responses to AIDS made in the UK, the significance of AIDS as a 'new' disease is paramount because it meant that no existing explanatory model seemed to bring understanding. As Berridge indiciates, "Nothing like this had happened within the living memory of anyone" (civil servant, 1988, interview cited in Berridge, 1996, p.1), and the rapid spread of AIDS meant that it began to be highlighted as a potential 'new plague' on the modern world. These factors are often seen as having been crucial in the social responses to this condition, which had to simultaneously address issues of fear and novelty, while attempting to devise an effective means of overcoming the threat posed. The identification of AIDS as a predominantly 'gay disease' led to a resurgence in the media, and society at large, of historical notions of 'innocent' and 'guilty' victims, with those who had caught the disease through "morally unacceptable practices" being negatively portrayed (Mort, 1987, p.1). In the same manner, attention surrounding the spread of AIDS focused on aspects of the 'gay lifestyle' including the frequency of sexual relations with multiple partners, late hours and the use of sexually stimulating drugs known as 'poppers' (Berridge, 1996, p.28). This attribution of 'susceptibility' is often cited as a revealing insight into underlying tensions of society at this time, part of a covert attempt to criticise a way of life branded immoral by the dominant New Right politics of this period. As Weeks (1993, p.17) points out, AIDS 'became for many a potent symbol for all that had changed, or threatened to change' in terms of sexuality, with its linkage to sexual promiscuity and homosexuality. Social responses like these cannot be seen to have been effective in addressing the AIDS issue, instead creating additional problems. The media emphasis upon particular 'risky behaviours' has created a sense of 'invulnerability' to the disease among low-risk groups, such as heterosexuals, (Memon, 1991, p.157) and led to what Alonzo and Reynolds label a 'denial of possibility'. This in turn can lead to an avoidance of testing, thus delaying diagnosis and treatment, while potentially increasing the risk of infection to others. In addition, the media response means that AIDS victims have been stigmatised in a way that those suffering from other chronic or infectious diseases have not. In what Berridge (1992, p.19) calls a 'media distortion', AIDS has become surrounded by notions of individual moral responsibility, deviancy and contamination. These have, in turn, clouded the public perception and led to an 'othering' of AIDS which has made the public response less sympathetic and inclusive, and made dealing with the condition itself about much more than biological symptoms. However, we cannot assume that the social responses to AIDS in the UK have been entirely detrimental and ineffective. As Berridge (1996, p.6) points out, official policy-making on AIDS has, in the most part, excluded the impact of stereotyping so widely disseminated by the media. While 'Thatcherism' as a political model espoused moral conservatism, the policy response has tended to formulate the condition as a biomedical rather than a social ill. Crucial here was the sense, emergent from the 'newness' of the condition, of AIDS policy formation as an open field. Following an initially slow government response to the crisis, lobbying by the active gay community allowed prominent voluntary agencies associated with AIDS, such as the Terrence Higgins Trust, to become involved in policy creation (Freeman, 1992, p.55). This meant that by the period in which AIDS came to be viewed as a threat to the population more generally (heterosexuals as well as homosexuals/drug users), policy formation in this area was already established as a 'liberal consensus' arena (Berridge, 1996, p.7). As a result, one finds in the late 1980s, an AIDS policy that acknowledges that 'Fear and repression in previous epidemics had often been misplaced, causing greater suffering than the disease' (Berridge, 1996, p.4). Safe sex and 'harm minimisation' were emphasised more than stigmatising policies like quarantining (Berridge, 1992, p.23), and money was invested into drug-research programmes as well as media-led health education campaigns. While this policy does seem to have been relatively effecting in keeping the number of UK AIDS sufferers at a low level, and to help reduce the influence of media-created stereotypes among most individuals, it is still open to criticism. Measures taken to help the prevention of HIV spread, such as needle exchange programmes and free condom distribution, have met with fierce opposition. This comes largely from those who believe such responses promote the 'immoral behaviour' that they see as having been the initial cause of the epidemic. AIDS policy has also had a tendency to confuse and conflict with other government initiatives. For example, while official policy clearly demarcated the necessity of a mass public education on transmission of the HIV virus, the continued existence of measures like 'Clause 28' of the 1988 Local Government Act (banning the promotion of homosexuality in education) served as a contradiction (Berridge, 1996, p.6). Examples like this reveal the deep-seated complexity of AIDS policy, and its impact on social responses to the condition. It clearly depends who is judging a measure or response, and from what moral or political position, as to whether it can be considered effective. An additional critique comes from those who view the biomedical approach taken to dealing with AIDS as having failed to reach the route of the problem. Post-1987, the most active phase of proactive social responses to AIDS slowed. The condition, at least in the UK, has become increasingly 'normalised' as simply another element of a modern disease network: a medical rather than social issue, thus brought under the control of doctors and the research laboratory. This has, in turn, created two types of response to AIDS in the new millennium. An emphasis on the role of drug treatments, and finding vaccines and 'cures' predominates in terms of government expenditure. Critics suggest that this approach, while having improved the quality of life for many sufferers, does little to really tackle the root of the problem. Instead they suggest that we ought to focus our attentions upon education and prevention, measures that could fundamentally alter public perceptions of AIDS, but tend to be avoided due to their potential impact on many other areas of social life. The 'normalisation' of this condition has also had the effect of reducing public interest. As Berridge (1992, p.17) points out, AIDS has become a 'boring story' and a 'buried subject', which, while perhaps indicating that much of the stigma associated with the novelty of AIDS has appeased, must also be viewed as dangerous to the effectiveness of health promotion and AIDS awareness. What has so far only been inferred is that, in the period since its initial identification, AIDS has grown to become a worldwide epidemic, affecting an estimated 34 million people. While the first cases of the disease were uncovered in the developed world, it is now the Third World, and Africa in particular, that has been hardest hit, with around 70 per cent of cases concentrated here (Finkel and Garrett, 2002, p.133). Where the condition has become 'normalised' within the UK itself, it has been increasingly highlighted as a crisis-point for the health of the developing world. The social responses to AIDS in places like Africa bring with them an entirely different set of problems, when compared to the UK. These are largely centred on the sheer scale of the problem here and the constraint of poor financial ability to deal with it. The issue of the effectiveness of taking a medicalised approach to addressing the AIDS is particularly prominent with reference to the developing world. Budgetary constraints and the huge percentage of the population affected, make this type of response questionably effective. Poor countries, like many of those worst affected in Africa, cannot afford expensive drug treatments, or mass screening programmes, a factor that has perhaps allowed the problem to grow to such an extent when compared to the UK. In a similar vain to the issues raised by critics of the biomedical approach in the UK, its use in the developing world fails to address many elements of the suffering associated with AIDS. Focussing on trying to distribute drug treatment to sufferers does little to overcome the massive social crises that have resulted out of its spread. An estimated 10 million children have been orphaned (Finkel and Garrett) and the effect on the economy of these nations of losing members of the labouring and reproductive population cannot be under-estimated. Part of what is needed for an effective response to AIDS in Africa, is help from outside but it is only relatively recently that this attitude began to take shape. There has been a tendency among the developed world to ignore the impact of AIDS in global terms because, as ???? (2000) indicates, 'Now that drugs can ward off the effects of AIDS in people who can afford them, the issue has slid out of sight'. However, recently we can begin to see a change of attitude, stimulated largely by the work of voluntary groups in Africa, which has encouraged measures such as the U.S. upgrading of AIDS to a matter that affects the security of nations. Drug companies too are cooperating in offering help to the charities operating in the worst-affected nations. The effectiveness of this type of response will, however, only go so far. In order to deal with the AIDS crisis, countries in the Third World must deal with a number of more structurally embedded issues that have thus-far prevented an effective response. More so than in the UK, taboos around the discussion of sexual matters have tended to create a denial of the problem, both among individuals and those in leadership roles, South Africa's President Mbeki being a prime example. This is problematic when one considers that the most effective responses (in terms of reducing cases) have been campaigns to reduce unsafe sex through condom use (Uganda). Equally, the empowerment of women is highlighted as a potentially effective way of initiating safer sex practices yet, again, this meets head-on the social constraints of traditionally patriarchal nations and communities. It would seem that dealing with AIDS in Africa is an entirely different matter to addressing it in countries like the UK. In the UK, the limited number of cases and money available for drug therapy has enabled a relatively effective response, in the sense of reducing the number of new infections. The biggest problem here has most probably been related to the media-induced 'moral panic' around AIDS during the 1980s, which led to the stigmatisation and blaming of sufferers. However, even this response has appeased with the 'normalisation' of the condition, so that contemporary attitudes are relatively neutral, if perhaps a little un-interested! Meanwhile, Africa must deal with an epidemic of epic proportions with a tiny percentage of the money available to richer nations. The social constraints that must be overcome in order to initiate the only perceivable effective response, preventative education programmes, are also much deeper embedded than there were in the UK. In conclusion then, I would argue that the social responses to AIDS have been more effective in UK than other parts of the world. We seem to have overcome the social stigma and fear associated with the condition, a response most likely initiated by the policy creation process that took place against a liberal consensual backdrop. Although we still face the danger of increasing complacency, AIDS no longer threatens the health of the entire nation and thus must be deemed effectively dealt with. Other parts of world, by contrast, must address a growing social and economic crisis, not just the medical treatment of an infection, a situation made worse by taboo and ineffective leadership. It would seem that in order to effectively tackle AIDS here, the developing world must be offered help from outside, and help in avoiding the stigma attached to AIDS that could intensify the situation further still. 