Weber tends to reject the type of over-arching theory of historical development that others, like Marx, favour, and thus it follows that he also rejects the idea that class relationships can have ultimate, universal supremacy. This led to the development of an approach that views social stratification as made up of three conceptually distinct elements: 'class', 'status' and 'power' (or 'party', as the term used in Weber's work). Weber viewed all three dimensions as 'phenomena of the distribution of power in a community', thus emphasising that power is not only struggled for on economic grounds but can also be valued "for its own sake" (Weber, 1966, p.21). He makes clear that while social honour and 'prestige' is often tied in with the struggle for power, it is not a necessary feature when that power is economic or political. Thus it is essential that these dimensions of power, in the economic order ('class'), in terms of honour (status), and over man (party), remain distinct. Weber's definition of 'class' incorporates all of those who share the same 'class situation', this being the level of opportunity a person has to purchase particular goods and to achieve certain living conditions and life experiences (Craib, 1997, p.128). In short this means those who share the same potential to dispose of their income in exchange for the receipt of goods, or the same 'market situation'. Weber's definition is an objective one, whereby class is dependent upon 'market situation' and thus works outside of appraisal of self or others (Giddens, 1971, p.166). This means that the members of a 'class' are not necessarily conscious of their membership, in terms of awareness of shared economic interests, in contrast to what Marx believed. The distinction of 'class' from status developed out of Weber's rejection of Marx's economic determinism, in that if the economy does not determine human ideals, then they must be established independently of class interests (Giddens, 1971, p.166). Thus from here 'status situation' emerges, incorporating the evaluations made by others and the attribution of a particular level of 'prestige' or 'esteem'. As Parkin points out, 'the distribution of symbolic rewards of social honour did not always correspond to the distribution of material reward' (Parkin, 1982, p.96) and thus 'status' is not simply a complication of 'class'. Status, above all, concerns the expectation of a particular group of a specific lifestyle (together with restrictions upon social contact outside of that circle). Thus in simplistic terms, the difference between 'class' and 'status' groups is one between production and consumption: where 'classes' are stratified according to their acquisition of goods, 'status groups' are stratified by their use of particular goods in accordance with a lifestyle. Whilst Weber acknowledges that membership of a high 'class' or 'status' group might provide social power, the formation of political parties is seen as another, further element in the distribution of power in society that is usually unrelated. Parties are the stratified groups that develop within the realm of power over man, as opposed to the economic system or the ranking of social 'prestige', and hence the term 'power' is often used in place of 'party' today. Giddens is keen to point out the confusion of this terminology. He suggests that it is crucial we do not see power ultimately as an additional part in this system because like 'status groups' and 'classes', parties represent another 'focus of social organisation' relevant to its overall distribution (Giddens, 1973, p.43). Although Weber appears to give less attention to this third element, he does make clear that it is distinct from the other two in the sense that drawing recruitment from common 'status' or 'class' is rare. The modern state is crucial in the development of political power as a third dimension of stratification, in that before the time when politicians were professional (paid) they could be drawn only from the moneyed classes, and thus probably did not represent an additional group in the same sense that they do today. Having outlined the conceptual distinctions that Weber made between each dimension in his tripartite system of stratification, I am now in a position to assess whether they are in fact useful in practice. An important factor here is the wide use of Weber's system of stratification, or its use as a basis to be built upon, in the work of many modern sociologists. As Parkin points out, the 'influence of Marx and Weber upon stratification theory is, if anything, more pronounced today than at any other stage of the subject's development' (Parkin, 1978, p.561). The use of an approach based upon Weber's work, for example, has been important in the discussion of whether the U.S. can be viewed as a 'classless society'. In terms of economic rewards, U.S. society appears to follow an unbroken continuum. However, by incorporating into the research Weber's categories of 'status' and 'power', along with other criteria of rank, it became clear that inequality is still in existence, just in terms other than those defined by Marx (Parkin, 1978, pp.562-3). Similarly, C. Wright-Mills puts forward the idea that Weber's definition of a 'class' as not necessarily being conscious of its shared interests means that we cannot claim to have a classless society simply because people are no longer strictly aware of inequalities (Wright-Mills, 1980, p.143). Thus it appears it appears that Weber's work is of use not only as a basis from which to develop adapted models of stratification, but also still useful in making observations within contemporary debate. The idea of Weber's relevance to contemporary issues brings me onto considering the debate over whether the use of occupation as an indicator of stratification is all that is needed in developed society, thus deeming Weber's multi-dimensional approach of little use. The notion has been put forward that occupations are generally the sole means through which such features as "natural endowment, upbringing and education" become translated into 'class', 'status' and 'power' benefits (Runciman in Archer and Giner, 1971, p.2). However, many problems have been uncovered concerning the validity of using such a narrow approach. It does not, for example, take account of cultural variation and the effect this might have on the evaluation of prestige in occupations. Equally there appear to be too many instances where 'class' and 'status' do not 'match up' for us to abandon Weber's approach. In illustration, Lipset and Zetterberg stressed that many working-class families have the earning capacity to participate in a lifestyle equal to or surpassing that of the middle-classes (Archer and Giner, 1971, p.13). The choice to spend money elsewhere means that despite the equality of wealth they remain distinct in 'status'. It has been suggested that the idea that the three dimensions of Weber's approach can be unified has probably developed due to the vagueness that comes coupled with stratification terminology (Runciman, 1968, p.31). Blame, in this respect, lays at the feet of words such as 'rank' which, in terms of the military for example, carry with them the implication that 'power' and 'prestige' are inherently linked. One must remember that such instances of overlapping terminology do not render the approach of no use, because it only becomes invalid when any statement about one dimension entails a statement about another. As discussion of occupation as an indicator shows, it seems that not all symbols of stratification can be found coupled together under a single heading. Therefore Weber's multi-dimensional approach comes back into favour as a more useful method by which to understand stratification. Runciman raises the issue of why, if it is valid to isolate the dimensions of 'class', 'status' and 'power', this technique has failed to establish itself as an orthodoxy (Runciman, 1968, p.25). In order to answer this question, one first needs to consider whether there are other dimensions in which society can be stratified that this approach fails to note, thus rendering its pure form of limited use in practice. Several authors have made clear that they feel that Weber's approach is not multi-dimensional enough to be of use, particularly in today's diverse society. Parkin, in illustration, comments that 'One of the most noteworthy things about this... classification is what it leaves out' (Parkin, 1982, p.90), believing, like Craib (1997, p.132) that Weber should have included the state and bureaucracy in his classification. More recently the idea has been put forward that it is now not enough to see factors like religion and ethnicity as contributing factors to 'status' and 'power', but that they ought to be seen as separate dimensions in their own right (Jeffries and Ransford, 1980, p.9). In situations where these factors are major causes of tension for example, it is easy to see how a person's ethnicity and religion might contradict their place upon a single hierarchy of 'status'. Perhaps then the usefulness of Weber's distinctions depends upon the willingness of the researcher to build upon his approach, adding elements that make it more appropriate to a diverse global community. However the notion that all aspects of life cannot be somehow attributed to one of Weber's three dimensions is still contested by some: 'there does not seem to be any one aspect of citizenship which constitutes an equality or inequality in some fourth dimension of stratification' (Runciman, 1968, p.36). Having established the possibility of occasions where a single indicator of stratification is enough, and where Weber's approach has its limitations, there appears to be only one other issue under which the use of the three-dimensional system might be questioned. This entails the ability to make comparisons across different societies when using this system. This problem emerges from the difficulty of assigning a very specific position to an individual in the overall stratification. While it is of relative ease to rank 'class' upon a scale based upon wealth, it is much harder to place 'status', a dimension based on subjective opinion. No 'common yardstick' exists upon which to compare 'status', and even the 'type' of status being accorded may differ as a result of culture and tradition. As a result, how can we compare 'status' in modern Britain to, say, a tribal society where the best hunter is awarded most prestige? It seems that to compare stratification across communities we would somehow need to decide upon how to weight each dimension relative to one another, as well as measuring the distance between each strata within the dimensions (Runciman, 1968, p.43). This would entail the specific positioning that has proven to be unviable in relation to 'status'. A lack of methodology thus appears to be this approach's downfall. Perhaps then one must conclude that while Weber's conceptual distinctions are certainly valid and still highly applicable, in practice it is not always easy or sometimes necessary to follow such an approach. If one desires to carry out comparative work then difficulties in the empirical definition of each dimension means that a scale of stratification is impossible to produce. Equally in modern industrial society it is often seen that the use of the category 'socio-economic status' is of more use than separating out 'status' and 'class'. Many see occupation and all it entails as an adequate enough system of stratification. However I do not believe we can be this rapid in assigning no place for Weber's distinctions in terms of useful sociology. I believe that there are still occasions where a person's place on the differing hierarchies is of considerable variation. One might claim such situations are becoming more frequent with the recent rise in income of traditionally 'low status' occupations such as plumbing and construction. Equally Weber's work can serve as a springboard for new, even wider systems of stratification and is also crucial as an alternative to the economic determinism of the Marxist approach. In conclusion then I would argue that it is useful in practice to make a distinction between 'class', 'status' and 'power' as separate elements of stratification. There are too many instances where the use of a single indicator would create confusion or a false image of society for us to abandon Weber's approach at present. While it may present difficulties in the analysis of distinct forms of unequal relationships, in a more general sense the three-dimensional approach is crucial, as can be seen from the discussion over whether we have now entered a 'classless' society. I would have to agree with Runciman who closes his work on this issue with the statement: 'the researcher who ignores the distinction between the three separate dimensions of stratification must show good reason for doing so' (Runciman, 1968, p.61). 