One's first question might well be to ask what really is 'eating badly'? This is not as easy as one might assume because nutritional advice is constantly changing. For example, at one time all fats were considered 'bad' and should therefore be reduced in the diet, whereas now we are told that many are in fact necessary for good health (Lupton, 1996, p.76). In addition many people have more individualised concepts of what constitutes 'good' and 'bad' food. People see food in terms of how it makes them feel, thus one person might consider salad 'good' because it makes them feel cleansed, whereas another's definition might be a 'hearty' fried breakfast. A study by Calnan (1987) provides evidence, showing that while middle-class women broke down their foods into components in order to decide whether they were good or bad, working-class women were more concerned with simply having three solid meals a day (cited in Lupton, 1996, pp81-83). However, in order to tackle this essay, a definition is essential. In line with most modern nutritional thinking then, I would define 'eating badly' as a diet high in energy-dense foods, such as saturated fats and sugars (that are linked to problems like obesity and heart disease) and low in protective foods like fruits and vegetables, which contain key vitamins, minerals, fibre and antioxidants. Foodstuffs high in salt would also come under the 'bad' heading and complex carbohydrates are considered 'good' because they contain necessary dietary fibre. The type of eating habits that would constitute 'eating badly' then tend to include high levels of consumption of things like meat products, confectionary and processed, convenience foods that are high in fats, sugars and salt, whilst avoiding fruit and vegetables. If we accept such a definition then the consequences of 'eating badly' are vast and wide-ranging. It is frequently noted that 'The linkage between diet and health is an inescapable fact of life' (Beardsworth and Keil, 1997, p.125) and there are hundreds of diseases that have diet as a contributory factor. These include 'deficiency diseases', which come about when an individual's diet is lacking in a nutrient due to cutting out particular foods. Examples like scurvy, common among sailors, whose diet lacked vitamin C due to the absence of fresh fruit and vegetables, have virtually disappeared in the developed world during the last century. However, while deficiency diseases are no longer seen as the primary area of concern in the developed world, they are still in existence. Iodine deficiency is present in around 16 per cent of the European population (Robertson et al, 2002, p.5) and is said to be a cause of preventable mental retardation. 'Eating badly' both before and during pregnancy can have huge consequences for both the mother and her child. It seems that women who have eaten 'badly' throughout their lives have poor nutrient stores, and if this diet continues during pregnancy, then the baby is deprived of substances key to its growth (Robertson et al, 1999, p.186). This in turn has the potential to affect health in later life, as inadequately nourished babies in utero are 'pre-programmed' with a increased risk of diseases like coronary heart disease because of the impaired development of their organs (Wadsworth, 1999, p.45). The cheap energy-dense foods that characterise the 'bad' diet make a massive contribution to the 'burden of disease' in Europe (Robertson et al, 2002, p.4). This type of diet is a primary factor in the incidence of cardio-vascular disease, which causes the greatest number of deaths here. High saturated fat intake has long been recognised as a contributory factor in coronary heart disease, the most common cardio-vascular condition, that WHO report is the cause of nearly 90,000 deaths annually across Europe. The links between 'eating badly' and other non-communicable diseases are also becoming clearer. For example, a diet high in salt can lead to high blood pressure thus increasing the risk of stroke (James et al, 1997, p.1549). Similarly substances found in fruit and vegetables are also believed to help prevent many forms of cancer, in particular of the colon and lung (Kromhout and Bloemburg, 1997, p.3). Overall, diet is implicated as a possible determinant in hundreds of other debilitating or problematic conditions, such as osteoporosis, dental decay and bowel conditions (Lupton, 1996, p.74) to mention just a few. Obesity is a further complication, affecting up to half the middle-aged adults across Europe (Robertson et al, 1999, p.183). This condition not only limits the life opportunities of the individual but is also linked to a massive number of health problems like diabetes (Brunner, 1997, p.80), increasing the risk of contracting diseases associated with 'eating badly'. That diet impacts on health is abundantly in evidence, but some predictions made by Robertson et al (1999) make this even clearer. They suggest that around half the premature deaths in Europe are diet-related, and thus preventable (p.181). In addition one must consider not only the number of deaths, but also the number of years lost to poor health as a result of such conditions. It appears that partly as a consequence of 'eating badly' millions of people across Europe are cutting short both their actual lives and their opportunity for a happier, healthier and more productive lifetime. There tends to be an abundant supply of information concerning the consequences of 'eating badly' in terms of health, but it can also carry effects into other areas of life. One of the major factors promoting government intervention into nutritional issues has been the fact that inadequate nourishment can lead to reduced productivity (Robertson et al, 2002, p.3). For example, the British government's first intrusions into personal nutrition in the early twentieth century occurred as a result of the finding that 38 per cent of volunteers to fight in the Boer War were unfit on health grounds (Beardsworth and Keil, 1997, p.134). Similar problems of productivity exist today if people choose, or are forced, to 'eat badly'. The choice, if it exists, to limit dietary intake is made because food is one of the more elastic items in the household budget (Dowler, 1997, p.97). However, without access to adequate foods to meet their nutritional needs, people tend to operate at less than optimum rates. This might mean not being able to earn enough, or in subsistence terms grow enough, to support a family and thus lead to further ill-health. TV chef Jamie Oliver has only recently been publicising the importance of a nutritious diet in order that school children are able to concentrate in their lessons. Junk food intake has even been highlighted as a possible cause of 'behavioural' disorders (Lupton, 1996, p.77), such as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), that cause great disruption to learning. If what children consume really is this crucial to their learning, then the wider social implications are clear. Those who 'eat badly' will have lower educational attainment throughout their schooling, thus limiting their opportunities in future life. Having a less that optimal diet not only has consequences for one's own circumstances but also for trends in wider society. 'Eating badly' has been linked to anti-social behaviour and even juvenile delinquency (Lupton, 1996, p.77). If this is true then the implication is that by limiting intake among adolescents we might see a reduction in the prevalence of such behaviours, perhaps even a fall in the crime rate. Equally as intriguing, some lay the blame for the 'disintegration' of the modern family at the feet of bad eating habits. It is argued that the ready-cooked, convenience meals that characterise one's image of the 'bad' diet have negated the need for family mealtimes, which play an important role in bonding and securing family units. It is clear therefore that 'eating badly', if such links are to be believed, has enormous social consequences. Bad diets also have massive economic consequences. The health problems linked to poor diet cost national health services huge sums annually. WHO estimate that just below 40 per cent of national healthcare budgets in the European Region are spent on diet-related diseases and obesity (Robertson et al, 2002, p.6). In addition, thousands of pounds are lost to the economy every year due to poor work rates and/or sick days that result from diet-related problems. Obesity alone costs £2 billion annually to the UK economy (Miller, 2004, p.11). It seems therefore that as nations we are not only losing lives and health by 'eating badly', but also large amounts of money. Diet-related conditions are a huge blight on national economies and the massive potential to increase national wealth suggests it would pay governments to invest in programmes to improve diet across their populations. The consequences of 'eating badly' are therefore enormous both in terms of pre-disposition to disease and the effect these conditions have on our society and economy. As a result, the question of whose responsibility is it that people eat these 'bad' diets is a crucial one if we are ever to attempt to resolve such problems. Throughout the last century, the focus tended to fall upon the individual taking responsibility for his or her own nutrition. The expectation existed that the population would take heed of nutritional advice and proceed to make the most appropriate food choices and adaptations to their diet. Even as recently as the 1980s, evidence suggests that those writing about diet and health believed 'responsibility for... malnutrition in Great Britain today... must rest to a major degree on the individual consumer who chooses to eat what he or she does' (Pyke, 1985, p.43). Today, despite experts acknowledging that it is affected by many factors, a moral discourse still exists around food choice, suggesting the individual is responsible if they 'eat badly'. It is argued that those who ignore warnings about the consequences of a bad diet 'are portrayed as lacking rationality and proper self-control' (Lupton, 1996, p.74). Those who make the 'wrong' choices are held responsible if their health deteriorates, for example Lupton interviewed one woman whose friend had contracted colon cancer, she claimed, because of her "really, really bad" eating habits (1996, p.83). This ignores the complex web of factors involved in making choices about what one eats, and is also dangerous in removing all responsibility from people like advertisers and the government, those who have the power to do something about the population's diet. Manufacturers also need to take some responsibility as the way they make and process food often affects its nutrient content. As Tansey and Worsley point out, for example, 'Sodium intake is generally beyond the control of individual consumers' because salt is added to common foods like bread (1995, p.54). Unless the individual completely avoids food that has been adulterated in some manner then it is extremely difficult for them to control, and therefore take responsibility for, exactly which potentially harmful substances enter their diet. Evidence is also mounting concerning the links between low socio-economic status and 'eating badly'. Access to healthy foods is restricted both by the increased cost of such items in comparison with more unhealthy, processed goods and also by the placement out-of-town of the larger retail outlets, where food can be bought more cheaply (James et al, 1997, p.1548). Such evidence backs up the idea that many people, both in the developed and developing worlds, have their food options limited as a result of cost, access or time commitments. This makes it clear that 'eating badly', far from being a simple matter of individual responsibility, is in fact a largely structural problem, resulting out of the conditions under which people live. The question of responsibility thus broadens out to encompass who is accountable for bringing about the changes that will enable all individuals within the population to have equal access to the right foods. Dietary change does not necessarily come about as a result of individual decision but is linked to policies on food supply, pricing, public health messages and the like. All of this evidence suggests that we cannot heap the responsibility for 'eating badly' simply upon the individual because their choices are massively affected by things beyond their control. Labelling products in order that the consumer understands what they contain is seen as a crucial responsibility taken on by manufacturers. All foodstuffs have to list quantities of certain ingredients, which the industry believes is enough to inform the individual when they are 'eating badly'. This ignores that translating quantified nutritional information into everyday choices at home or in the supermarket is difficult and time-consuming. Anderson suggests that 'The average person is more frightened than helped by language he does not understand' (1995, p.170). As a result, the levels recommended tend not to have huge relevance in the day-to-day decisions of the individual consumer (Beardsworth and Keil, 1997, p.138). The Coronary Prevention Group argue that labelling needs to be much more visible and clear with respect to 'negative' ingredients like fats and sugars, that are harmful to health (Tansey and Worsley, 1995, p.155). This is therefore a responsibility that lays with manufacturers, or rather those who produce their packaging, in order to assist the public in making good food choices. The provision of dietary guidelines is similarly crucial to those making decisions about what to eat. If the individual is not told how much of a substance is 'good' or 'bad' for them, it may be harder to make decisions about what to eat. However, both of these areas hint at government responsibility in ensuring that those who draw up such data do so in a way that is accessible to the wider population. Most people would deny that their food choices are affected by information they receive from marketing and advertising, but if this were the case then it seems unlikely that food companies would continue to spend millions of pounds on it. Marketing experts have many methods to convince us not to move away from a particular food even if eating it contravenes health advice. For example, those promoting butter often use its 'naturalness' to suggest that it is healthy, when in fact it has been highlighted as a major source of harmful saturated fats (Lupton, 1996, p.90). Advertisers are aware that food meets more than simple nutritional needs and thus appeal to our psychological ones (Tansey and Worsley, 1995, p.157). Junk food like chocolate is often promoted as helping us to relax and relieve depression when in fact, being high in sugar and fats, it is linked to causing illness. Advertisers and marketing agencies also have millions of pounds at their disposal. In Scotland in 1991, over £80 million was spent on advertising chocolate, compared with a meagre £1 million on fruit and vegetables (Robertson et al, 1999, p.197). This is just one example of a clear and dangerous trend not only because it makes unhealthy products more visible, but also because many people believe that advertised items are superior to those not (Robertson et al, 1999, p.199). Similar principles apply with reference to retailers, who can exercise power over what we buy through prominent placement, suggesting superior quality (Tansey and Worsley, 1995, p.156). Advertising and marketing then must be seen as a massive source of information for the general public. Advertisements bombard our senses every day, in newspapers, on television, that is, far more frequently than health messages, and thus they are influential in suggesting what we should or should not consume. The fact that a huge majority promotes products that are detrimental to health means that advertisers must take some responsibility for encouraging people to make unhealthy food choices. However, it is up to the government to place restrictions on what can be advertised and in what manner. Food companies work for profit and thus if unhealthy foods continue to be the biggest money-spinner, they will continue to promote these until otherwise controlled. The high profile of the media in today's developed world means this must also take some responsibility for altering the way people think about food. The media is a major source of information for those whom academic articles are not readily accessible, but this presents a problem when the information given out is not accurate. The media tends to focus on 'scare-stories' that will sell the highest number of newspapers or magazines. As a result, there are many examples where inaccurate statements or advice on eating has been given as a result of an improper understanding of medical debate. For example, one newspaper reported the headline "A healthy lifestyle might be the death of you" out of the academic debate about the link between cholesterol and cardio-vascular diseases. Thus the media is responsible for people 'eating badly' to the extent that it has the power to create increased confusion among the population as to what this, and its consequences, actually constitute. A more formalised education than just food labels and dietary guidelines is required if the individual is expected to take responsibility for eating healthily. This can operate through a number of methods including incorporating lessons within the school curriculum and the distribution of health advice through leaflets or advertising, to give a few examples. Responsibility for this type of formalised education tends to fall to government and thus it is up to them to make the necessary budgetary alterations to be able to promote the healthy eating message more widely. They need to learn to cooperate with other sources of information such as voluntary organisations and academics in order that the information received by the public does not confuse or conflict, as this has been shown to be a major cause of distrust in health advice (Keane, 1997, p.181). However, education alone is unlikely to bring about changes in the population's eating habits, unless coupled with policy change. Robertson et al point out that social and personal experience tend to have a much greater influence on food choice than education (1999, p.191). It is therefore unfair to expect individuals to alter their eating habits just by being provided with information about what is healthy or unhealthy. This is the point at which, once again, government intervention is crucial in imposing policy changes that operate in line with health education. Although it is important that national governments cooperate with global agencies in trying to tackle these problems of nutrition, implementing policy does in general have to be ultimately the responsibility of government. Organisations like WHO cannot compel governments to develop nutritional plans of action but they do have an important role in developing and assessing strategy, for example by encouraging multi-sectoral involvement, something proven very successful in Finland. Policy agreement across all sectors is far more likely to be successful in dealing with 'eating badly' habits because it avoids the consumer confusion that comes with contradictory claims. Included need to be health ministries, education authorities, those responsible for policy on food supply and pricing, marketing and advertisers and voluntary organisations; in short, all of the consumer's sources of information. Structural change might be required within government so that this type of multi-sectoral involvement is viable, allowing responsibility to be less fragmented and confusing to the public. While it is ultimately the individual who must choose what to eat on a daily basis, this decision is not uninhibited, instead being one that takes into consideration a number of different factors. The foodstuffs chosen must be within the individual's available budget, and thus those responsible for food pricing must take some responsibility for ensuring those foods linked to 'eating badly' are not the cheapest option. Similarly if the public are expected to 'eat well', they must be informed as to what the best choices are, and thus it is up to all of our sources of information (education authorities, academics, advertising and the media) that we have what is necessary to make these decisions. However, I would argue that the biggest area of responsibility lies with government. Although other parties have a role to play in affecting the choices that individuals make about food, it is up to the government (both national and local) to put in practice and enforce policies that make the healthiest choices the easiest. Without government intervention, it is unlikely that manufacturers will stop making unhealthy foods, or advertisers stop promoting them, for example. It is therefore up to national governments to impose rules and restrictions on those who encourage 'eating badly' and to set out education and information programmes in order that the public receive accurate, accessible messages about food and health, which do not conflict and confuse. Only when we make choosing to 'eat badly' the most difficult and costly option can we move the responsibility onto the individual who chooses to do so. In conclusion then, the consequences of 'eating badly' are vast and they include not just health concerns but also effects on the social and economic well being of society. A bad diet is linked to hundreds of different debilitating medical conditions and significantly impacts on the number of premature deaths every year. It affects quality of life not only for the individual but also for wider society through annual losses to the economy. It seems abundantly clear that 'nutrition underlies many of the current public health problems and societal challenges in the world today' (James, 1997, p.281). The issue of responsibility then is an important one, and something that I feel falls mostly at the feet of government. Although many different sectors are partly responsible for the way we eat, implementing the policy changes that can really make a difference has to be seen as a governmental task. 