The traditional images associated with nineteenth-century colonialism are that of the heroic explorer and solider conquering uncivilised land, and subsequently of the missionary sent to 'rescue' the heathen population through the word of Christianity. One seldom associates established images of the Empire-building project with women in any respect other than as the wives of those who lived in the colonies. Yet to view Empire, and the politics surrounding it, as a wholly male 'space' is to underestimate the role played by the female population. In terms of both the 'coloniser' and the 'colonised', women played a critical role in helping to define both the purpose and the need for colonial venture. The liberation of a downtrodden and oppressed native female became an integral part of imperial rhetoric justifying the European presence. Though often indirectly, the women of the 'mother country' were part of what helped to maintain and propagate this image. European women did not all, however, play a supporting role in the politics of Empire, and some were openly critical of the policy of imposing not simply European presence but also European culture upon these little understood lands. The role of European women in relation to Empire-building is complicated by the presence of feminists, whose opinions one must be careful not to assimilate with all women at this time. This applies in particular with reference to lower class women as at this time feminism was predominantly a middle-class arena. In addition, as a movement that assimilated itself with 'pride in the nation' through its suffrage campaign, one can perhaps necessarily expect that support for Empire would be greater among those involved, after all colonies were seen as a simple extension of the nation they heralded (Burton, 1994, p.6). It is clear that probably few non-feminist women would feel they possessed the ability to speak out at this time and thus one must expect that the contemporary opinion on this debate may be biased and unrepresentative of working-class and non-feminist women. Thus while the roles and opinions of feminists are part of the imperial framework of society it is perhaps necessary to make these distinctions in order that one grasps an accurate understanding of the gradations of support and resistance in operation. As a group attempting to overcome subordination and powerless themselves one might have expected feminist women to react negatively to the Empire-building project on the basic premise of opposition to the domination of a marginalised population. Yet it appears that few women made such an association (Callaway and Helly, 1992, p.92). In fact the opposite seems to be the case, with some feminists not only complying with colonial enterprise but actively supporting it. Part of the reason for this it seems, was the 'need' for the feminist movement that Empire-building created. At a time when the campaign for the repeal of the Contagious Diseases Act in Britain had been won, and work towards gaining suffrage was at something of a standstill, work conducted on behalf of native populations justified the continuance of the feminist movement and to a lesser extent granting of the vote. Thus empire was crucial if the desire for equality among European women was to be met and as a result they claimed its continuance as 'their own feminist burden' (Burton, 1994, p.207). Perhaps then the evidence of real support given to colonial enterprise from feminist women reflects simply the need to gain power for themselves before they could offer any effective resistance to domination in elsewhere. However, to argue this is to ignore the extent to which the politics and language of Empire entered into feminist discourse. As Burton points out, 'British feminists participated in the assumptions of national and racial superiority implicit in their culture' (Burton, 1990, p.295). Like those in charge of colonial venture, these women viewed the native population, or more specifically women, as helpless, inferior beings. They expected these women, like working-class women in their own country, to be waiting to be rescued by their more advanced 'sisters'. Of course, implicit here are the notions that the native lifestyle is something that these women need to be saved from, and thus of the superiority of stereotyped 'Britishness', symbolically something represented by the middle-class lifestyle. Like the imperialists then, feminists helped to impart an infantile native image that encouraged continued colonialist venture for 'their sake'. In phraseology too, feminists adopted the same principles as those at the head of the Empire-building project. Josephine Butler, for example, used language in her campaign that paralleled that of imperialists in claiming that female reformers could lead native women "into a position of greater freedom and light" (Burton, 1990, p.301). By enlisting the use of such terms and ideas, these women were actively participating in the maintenance of Empire, by offering approval of their validity. There were, of course, some examples of feminist women who voiced opposition to the project of Empire. Annie Besant was able to challenge the ideology behind imperialism without compromising her desire to further the position of women. She worked tirelessly to understand native culture, thus her criticism of certain practices (such as child marriage) was well founded. Unlike her feminist sisters at home, this understanding enabled Besant to overcome the racism imparted through British society. She become a prominent critic of British rule in India, understanding that female emancipation would never occur so long as Empire, with its inherent patriarchal domination, continued. Yet this is just one case, and in addition Besant did not actively associate herself with feminism as a movement. It seems that, in failing to experience the realities of colonial rule, most European feminist women could not understand that it was functioning as a barrier to female emancipation. It is important to establish just how typical feminist supportive attitudes were among the general female population, although of course working-class women's attitudes remain almost totally unrepresented. It seems that attitudes differed little here too: few women outside the feminist circle offered criticism of the operation of colonialism and many carried through the same notions of European superiority. Burton's work on Ramabai, an Indian reformer who came to Britain for education, uncovers such prejudice in the reaction of her female mentor to her rejection of aspects of Christianity. While it is clear that Ramabai's objections reflect a desire to prevent the compromise of her culture, her mentor attributed them to 'the Indian woman's apparent inability to hear the messages of the 'true faith'' (Burton, 1995, p.37) and thus to the inability of such women to help themselves. Here again then one can see a reproduction by women of that established image of a decaying people and culture who required salvation through the imposition of the ideal of the European, and therefore 'correct', way of life. The promotion of this image through writing and letters was another important aspect of European women's support for Empire-building. While some did criticise certain parts of colonial policy, they rarely escaped the imperial framework. Mary Kingsley, in illustration, opposed missionary education of native Africans, but still represented the African as an 'inferior' in need of protection from such policies (Strobel, 1991, p.38-39). Thus such women helped bring the established native image to popular audiences, perhaps even reaching the working classes, and in the process offered support to colonialism itself. The work of female missionaries and educators did result in some genuine improvements in the position of women, particularly in India where the practice of clitoridectomy was brought under control. Missionaries offered teaching to the higher-caste families, and thus began the process whereby Indian women might be able to compete in the employment market. Some might view such work as a challenge to Empire in that, in empowering the indigenous female, these European women risked refuting the image of the inferior native. Yet at the same time, as Strobel points out, such reforms 'caused indigenous people to identify more closely with western culture and disparage their own' (Strobel, 1991, p.51). Education was almost always based upon the European system and the learning of native languages was often shunned (Jayaweera, 1990, p.328). Thus once again we can see support for Empire in the way in which such women promoted western knowledge as superior, in other words through the transmission of their cultural imperialism. Mary Carpenter and Annette Akroyd Beveridge provide just two examples of the contradictions inherent in such women. Whilst they were genuinely concerned to improve the lives of women and even disapproved of certain aspects of colonialism, they still failed to escape the imperial framework imposed upon them as Europeans. Akroyd Beveridge, for example, disliked the idea of Westernisation, yet, as a middle-class woman, found herself critical of the dress of Bengali women which she considered improper and immodest (Ramusack, 1990, p.312). Margaret Noble and Eleanor Rathbone were more successful in challenging the Empire-building project in terms of supporting greater political freedom and a less European-based education system. Yet these women again inadvertently granted authority to the imperial power by continuing to see the colonial government as important in gaining advances (Ramusack, 1990, p.317). It seems that these European reformers identified themselves with the familiar maternal relationship, used also in relation to working-class women, in offering aid to their native inferiors. Thus again they help to reproduce imperialist rhetoric, and therefore fail overall in challenging Empire, even though they offered no visible support. It seems then that European women did both challenge and support Empire and that this is a matter perhaps of gradation rather than a straightforward choice of which 'side' to take. Some women did indeed offer enthusiastic promotion of the need for colonialist venture, for example Flora Shaw wrote articles for The Times supporting an expansionist policy (Callaway and Helly, 1992, p.79). However, such open and visible support for Empire as an end in itself, is rarely apparent, and instead it seems that support was more generally an inadvertent result of cultural conditioning. Equally, distinct challenges were also rare and only tended to emerge from those women who actually went to live in the colonies, such as Annie Besant, who had the opportunity to internalise indigenous culture. Real opposition to Empire by those who would perhaps have been most effective in improving conditions as established activists, members of the feminist movement, was prevented by the pressing need for a cause under which to operate. Thus while such feminist women as Josephine Butler did illicit some improvements for native women, imperialism was too great a part of the feminist movement, it having matured as Empire-building grew to its peak, for them ever to offer any form of challenge. The rhetoric of the Empire-builders was equally the rhetoric of the feminist movement, and thus each was needed to help maintain the other. In conclusion then it appears that the ideology of Empire was too great a barrier to overcome for most women, in order that they be capable of challenging the project as a whole. Any opposition tended to take an indirect route, for example by promoting the education of women in order that they undermine the image of a weak indigenous population. It is, I believe, the propagation and upholding of this image that is key to this issue. It offered a justification to those who supported Empire openly, and thus entered into the language of colonial venture to such an extent as to become established as a universal 'truth'. Coupled with the cultural arrogance that emerged during the Victorian age of advancement in Europe, and there was a combination that even those who attempted to protest against Empire became conditioned by. As a result, almost all European women with an interest in the colonies eventually came to offer support, despite this often being of an indirect or inadvertent nature. I would argue, then, that those European women whose opinion we know of (thus excluding working-class) were all ultimately conditioned by their imperial society. Some supported and some attempted to challenge but all left the mark of the cultural arrogance that they could not escape. 