The area surrounding the addition of micro-nutrients to foodstuffs is one of vast debate. This is partly because it represents a rare convergence of interests between food manufacturers, medical scientists and government agencies. It is a controversial matter because it has resulted in the so-called "medicalisation" of the food supply, that is, using food and/or food components to treat and prevent diseases, the area traditionally reserved for drug development. In an ideal world such new scientific developments could result in food that not only tastes better but is also better for our health. It is my task in the course of this essay to examine the extent to which adding micro-nutrients to foodstuffs really can help solve nutritional problems and make these health improvements. This entails looking at food fortification, the process when particular vitamins and minerals are added to a food product, at levels higher than they would naturally be found, to increase its micro-nutrient value. The hope is that by doing so we can prevent the occurrence of diseases and disorders that result from nutritional deficiencies. In addition one might also consider so-called "functional" foods, created and marketed specifically to be of benefit to health because of the added nutrients they contain. In a sense we cannot deny that fortification has been successful thus far as a response to nutritional problems. As Humphrys points out, 'Across the globe, many diseases that once thrived because of vitamin and mineral deficiencies are on the verge of being defeated' (2001, p.196). The addition to foodstuffs of iron, iodine and vitamin A in particular, has been practised widely for many years and is responsible for improved levels of nutrition in many areas of the globe. In Cameroon, to give an example, organised fortification of salt with iodine has almost completely normalised iodine levels across the population and resulted in massive reductions in the prevalence of related diseases, like goitre (Young, 2001, p.256). In developed countries, deficiencies in such key nutrients are rare across the population (aside from particular at-risk groups), and this is at least partly the result of fortification strategies put into practise over the course of the last century. Iodine has been added to salt since the early 1900s in most countries of Europe, and many breakfast cereals have been fortified for around the last fifty years. Thus the aim behind the adoption of such measures, to raise the intake of essential nutrients thought to be deficient throughout the population, at least appears to have been successful as a strategy. However, having seemingly erased such glaring population deficiencies, the question remains as to whether there are still micro-nutrients that are generally unobtainable from today's diet and thus the need for further fortification strategies. Food manufacturers seem to suggest that this is indeed the case and that the average diet does not provide certain nutrients in quantities that have any beneficial effect on health. A good example of this is folic acid, which is said to prevent certain neural tube defects (NTDs) in babies (Heasman and Mellentin, 2001, p.14). The quantity found in the average diet is not sufficient to have this advantage and, as the presence of folates is most important at the point of conception and early development, it is not enough to supplement diets on the discovery of pregnancy. Scott suggests that women will not alter their diet to prepare for a pregnancy that they are not necessarily planning, and thus a situation is produced whereby fortification of some generally consumed foodstuff is the only viable method by which the benefits of folic acid consumption would be seen (Scott, 2000, pp.161-2). In this case then it would appear that adding micro-nutrients is indeed an appropriate response to a specific nutritional problem. Many manufacturers apply the same principle to other examples of fortification, pointing out that people appear unlikely to alter their eating habits simply by being providing with information as to what the healthy choice would be (Robertson, Brunner and Sheiham, 1999, p.191). Adding micro-nutrients, according to this argument, is the most appropriate answer to nutritional problems because it is by far the least invasive plausible solution. Other options such as better health education have inherent problems of failure. This is because they ignore the fact that individual food choice for many people is not based on health but instead many other factors such as price, availability and taste. Adding micro-nutrients then, particularly to a widely consumed foodstuff, avoids these problems and ensures that a greater majority of the population inherit the nutritional benefits of their increased consumption. It could even be claimed that the debate surrounding these issues is a form of health education in itself and thus has additional benefits. The prevalence of "functional" foods, that is, those with added nutrient qualities that specifically market themselves as such, has perhaps made the general population more aware of the links between food and health. Another reason why adding vitamins and minerals might be an appropriate response to nutritional problems is that it perhaps may go some way to meet the new challenges that the modern lifestyle presents us with. The massive increase in the number of meals both prepared and consumed outside the home means that many nutritionists believe we can no longer leave the responsibility for health simply to the individual (Nestle, 2002, p.298). Fortification with micro-nutrients can thus be seen as the industry's way of accepting liability for the massive effect they have on nutrition across the population today. It is, at least, a step towards improving nutrition even if it is not perhaps the whole answer to its problems. It seems clear that fortification clearly yields some benefits and has begun to solve problems related to poor nutrition, but one must be aware, as Nestle states, that 'most of the benefits claimed for this approach are uncertain' (2002, p.296). A lot of research behind the claims on our food products, arguing that their added nutrients make them beneficial to health, is funded by the industry itself. Sceptics suggest that food companies are capitalising on the fact that health has become a trend in modern living (Heasman and Mellentin, 2001, p.21). They suggest that fortification and the production of "functional" foods is being used as a clever marketing and thus profit-inducing measure, as opposed to one genuinely concerned with improving the health of the nation and resolving nutritional problems. One must remember that the food industry, like all others, relies on profits and thus there is a vested interest in maintaining the "eat more" message. By creating products with added micro-nutrients that can be marketed as health-giving, food companies have simply assimilated this need with the modern public interest in healthy-living. Part of the problem that this has created is that it has eroded the idea of the importance of dietary patterns overall, instead suggesting that individuals foods can be seen as "good" or "bad". "Functional" and many fortified foods reduce the value of foodstuffs to their single functional ingredient(s), working off the idea that there must be something within "good" foods that is responsible for better health. As Nestle is keen to point out, this ignores the complexity of food composition and also how its components interact. Simply 'Dumping nutrients into... foods will not neutralise their detrimental effects or make them more healthful' (Nestle, 2002, p.314). In real terms, foods with added vitamins and minerals are likely to be beneficial only when incorporated into an already healthy and balanced diet. It seems unlikely, at least at present, that technologically developed or adapted foods can make up for the detrimental effect that missing certain foodstuffs and/or food groups (such as fruit and vegetables) will have on health. The other factor unmentioned thus far is that these added nutrient foods can only offer a benefit to those who actually consume them. In many developing countries this problem is a literal one: foodstuffs are being distributed that contain added micro-nutrients to help ease health problems, but not everybody has access to them, particularly those in remote, rural areas, for example (Young, 2001, p.256). In the developed world this problem is related more to cost. Aside from those general foodstuffs that have been subject to fortification for many years, foods with added nutrients tend to be more expensive than those without. In this scenario then it will be those who can already afford a better diet who will be the prime purchasers of fortified foods and thus who will gain the nutritional benefits they bring. This leads onto the key factor that adding micro-nutrients to foodstuffs as a health solution ignores, that nutritional problems rest on a multi-causal base and thus require a multi-faceted solution. Poor health is often related not to inherent nutritional deficiencies in the diet available to the individual, but instead their lack of access to the choices that would appease deficiencies. This inability may be a physical lack of access, as in the developing world, but also one of a lack of knowledge or the right circumstances to make the healthiest choices. Many nutritionists, for example, see health education, rather than modified food, as the way forward in solving nutritional problems, at least in the developed world. Learnt early in life, it is suggested that teachings about the right diet patterns to follow would mean that the need for foods with added micro-nutrients would decrease, as people increasingly obtained them from their natural diet. Added to the effect of lack of knowledge concerning healthy choices is the fact that, at present, they are not generally the cheapest, and that shops supplying the best food tend to be located outside areas of lower socio-economic status. As Lawrence and Germov argue, it is unrealistic to expect technologically manufactured foodstuffs to solve health problems that are the result of complex social factors (1999, p.58). Fortified foods deal with the symptoms of nutritional problems, but do nothing to address these causes, and thus it seems unlikely that they provide a genuine long-term solution to dealing with such health issues. Lastly one must acknowledge the problems that foods with added micro-nutrients have the potential to create. Both Humphrys and Lawrence and Germov highlight the fact that the ever-increasing consumption of fortified foods makes it very difficult to measure nutrient intake and thus there is a danger of altering the bio-availability of vitamins and minerals to the body, and also of toxic overdoses (Humphrys, 2001, p.198 and Lawrence and Germov, 1999, p.60). A good example of this can be found with the effect of added iron to homochromatosis sufferers. During the years between 1970-1994 when the amount of iron found in the U.S. food supply went up by one third due to fortification, the listing of this condition on death certificates also increased by 60 per cent! Examples like this seem to raise doubts as to whether the addition of micro-nutrients is really being undertaken on the basis of scientific evidence. In bringing this debate to a close then, I would argue that the addition of micro-nutrients can only be seen to a small extent as an appropriate response to nutrient-related health problems. While procedures like food fortification have admittedly helped to reduce problems relating to nutrient deficiencies across the globe, it is questionable whether they achieved this in isolation. As access to healthy foods has generally increased, one might ask whether these problems might have disappeared anyway, perhaps with the help of policies like improved health education. Food manufacturers may want us to believe this is not the case simply because marketing fortified or "functional" foods is a massive profit-gaining business for them. Adding micro-nutrients can only ever be seen as a temporary solution because it does not genuinely treat the causes of malnutrition. In the modern, developed world at least, the food supply is not inherently lacking in any micro-nutrients and thus a truly appropriate response to nutritional problems would attack the reasons why they exist. However, one has to admit that rectifying the reasons why people suffer as a result of micro-nutrient deficiencies is a massive task. As we have seen poor nutrition is the result of a complex web of factors and thus, in real terms, we cannot expect them to be resolved quickly or easily. Perhaps then procedures like food fortification can be seen as an appropriate, but temporary, solution to put into use. As Scott suggests in his piece on the benefits of folic acid, it is not easy to convince people to fundamentally change the way they eat. Therefore if adding micro-nutrients can help prolong or improve the quality of life for people today, while we put into practise real solutions it does seem to be a relatively beneficial idea. It would seem that working as part of a multi-faceted response to nutritional problems, the addition of micro-nutrients to foods certainly has its place. However, in isolation it is difficult to see how, at present, it could be used to permanently eliminate them at the population level. Instead this procedure offers a potential benefit to certain individuals who suffer specific nutritional deficiencies, particularly to those who have the resources and ability to incorporate them into their diet. At the more general level of wider health, more broad socio-economic circumstances remain key and thus it is structural problems in society that must be addressed. 