The assumption that antebellum North and South America were inherently distinct has often been taken for granted in the past. With historic insight we are aware that this period culminated with a brutal inter-sectional Civil War, and thus it is easy to assume that the historian ought to concentrate on what is different between them. For many years study has indeed focussed upon such distinctions, with a particular concentration upon the most obvious and fundamental, the differential use of slave or waged labour. However, in recent years historians have become increasingly sceptical of such clear sectional divisions and there has been an upsurge in work examining the many similarities that remained even throughout the warring period. My aim here is to use such work to examine whether a stress upon the similarities, or instead the differences between the sections is more useful and/or potentially accurate to the historian interested in this period of American history. In doing so I will examine several important aspects of American society including the economy, ideology and social life of the sections and how these compare. An important element of many previous studies on sectional differences has been the paths taken to economic development within the North and South. North America tends to be viewed as the seat of commercial, industrial and urban development in this period. The rapid growth of cities at this time was heavily concentrated in the North, in particular in the North-East were the greatest levels of industrial progress were occurring. By the 1860s this section owned double the wealth of the South, an astounding move when at the beginning of the century it had only accounted for around 40 per cent of national income. With the South remaining predominantly agricultural one might assume that here an emphasis on sectional differences is the only logical way forward for the historian. Yet despite the widening contrast in economic bases, the two sections continued to share some similarities in development and, perhaps more importantly, appear to have been largely co-dependent at this time. <fnote>Clark, Christopher and Hewitt, Nancy A., Who Built America? Working People and the Nation's Economy, Politics, Culture and Society: Volume One - From Conquest and Colonization Through 1877 (New York: Worth Publishers, 2000), p.351 </fnote>Southern economic development had been very much focussed upon a move to cotton as the staple export crop of a plantation economy. Although of course distinct from the manufacturing progress of the North, the South equally as much became entwined into the market economy and commercial world. Total isolation of the sections at this time was simply not present; business connections ran across the nation and most had little desire to risk their enterprise for the sake of sectional loyalty. It might well be arguable therefore that, at least in terms of economic development, the historian wishing to best understand the changes in this period might be as wise to look at sectional similarities as differences. The fact that both were affected, although in different ways, by an international industrial revolution occurring at this moment in time suggests that the forces acting upon both North and South remained the same, even if the outcome of these differed. <fnote>Ib id., p.331 </fnote><fnote>Wiebe, Robert H., The Opening of American Society: From the Adoption of the Constitution to the Eve of Disunion (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc, 1984), p.362 </fnote><fnote>Clark and Hewitt, Who Built America? , p.299 </fnote>One important result of economic development in both sections is the labour system undertaken in each to deal with the increased demand of an industrialising world. This is often cited as the single biggest and most crucial difference between the North and South in this period, producing 'profound cultural differences' between the sections. The enslavement of blacks of African origin had almost always been a mark of Southern society, but with the move to cotton production en masse, it became what many view as its defining feature. Clark and Hewitt point out that in the twenty years before the 1808 embargo on slave importation, up to a quarter of a million Africans were purchased by Southern plantation owners. This huge figure almost doubles the number imported in the previous two centuries! This trend created a society with a black majority, in stark contrast to the North. This of course in turn would have had a massive effect on many other aspects of life here, for example in the way that slave ownership became a mark of status. A contemporary comment illustrates the extent to which slave ownership became the basis of Southern existence: "To sell cotton in order to buy negroes, to make more cotton to buy more negroes... is the aim and direct tendency of all the operations of the thoroughgoing cotton planter." The accumulation of slaves appears to have been to the South what the accumulation of machinery was to the North. <fnote>Sellers, Charles, The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815-1846 (New York; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), p.5 </fnote><fnote>Clark and Hewitt, Who Built America? , p.322 </fnote><fnote>Quote taken from ib id., p.322 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.332 </fnote>In the Northern states by comparison, commercial and industrial development had been dealt with through the use of waged labour. European migrants were encouraged to enter the North where they manned the increasing number of factories and manufacturing outlets. Here one can see then that the fuel of economic development in the two sections, the workforce, was as distinct as could be. With the growth of abolitionist movements in the North during the later part of the antebellum period, it is easy to see how historians have marked this difference as the crucial point of departure between sections. Indeed if we can truly divide support for the continuance of slavery and for the abolitionist movement by section, one might well see this difference as crucial to an understanding of this period, in particular how the Civil War came about. However the question remains as to the extent to which we really can make such distinctions. Although slavery was generally confined to the Southern states, I do not believe we can argue that support for its continuance was similarly isolated. Only a small minority in the North ever signed the anti-slavery petitions of the abolitionist movements and in general an uneasy acceptance of the need for its continuance appears to have existed amongst the population of this section. A contemporary comment made by Horace Greeley backs up this idea: "I do not believe that the People of the Free States are heartily Anti-Slavery... hostile to Slavery as wrong and crime, they are not, nor (I fear) likely soon to be." In a sense many Northern manufacturers and merchants worked implicitly to keep slavery alive in the South by maintaining a business relationship with those plantation owners who could provide the staples the required. As Wiebe suggests it seems that 'Just as long as sin stayed there and did not come here, most northerners could tolerate slavery." It would seem that slavery was not as alien to the North as many historians in the past have led us to believe and similarly that those in the South saw themselves as 'at war with a crazy, viscious band of abolitionists, not as section battling section." Although a distinctly Southern institution, its effects reached out to every corner of the country and thus in attempting to make sense of this period in history it would perhaps be unwise for the historian to consider labour in a strictly sectional sense. <fnote>Horace Greeley 1858, quoted in Wyatt-Brown, Yankee Saints and Southern Sinners (Baton Rouge; London: Louisiana State University Press, 1985), p.7 </fnote><fnote>Wiebe, The Opening of American Society, p.362 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.355 </fnote>This leads onto another key feature of potential difference between the sections, the existence of inequalities. Racism as we have seen appears to have been an inherent feature of both Northern and Southern society. Although blacks were not enslaved in the North section they still lacked most basic human rights and were unable to fulfil the role of true citizen in the majority of states, either through legal prevention or by intimidation in some form. Racial inequality was not the only form present in both sections where previously thought absent. Pessen acknowledges that through the use of methodology borrowed from the social scientists, historians have overturned many of the previously held notions concerning antebellum social stratification. He shows that the both those in the North and the South lived 'in a stratified society marked by great inequalities in status, material condition, and opportunity.' The slave market certainly helped to narrow the gulf in sectional inequalities of wealth as slaves were not classed as citizens, thus total sectional wealth was divided between far fewer than the true population. However despite this, many patterns remained shockingly similar between the two sections, for example that in both sections, by the outbreak of war, one-half of free adult males owned less than 1 per cent of property. On both sides of the divide wealth was more equally distributed in rural areas and at inequalities were at their height in the cities. In addition many of the white waged labourers in the North complained bitterly about their working conditions. They struggled to gain a ten-hour day and frequently evoked comparisons between their own condition and that of slaves in the South. Although one can never argue that these two sections were 'carbon copies' in terms of the existence of inequalities, it does seem that for the free white male at least, the living social experience at this time would have been remarkably similar. <fnote>Pessen, 'How Different from Each Other Were the Antebellum North and South?', p.1127 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.1133 </fnote><fnote>Hoffman, Elizabeth Cobbs and Gjerde, Jon, Major Problems in American History: Volume One - To 1877 (Boston; New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2002), p.302 </fnote>The topic of social inequality brings me onto the importance of differences in ideology between the sections. The North prided itself on its distinct sectional ideology that celebrated the freedom and liberty they believed was the basis of society. The notion that opportunities for vertical social mobility were present and available for the taking if so desired permeated this ideology and thus for many years was accepted as given by many historians. That the South did not possess such opportunities was a major factor in Northern notions of superiority over a South they believed to be strictly divided between the rich, poor and black. There is certainly little evidence to dispute that the chance to move up the social ladder was a rare one in the American South at this time; what recent historians have uncovered however is that, despite the ideology suggesting otherwise, this was also rare in the North. There are very few examples of individuals from genuinely lower class backgrounds making large social leaps in their lifetimes in either section. The idea of political independence based upon property ownership in the North had been the basis of their ideology, and this cannot fail to be seen as undermined by the massive increase in landless labourers during the antebellum period. Once again then, this evidence hints that the historian of the antebellum period should be careful in examining only the sectional differences present. While the social exclusion of blacks in the South was of course of a high degree, the emphasis on social justice in the Northern political climate towards the end of this era is perhaps misguiding to the historian when massive inequalities still existed within their own section. <fnote>Pessen, 'How Different from Each Other Were the Antebellum North and South?', p.1134 </fnote>In bringing these ideas together then, I would argue that the historian would be misguided to stress simply the differences between the North and South in this period. Although it might seem that to explain the explosion of the Civil War there must be fundamental distinctions between the sections, to concentrate only upon these would reveal an inadequate picture of this period. Indeed there were many important differences in the society, economy and other areas of Northern and Southern life, the presence of an enslaved labour force in one being the most glaringly obvious. However, while these may have taken on a greater importance after the commencement of the war, at this point in time I would argue that the similarities between the sections are of equal importance to the historian who desires to examine this period as a unique time in its own right. Like Wiebe, I believe that the success of this period hinges on the fact that most Americans did not see a contradiction between having autonomy of sections whilst maintaining harmony as a whole.  <fnote>Wiebe, The Opening of American Society, p.362 </fnote>Within these decades, as I hope to have shown, there were perhaps as many important similarities, or at least links between the sections as to make them interdependent, as there were differences tearing them apart. Both sections underwent periods of definite economic progression while issues of inequality remained an undercurrent. Of course the end results and even the process of transformation that the international industrial revolution brought about within the sections was entirely different, but they were equally affected by it and thus to deny the importance of studying similarities would be inadequate. Equally of course, one cannot simply emphasise what was the same nationwide, a trap that perhaps Pessen falls a little too far into in his work. The fact that war was the end result of the antebellum period, although perhaps tainting the extent to which we view the sections as different, does indicate that we cannot fail to acknowledge that these two societies were distinctly separate. Perhaps my conclusion is not as definite as one would prefer, but I cannot fail to argue that looking at both the similarities and the differences between the sections is important to this era. For future historians, and this is perhaps why I have emphasised this aspect more, looking at similarities is possibly of a greater importance because there is already so much historical work which stresses the differences. If we desire to understand this period in history in its own right then comparisons between the North and South become as important to our work as contrasts because 'for all of their distinctiveness, the Old South and North were complementary elements in an American society'. <fnote>Pessen, 'How Different from Each Other Were the Antebellum North and South?', p.1147 </fnote>