The first Africans to land on American soil were brought over in a Dutch frigate in 1619. The tiny proportion of attention this event receives in contemporary sources suggests a total lack of awareness by North American settlers of the huge effect this people would come to have on the development of the American nation. Evidence about the status of such early arrivals remains sketchy and thus debate has continued to rage among historians as to what exactly caused Africans in the Americas to become an enslaved people. The main thrust of the debate focuses upon whether economic factors, largely the need for a reliable labour force, were really the key issue at hand in causing the enslavement of Africans. The alternate argument, brought closer to central stage by the attention paid to racial history in recent years, suggests that American settlers saw 'African' as meaning 'slave' because of the debasement they believed inherent in the African race. This argument entertains complex ideas of racial politics that frequently intertwine with economic considerations: to unravel such ideas in order to understand slavery's origins is the aim here. It has often been argued that the forced migration and enslavement of Africans in the New World was simply the direct result of a 'seemingly inexhaustible' demand for labour in developing colonial settlement areas like New England and Virginia. In all of those parts of North America settled upon by European migrants, land was readily available and cheap to buy, including to those who would have made up the labouring population back in their native countries. In addition, in order to survive colonialists needed to develop staple cash crops that could be exported back to Europe, crops that would require a large, non-migratory workforce to grow successfully. Klein suggests that the lack of accessible labour in colonial North America was a two-fold problem caused by the unwillingness of the European "labouring classes" to migrate, and also by the nomadic nature of the native population. Unlike the Spanish who arrived in central and southern America, settlers in the North did not discover established agriculturalist societies but instead semi-migratory tribes who would thus be difficult to integrate into colonial society. Indentured servants brought over with European migrants offered one solution, albeit a rather unsatisfactory one. Although they could provide cheap labour over a given period, indentured servants became free men on the expiration of their contracted period of servitude. This not only meant that the labour force had to be continually replaced, but also exacerbated the shortages when freed servants became landowners themselves. It would appear then that there was 'no possibility that the supply would satisfy the demand' if no other solution were found. <fnote>Klein, Herbert S., 'Patterns of Settlement of the Afro-American Population in the New World' in Nathan I. Huggins, Martin Kilson and Daniel M. Fox, Key Issues in the Afro-American Experience (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971), p.99. </fnote><fnote>Ib id., pp.100-103. </fnote><fnote>Franklin, John Hope, From Slavery to Freedom: A History of American Negroes (New York: Knopf, 1956), p.71. </fnote>Given such evidence it is easy to see why it is plausible that colonialists did simply view the importation of African slaves as a ready solution to the labour shortages in existence in the New World. It appears to have been something of a last resort, only brought in after other workforces were trialled fruitlessly. If one chooses to believe this economic argument then it might be said that these new colonies could not afford to avoid enslavement if its effect on economic life would be so constructive. One could perhaps then argue that African slaves merely offered the closest and cheapest workforce and that this is reason enough to explain their enslavement. However this ignores the fact that it was generally only black Africans who carried with them the 'slave' label. Jordan suggests that it would not have been too difficult for Europeans to turn their own indentured servants into slaves also, but that as a group they did not feel empowered enough to do so. The pure economic argument also ignores the fact that slavery developed even where there was no clear economic demand for the quantity of Africans imported, such as in New England. Here they made up just three per cent of the workforce and thus hardly needed a unique status. These aspects indicate that there was something distinct about the African that made European settlers feel it necessary and allowable to create the separate category of the negro slave whose freedom was minimal. It is this factor that many argue must be racial. <fnote>Jordan, Winthrop D., The White Man's Burden: Historical Origins of Racism in the United States (New York: Oxford University Press, 1974), p.50. </fnote><fnote>Ib id, p.37. </fnote>The concept of racism as causing enslavement is complicated by the fact that historians are still yet to uncover exactly the point at which enslavement began. In the nineteenth century racial slavery still stood close in the memory of historians, and thus most made the culturally-bound assumption that all negroes arrived in the Americas as slaves. However, more recently much evidence has been uncovered that some early arrivals were treated in a similar manner to European indentured servants, with the right to private property ownership and service contracts of a set number of years. Evidence of this can be seen from contemporary sources such as the will and testament made by a Francis Payne, which bequeaths his property to his wife on death, emphasising his private ownership. Such instances of equality of treatment between black and white servants suggest that racism was not an inherent aspect of colonial American society. This led to claims that perhaps that slavery was the cause of racism rather than its effect, a theory popular among some sociologists as it means that natural prejudice did not exist, thus current racial inequalities are reversible.  <fnote>Ordahl Kupperman, Karen, Major Problems in American Colonial History: Second Edition (Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin, 2000), p.286. </fnote><fnote>Will and Testament of Francis Payne, features as document 5 in Holt, Thomas C. and Barkley Brown, Elsa (eds.), Major Problems in African-American History: Documents and Essays, Vol. 1: From Slavery to Freedom, 1619-1877 (Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin, 2000), p.90. </fnote><fnote>Jordan, Winthrop D., '"The Mutual Causation" of Racism and Slavery' in Thomas C. Holt and Elsa Barkley Brown (eds.), Major Problems in African-American History: Documents and Essays, Vol. 1: From Slavery to Freedom, 1619-1877 (Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin, 2000), p. 92. </fnote>However if this were the case then neither racism nor economic factors adequately explain the emergence of solely African slavery in the colonies. The assumption that slavery caused racism is based on too little evidence to ever be conclusive because we cannot be sure as to whether Negroes were ever treated in the same manner as white servants. Evidence from the 1640s suggests that, from this time at least, there was indeed a definite distinction between what the terms servant and slave entailed. Slavery was characterised by two important differences: firstly the loss of freedom was total. Slaves became akin to property rather than people and thus came to be associated with a lack of humanity. The other key embodiment of slavery was that it was perpetual: service was for the lifetime and was also passed onto children via hereditarily gained status, whereas servitude was always a designated number of years. Evidence of definite lifetime sales, including any progeny, thus first emerges at this time. In illustration, county court records from 1646 show the sale of a Negro woman and boy to a Stephen Charlton "to the use of him... forever" among many other similar cases. Even though slavery did not lawfully take shape until the 1660s, its existence is officially acknowledged during this period. This can be seen from a 1639 statute stating that "all the Inhabitants of this Province being Christians (Slaves excepted) Shall have and enjoy all such rights liberties immunities priviledges and free customs within this Province as any naturall born subject of England." The mention of slavery in such legal documentation suggests its growing establishment in colonial society. <fnote>Ib id., p.95 </fnote><fnote>Henretta, James A. and Nobles, Gregory H., Evolution and Revolution: American Society, 1600-1820 (Lexington, Massachusetts; Toronto: D.C. Heath and Company, 1987), p.44. </fnote>Such distinctions become important to the debate at hand when one considers that, at the same time, discriminations between black and white were taking shape. The very fact that a separate name, the 'negro', was given to black people from the outset (as the Census records) emphasises their difference in society, and other evidence confirms this distinction. For example, white female servants were rarely allowed to undertake fieldwork at this time, whereas black females were, something likely to explain the higher price paid for an African female servant. Similarly the language of horror and disgust used in contemporary pieces concerning the sexual union of black and white emphasises their innate separateness. For instance, a Virginia man was sentenced to whipping for "abusing himself to the dishonour of God and shame of Chrisitians, by defiling his body in lying with a Negro." It would appear then that at the same time as the key features of slavery were emerging (perpetual service) so were notions surrounding the inferiority of the Negro race. This, in turn, means that racism can hardly have caused the emergence of slavery. In doing so such concepts of difference and inferiority would need to have been in place well before slavery developed in practice. <fnote>Jordan, '"The Mutual Causation" of Racism and Slavery', p.97. </fnote>Such complex interactions have led some historians, namely Winthrop D. Jordan to take on the idea that racism and slavery were mutually causal, constantly acting upon one another to increase the general debasement of the African in American colonial society. Economic factors such as the need for a stable labour force may have played a role, but the demarcation of the African as slave rather than servant is evidence enough that some form of discrimination was essential in the emergence of this institution. If this prejudice was not in its totality caused by inherent racism, as I have argued, then a further factor must be brought into the debate. This I believe is the importance of race as a culturally and historically specific concept. <fnote>Berlin, Ira, Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery in North America (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1998), pp.1-3. </fnote>Even from the earliest European migrations the concept of 'whiteness' was culturally loaded, containing far more than simply a notion of colour. Particularly for the English settlers, to be white meant also to be Christian and to be civilised, something that equated itself to freedom through common law. This explains why the English were capable of viewing other European settlers with disdain, and as holding a lower status, without reducing them to slaves. Africans represented the exact opposite of what it meant to be 'white' and also therefore what it meant to be deserving of freedom. Such opposition was not achieved simply through race in the traditional sense as meaning colour, but also through something historians have called the 'heathen condition'. This incorporated the ideas Europeans had picked up through historical experience of religious wars, that to be Christian was the norm and therefore to define anything outside as an 'other'. Africans were 'others' in every sense of the word: heathen rather than Christian, black rather than white and, it seems in a context where to employ the concept in full would be beneficial such as this one, bonded rather than free. That the inauguration of slavery into colonial society is linked to religion ought hardly to be surprising given the extent to which European, particularly English, migration was the result of religious factors. As the importance of religion declined in these societies, so it would seem did religion as a justification for slavery, hence why eventually conversion of slaves to Christianity was allowed. I would argue that it is only after this point that racism become key as an independent cause, well after slavery had been established as an institution. <fnote>Jordan, The White Man's Burden, pp.50-52. </fnote><fnote>Wood, Peter H., Black Majority: Negroes in Colonial South Carolina from 1670 through the Stono Rebellion (New York; London: W.W. Norton and Company, 1974), p.18. </fnote>In summing up this debate on the causes of African enslavement in the New World colonies it seems one must split conclusions into three distinct categories. Firstly, were economic factors important in causing the emergence of slavery? The answer here is most certainly that yes they were important but probably not the crucial deciding factor. Without the demand for a labour force that had such distinct characteristics, to be non-migratory, cheap, stable, and in abundance, Africans may well have been an unnecessary addition to colonial society. However this need does not explain why it was only black Africans who were enslaved, and it is for this reason that race becomes important. Secondly then, to what extent is racism important? In the traditional sense as meaning purely colour I would argue that race alone cannot account for the enslavement of Africans. This is because historians have as yet been unable to guarantee that racism emerged before slavery, while some in fact even considering its opposite, that racism was its consequence. Evidence of an increasing society of 'difference' emerges during the 1640s at the same time as slavery itself appears to have become established. Thus it appears that while the institution of slavery and the notion of race discrimination may have operated alongside one another to encourage the general debasement of the African, racism cannot account for slavery's initial growth. In order to find the real igniting factor then it seems one must consider race as a culture-specific term. Thus in the European sense, to deserve freedom was a feature of the 'white' race not in terms of colour exclusively but of being civilised and Christian. Only in this sense can one understand why the African was debased enough in the New World to allow for his freedom to be degraded in this manner. So in conclusion, were economic factors or those concerning race more important in causing African slavery? It would seem that while the need for labour was certainly a crucial factor in guiding the direction of debasement, its role was a supporting one. Race, but only when considered wholly as a culturally loaded term, was the key causal factor in the development of slavery because as an institution it was never an isolated economic phenomenon, instead part of a general debasement of the African in colonial society. 