<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>The Empire Glass Company uses the 'budgetary control system' to create a corporate direction. Company is organised in a divisionalised structure where it gain benefits of: reduce scale of complexity and becomes more adaptive to its environment. Current situation of Glass Product Division: competition relating to cost and quality. Need cost management systems which ensure cost reduction, continuous improvement and customer satisfaction. The Planning and Budgeting Procedures, Structures of Accountability and Reward Structure are analysed and recommendations are explained to counter weaknesses. Planning and Budgeting: Advantages includes; Head office's role is to standardise, sufficient control through reviews by top management's visits to the plants, and planning which ensures commitment. However, drawback makes the system somewhat unreliable. This includes rigid control; sales budget process is lengthy; profit determined by plant managers themselves may de-motivate cost reduction; variance analysis encourages budgetary slack and short termism; and planning may easily be discarded. Structure of accountability: Sales unit as revenue centre is a danger as costs maybe increased to maximise revenue and this creates bad sales-manufacturing relations. Besides, manufacturing unit is treated as a profit centre. Contended to be efficient as profits are in line with organisational objective but unfair for plant managers for they are not involved in the sales forecast preparation. Reward Structure: There is only a system for plant manager but what about plant employees? Issue also includes the 'produced to order' system where customer is to be prioritised even at the expense of plant manager's cost. Hence, customer profitability analysis is recommended. Recommendation includes better budgeting procedures, kaizen costing, treating both units as profit centres to achieve mutual dependency and balance scorecard framework for customer profitability and service analysis. </abstract><heading>1. Introduction</heading>The Empire Glass Company is a diversified company organised into several major product which includes the Glass Product Division. Its principal management tool is its 'budgetary control system' in which head office coordinates the efforts of the various segments of the company towards a set objective. This is precisely an example of using accounting as a form of control. It is noted, in a survey supported by the ACCA, over 300 companies were reported to use some form of budgeting and budgetary control suggesting the wide benefits it promotes as a form of control to companies. <fnote> URL  </fnote>Furthermore, it is observed that the division of an organisation into self contained units, each with its own manufacturing, development and selling operations, reduces the scale of complexity for any one unit to a more manageable proportion. By delegating decision making authority down the hierarchy, it facilitates prompt adaptation by each division to its environments efficiently. <fnote>J.F. Dent (1987) </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote><heading>1.1 Current situation of Glass Product Division</heading>It is first important to understand the current situation in which Glass Product Division is operating in. It is observed that product lines are contended to be mature and faced with competition with respect to quality and customer service (not reducing prices). Hence, to increase profitability, Glass Product Division has to seek ways for continuous improvement and methods for cost reduction. <heading>2. Evaluation of existing systems and practices</heading><heading>2.1. Control system</heading>For the purpose of analysis, formal control system maybe thought to consist of various interrelated elements; <fnote>Ibid. </fnote><heading>2.1.1 Planning and budgeting procedures</heading><heading>2.1.1.1 Sales Forecasting</heading>Reviewing the sales budget procedures, the head office's goal is to ensure standardisation of planning and budgeting procedures between product divisions. This suggests that head office is delegating decision-making responsibility to more people in the organisation. Consequently, control moves from task control to results control in which managers are able to use their skill, knowledge and creativity to improve results. Besides that, every step of the sales budgeting process will formally go through the product's division top management (as observed in Appendix 1). This suggests that although the management structure is decentralised to form a multi-divisionary form, to a certain extent it operates like a mechanistic organisation in which the company has stringent rules and rigid hierarchies. For instance, any changes in the approved budgets cannot be made without the agreement of all the people responsible for the budget. This is in line with the traditional accounting view of discharging formal obligations. Justifiably, Dent (1987) stated that; <fnote>T. Burns and G.M. Stalker (1961) </fnote><quote> "Order and coherence is seen as 'good', disorder and chaos as 'bad'. Confusion and ambiguity indicate poor management, a facet of organisational life to be suppressed. Actions should be intensively analysed before they are implemented" (pp. 120)</quote>However, it is argued that it is inflexible as any changes made would have to go through four units for clarification and justification. Therefore, adopting a more contingent perspective maybe more appropriate for changing contexts. <fnote>This include: Divisional Top Management, Market Research, District Sales Manager and Division General of Marketing. (re: Appendix 1) </fnote>Furthermore, the procedures are repeated until everybody involves agrees that the sales budgets are sound. Hence, it is argued that this and the fact that the process has got too many formalities, is time consuming and lengthy. It can be seen that the budget is done as early as May 15 every year and is finally approved in December at the board of directors' meeting which takes about 7 and a half months altogether. <heading>2.1.1.2 Plant Manufacturing Budget</heading>It is observed that manufacturing budget is done based on the given sales budget. Although, many companies gives each plant manager sales and incomes figures that the plant has to meet, Empire Glass Company operates otherwise; plant mangers are given only the sales figures to work with. As Walker mentioned, "If we gave a profit figure to out plant managers to meet, how could we say it was their responsibility to meet it?" Arguably, the system which provided no information relating to profit will de-motivate the cost reduction efforts by plant managers as profit figure is determined by them. Given the competitive environment with competitors having the same price and quality, seeking ways for cost reductions is fundamental. <fnote>Re: Case Study. James Walker is the controller of Empire Glass Company. </fnote>Furthermore, it is seen that before budget is sent to the British City, a group of people from the head office will visit the plants to review. This in a way gives an impression that top management are not living in an ivory tower. Consequently, it is seen as an element of control as staffs would be motivated to work efficiently to impress top level management. <heading>2.1.1.3 Comparison of Actual and Standard Performance</heading>Budgeting which is concerned with short term planning ensures that managers' attention and effort is concentrated on the significant deviations between the budgeted an actual results. Consequently, enable managers to identify inefficiencies and hence proper control. However, variance analysis is done over the basis of exception, that is, only figures that are in excess of the budgeted amounts are analysed. This suggests the level of trust that upper management have on the plant managers and therefore, have a good effect on morale as plant managers do not have to explain everything they do but only where they go off base. Nevertheless, figures that meets or not in excess of the budgeted amounts are not necessarily accurate information. For example, it is thought that there maybe some element of budgetary slack. It is contended that, managers missing the budget targets is faced with prospect of intervention by upper management, loss of organisational resources, loss of annual bonuses and ultimately, their job. Therefore, plant managers, who are answerable for deviations in budget, might protect themselves from the downside risk of missing budget targets by negotiating highly achievable targets (i.e. slack creation). Justifiably, in Osni's study of budgetary slack (July 1973), he reported that 80 percent of the managers he interviewed admitted that they 'bargain for slack'. <fnote>Merchant and Manzoni (1989) </fnote>Moreover, using variance analysis as a form of control may encourage the worst practices of management training for short run profit maximisation at the expense of long term effectiveness and competitive strength. Pressures on management to perform in the present which affects their performance in the budgeting period, reduce the probability of initiating new programs, stifle creativity and undermine commitment to continuous improvement. Overall, it can be concluded that the company is in Stage II where budgetary control system is used and no primary information is provided to employees. <fnote>Laverty (1996) </fnote><heading>2.1.1.4 Planning procedures in general</heading>Planning in general for every companies maps a way forward and exhibits corporate direction. It ensures all parties to a set of actions that they will be committed for and removes the potential chaos and confusion that might arise if managers are under pressure to meet a stated profit goal. Arguably, planning in Glass Product Division may not mean anything at the end of the day. For instance, plant managers have their manufacturing plans but sales group may insist that a production schedule be changed to meet customer's order as customer wants are primary. Another example relates to the fact that plant managers may have to discard their plans if actual sales volume is less than the budgeted sales volume. Finally, budget can encourage inefficiency and conflict between managers. It is observed that there is no joint commitment in the planning stage between both the sales and manufacturing units and that plant managers are only informally involved in the sales budget preparation. This indicates that there is an urgent need to manage interdependencies so as to ensure a coordinated budget is achieved. <heading>2.1.2 Structure of accountability</heading><heading>2.1.2.1 Sales Unit as a Revenue Centre</heading>Sales unit has a sales responsibility and therefore, sales managers are accountable only for financial outputs in the form of generating sales revenue and not accountable for the cost of goods they sell. However, there is a risk that managers may increase the use of activities that create costs in order to maximise sales revenue which might impact the profit centre's performance. For example, sales unit may promote low profits products to achieve higher sales revenue. <heading>2.1.2.2 Manufacturing Unit as a Profit Centre </heading>Manufacturing unit is treated as a profit centre in which plant managers are accountable for both revenues and costs of the product they deliver. It is efficient to treat unit as a profit centre because unit will be treated like an independent business, except that top level management controls the sources of funds. Managers are able to see the complete picture of the division's activities and are able to set selling prices and making output decisions accordingly. Nonetheless, as noted above, plant managers are not formally involved with the preparation of sales budget. This approach is not consistent with the controllability principle as plant managers (being accountable for revenue) should be involved in the sales budget preparation which is by right within their formal authority. The controllability principle states that the manager of a responsibility centre should be held accountable for the revenues, costs or investment that responsibility centre personnel control. <fnote>Kaplan and Young (2003) </fnote><heading>2.1.3 Reward Structures </heading>Plant managers maybe promoted if capable and receive incentive in monetary form. Also, there is a bar chart to indicate their performance. These are contended to motivate plant managers further. However, it is noted that although wages are relatively high in the glass industry, there is no incentives for plant workers. Plus, their working conditions are difficult and these may discourage employees' motivation as their job is not seemed rewarding. <heading>2.2 Customer focused approach</heading>Creating a satisfied customer is the only valid definition of a business. The company is case where 'sales wags the rest of the dog', that is, unexpected rush order must be fulfilled even at the expense of plant manager's cost. Giving priority to customers ensure that company does not lose out sale to competitors who understand customers better. However, it is thought that sales unit should conduct a framework to manage customers to ensure which are the profitable customers that are worth prioritising. A framework includes the balanced scorecard (BSC) approach. <fnote>Drucker (1954) </fnote>Furthermore, it is argued that if sales managers have the final say, who is to control the sales group? The sales people might be taking up every customer (even the unprofitable ones) just to meet their sales budget and improve unit's performance. This is deemed unreasonable for plant managers and may affect the sales and manufacturing relations. <heading>3. Recommendations for change</heading><heading>3.1 Planning and budgeting procedures</heading>It is recommended that to a certain extent, the sales budget system needed to be relatively flexible (in terms of its control) to facilitate changes. It is found that in a study of British electronics firms, bureaucratic principles to be inappropriate in changing contexts. If making changes are difficult, it is argued that there would be no room for continuous improvement and strategy making. Therefore, a more participative management style instead of emphasising on hierarchy and authority is suggested. In a similar vein, this flexibility should include to allow informal communication between units. For instance, 'little black book'; which can increase employees' motivation as it is not dictated by hierarchy. <fnote>T. Burns and G.M. Stalker (1961) </fnote>Besides that, it is recommended that the review of forecast by top management should be at the final stage; after consolidation (re: Appendix 1) is done. When few formalities are cut out of the process, the budgeting process altogether is shortened. <heading>3.2 Kaizen Costing </heading>The information from variance analysis promotes a controlling, not a learning view. As explained above, budgets may not be accurate as there may be an element of budgetary slack and encourages short-termism practice. The variances are not easily understandable by frontline employees, do not promote an integrated process view of the organisation and do not directly encourage continuous improvement. Hence, it is recommended that there should be a system for learning and continuous improvement (stage III) which could be exploited by using kaizen costing. <fnote>R.S.Kaplan and R.Cooper (1998) </fnote>Since kaizen costing is applied during the manufacturing stage of the product life cycle, it is deemed most appropriate as Glass Product Division has come to the point where only further cost reduction would increase profitability. Kaizen costing focuses on the production processes where cost reductions are gained through increased efficiency of the production process. Its success can be seen from approach taken by Shionogi Pharmaceuticals where it uses two set of standards, budgetary and updated. The updated standards are revised throughout the year based on the progress of the kaizen program. <fnote>Re: Section 1.1; current situation of the Glass Product Division </fnote><fnote>R.S.Kaplan and R.Cooper (1998) </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote>The objective of kaizen costing is not to achieve standard but to outperform it and constantly improve critical processes so that costs can be continually reduced. This is especially true for Glass Product Division where its product lines are already in a mature position in the market. It is noted also that kaizen costing relies heavily on employee empowerment. Consequently, provides direct financial feedback to employees. Therefore, it is crucially important that bureaucratic principles are loosened. Finally, it is contended that kaizen costing can be used hand in hand with variance analysis as it seek to provide solutions to the flaws of variance analysis and strive towards cost reductions and continuous improvement. In reference to the plant manufacturing budget evaluation, it is explained that plant managers maybe de-motivated to be cost conscious. Hence, it is thought that kaizen costing to a certain extent may motivate the plant managers and workforce to be highly cost conscious since they are now together responsible for generating ideas and have authority to make small-scale investments (if demonstrated to have cost reductions). Finally, with respect to the reward structure explained above. It is thought that the division could bases their reward system through kaizen costing. Employees should not be rewarded or punished for creating variances; however it is contended that overall performance, including variances should be taken into account in performance reviews for both promotion and pay rises. Especially if kaizen aims are achieved. <heading>3.3 Structure of Accountability</heading>For an organisation to successful, the activities of its responsibility centres must be coordinated. Unfortunately, as observed sales and manufacturing activities are very disjointed and this would eventually results in diminished performance. Hence, it is recommended that sales and manufacturing units are treated as follows; <heading>3.3.1 Sales unit as a profit centre</heading>Arguably, if sales unit remained as a revenue centre, plant managers would have to be accountable for profit and this would affect the sales-manufacturing relations as it can be reasonably unfair for plant managers. Furthermore, adopting this practice, sales units would think of themselves as running businesses and hence, ensuring that they know the cost involved with selling. Instead of maximising revenue (which can be at the expense of higher cost), they will now be maximising profits. This ultimately motivates the employees as they are provided with profit information relating to their operations which ensures long term success of the company. This is explained as the real psychological benefits in which it focuses the workforce onto the positive action of increasing profits as opposed to the negative action of decreasing costs. Kaplan and Cooper (1998) stated that; <quote>"Profit is a more comprehensive financial signal than cost, and profit enhancement is proving to be a more powerful motivator for improvement than cost reduction.' </quote>On top of that, by sharing profit information, employees are able to observe the alignment of their actions with firm's overall performance. Finally, it is observed that treating unit as a profit centre would enable sales unit to justify their spending of costs to plant manager in order for improvement and investment. As noted, this can reduce the issues of discarding the plans that have been outlaid by the plant managers in event of meeting customers' needs timely and if actual sales volume is less than the budgeted. <fnote>Re: Planning procedures in general </fnote><heading>3.3.2 Plant Manufacturing unit as a pseudo-profit centre</heading>For the sake of analysis, manufacturing unit is treated as a cost centre where unit is accountable for only those cost that are within their control. However, a major drawback of using cost centre is that managers can affect the amount of sales revenues generated if outputs are not produced according to schedule and quality standards are not met. Hence, continuous improvement of cost reduction and customer satisfaction cannot be correlated because managers would then be focusing on only cost reduction to ensure units' performance. Therefore, it is suggested that manufacturing unit is treated as a pseudo-profit centre. This can overcome the major limitation of cost centre. Pseudo-profit centre is recommended because the unit is not subjected to external competitive forces but merely an inter-unit trading which at the same time, will produce the advantages of being treated like a profit centre (as explained in 3.2.1 above). Also, it is observed that the use of profit ensures employees' motivation for continuous improvement without actually having to organise the manufacturing unit into true profit centres. In similar vein, referring to the San Francisco Consulting Bay seminar, it is observed that recommending CS as a pseudo profit centre will mean expenses are accurately captured and that employee are provided with a complete picture of the costs of providing services to clients. Therefore, the current trust deficit between divisions is improved. Although, the recommendations are not in line with the controllability principle, having two units accountable for profits is deemed to promote a sense of mutual dependence. An example is the Eurocorp's accountability structure (Dent, 1987); both sales and development functions' interest bring both units into alignment. Similarly, it created reciprocal pressures for efficiency in task performance as inefficiencies in one unit would decrease the profit of another. Besides, applying the controllability principle is difficult in practice as many areas do not fit neatly into controllable and uncontrollable categories. <fnote>C. Drury (2004) </fnote><heading>3.4 Balanced Scorecard Framework</heading>It is noted that although cost management seeks to reduce cost, it should not be at the expense of customer satisfaction. Ideally, BSC provides a comprehensive framework for managing customer relationships and enhances customer satisfaction. This approach is vital towards improving overall corporate profitability and should be considered a fundamental procedure for success of any company. This is especially true in organisations that have been effective at cost management and revenue growth and that are now looking for their next large boost in performance and profitability. <fnote>Kaplan and Norton (1996) </fnote>Using this method, sales managers is to identify the customer and market segments by developing performance measures that tracks Glass Product Division's ability to create satisfied and loyal customers in each targeted segments. This could be done within the 5 sales districts. Performance measures typically include market share, customer retention and loyalty and new customer acquisition. For instance, to understand whether loyal or satisfied customers are profitable, it is suggested that the manager may use 'average duration of customer relationship' to recognise loyal customers and 'customer response cards' to understand customers satisfaction. Consequently ensures that excellent customer service (in terms of time and cost) is given adequately to both loyal and satisfied customers and hence, not affecting plant managers' cost continually. This is especially true since Glass Product Division only does "produced to order". It is important that the division prioritise profitable customers so that delivery or production schedules are not affected crucially. Besides that, having this framework justify the autonomy of the sales managers in insisting that a production schedule should be changed to get out an unexpected rush order. At the same time, communication between sales and manufacturing group is improved. Plant managers will not have to devise their budgets unreasonably without justification. <heading>4. Conclusion</heading>In conclusion, the existing is evaluated and its pros and cons have been discussed. It is observed that the Glass Product Division is currently in the stage II of the cost system (Cooper and Kaplan) where it is more financial report driven. Although, drawing on discussions and observations drawn from across the organisational and functional hierarchy, many organisational members sought to use accounting to achieve situated functionality of accounting, it is crucially important to move on into stage III of the cost system where cost reduction and continuous improvement would ensure the profitability of products that are already matured. <fnote>Ahrens and Chapman (in press) </fnote>However, it must be noted that the understanding of the Glass Product Division is only by the observation taken from the interview with James Walker i.e. the point of view of the controller who is in the management group. For further and concrete analysis, it is suggested that interview should be conducted with lower level management and employees. 