Sir Guenter Treitel in his textbook defines contract as an 'agreement giving rise to obligations which are enforced or recognised by law. The factor which distinguishes contractual from other legal obligations is that they are based on the agreement of the contracting parties'. The law of contract is therefore, a mutual exchange of requirements, where each party has to do something to make the agreement legally binding. In order for a contract to exist, it is subjected to a number of important formalities. First, there must me an offer and the offer must be accepted. Then, both parties must provide consideration and have an intention to create legal relations. Both parties must also have the capacity to create a contract. Finally, the purpose of the contract must be valid. <fnote>The law of contract (10th edition, Sweet and Maxwell, 1999) </fnote>Upon advising Workwell Ltd on the legal implications of the events stated, we must first understand the concept of tender under the eye of contract law. A tender is competitive offer to provide goods and services. It is held in Spencer v. Harding that tenders are basically a mere attempt to establish whether an offer can be obtained. The general principle is that an invitation to submit tender is not an offer but considered as an invitation to treat. Invitation to treat is merely an invitation to others to make offers to you. Hence, the invitation to tender is not an offer but the production of the tender is the offer, which can be accepted or rejected. If accepted, this is the binding contract. In the case of Workwell Ltd. and the Highroad plc, it is established that Workwell Ltd. is bound by the contract because Highroad plc had invited tenders for the civil engineering project and Workwell Ltd. responded by giving an offer of a quote calculated based on Drainklear's price. Then, the offer was accepted by Highroad plc when they awarded Workwell Ltd. with the Highroad contract. Here, the contract is said to exist and that there is consensus ad idem. However, to be legally binding, acceptance must fulfil three rules. Acceptance therefore must be a 'mirror image' of the offer, firm and communicated to the offerror. These rules are seen to be fulfilled by Highroad plc. <fnote>Assuming a valid offer and consideration </fnote><fnote>The offeree must agree to all the terms of the offer and not trying to introduce new terms. </fnote>Furthermore, it is enforceable that there is consideration on both parties in order to have a valid contract. It is ascertained that there was an executory consideration on both parties. Executory consideration is a promise to give consideration in the future. Here, the consideration given by Workwell Ltd. is the promise to carry out the civil engineering job and the consideration given by Highroad plc is the promise to pay. Besides that, based on the general rule of the courts, commercial deal or business agreement intend to create legal relations. It is also highly likely that both Workwell Ltd and Highroad plc to sue each other if either party breaks the agreement since it involves quite a sum of money. Finally, both parties have the capacity to make the contract, that is both parties were not forced into the contract and the contract is further said to be valid because the purpose is legal and not immoral which go against public policy. However, Workwell Ltd may decide to argue that they only submitted a 'quote' which does not constitute an offer. But, in Crowshaw V. Pritchard and Renwich(1899), it was held that terms used by contractors and sub-contractors to depict an offer such as quotation, tender and estimate was an offer to carry out work capable of acceptance and hence the formation of a binding contract. Subsequently, before dealing with the second case involving Workwell Ltd and Drainklear, we must again analyse the formalities of a contract. In this case, when Workwell Ltd. invited tenders, Drainklear made an offer by submitting a price of £19,000 to complete the drainage project. Clearly, offer was made in writing which also mentioned that the 'tender is open for acceptance within 3 months'. This offer which is open for acceptance within 3 months is not legally binding as it is gratuitous. Workwell Ltd. has provided no consideration in return. In Routledge V. Grant, a promise to keep an offer open for the sale of a house was not held to be binding because the potential buyer had given no consideration to the seller for keeping the offer open. Workwell Ltd. has promised nothing in return and Drainklear, the offeror is therefore free to withdraw or revoke the promise at anytime before the offer is accepted which in this case, Drainklear revoked the promise by quoting a new price of £29,000. Certainly, Workwell Ltd. may claim that the letter of acceptance have been sent well before the 3 month deadline. Since communications between both parties are made by post, the postal rules apply. Postal rules stated that postal acceptance produces an instantaneous legal effect and a postal offer or revocation is effective only on receipt. Therefore, it is arguable by Workwell Ltd. that according to the postal rules established in the case of Adams V. Lindsell, the letter of acceptance is valid on the day it was posted which was within the 3 month deadline. <fnote>Court held: Once a letter of acceptance is posted, a contract comes into existence immediately. </fnote>However, court held in Household Insurance V. Grant (1879,CA) established that acceptance of offer by post is effective even if letter is delayed in the post or fails to reach the offeror, provided that this is not due to the offeree's fault and that the letter is properly stamped and addressed. Through these decisions, the letter of acceptance by Workwell Ltd. proves to be invalid on the day it was posted as it was wrongly addressed and only reached Drainklear 2 days after Workwell Ltd. received the revocation letter. <fnote>The letter which Drainklear wrote to Workwell Ltd. explaining that they could not undertake the work for less than £29,000. </fnote>In Byrne V. Van Tienhoven (1880), it was held that postal revocation is ineffective unless it is received by the offeree before the acceptance date. But in this situation, since the letter of acceptance is invalid on the day it was posted, it is considered valid only on the day of receipt and by that time, revocation had been taken place (revocation letter arrived Workwell Ltd. 2 days before the acceptance date). Hence, there is no legal binding contract which undoubtedly gives no allowance for Workwell Ltd. to hold Drainklear at its original price. <fnote>It was held that a contract was formed on 11th October when the claimant mailed his telegram of acceptance. The revocation was not communicated to the claimant until 20th October and was, therefore, too late to be effective. </fnote>In conclusion, it is observed that Workwell Ltd. is bound by their bid for the Highroad contract and if Workwell Ltd. decides not to continue with the project for reasons like high cost for instance, Workwell Ltd. is said to be in breach of contract. Workwell Ltd. also may not hold Drainklear to their original price because it is seen that there was no contract and it was not legally binding and that the revocation is allowable before acceptance of contract. Both this situations is likely to give complications to Workwell Ltd. It is suggested that Workwell Ltd. should try and renegotiate the new price quoted by Drainklear so that they could take the job for less than £29,000. Another alternative would be inviting new tenders and stating terms of which include the total price should be about £19,000. However, this may not be an easy process. If renegotiations are not successful, then worse comes to worse is that Workwell Ltd. is likely to suffer the loss of £10,000. If matters are brought to court then Workwell Ltd may end up suffering more than £10,000. 