<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>An experiment was conducted to explore the design of a measurement system for measuring low-lever force, a kind of cantilever rig which is called Analogue Experimental Transducer was introduced in this laboratory. It was connected with a designed amplifier in order to make the output observable. Fifteen sets of measured loading force and output voltage were obtained, which determined the linear range and sensitivity of the force sensor system. The output reading appeared to be suitable for predicting values, whereas, there were  FORMULA  errors when comparison was made between them. The errors associated with the output may have been caused by improperly zeroing the system when there was no loading force. And an overall equation for output voltage against the loading force were derived and evaluated. In addition, data were collected by using the Labview software with different system configuration. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Low-level force can be measured with a beam-type load cells composed of a cantilever beam and two or four strain gauges. The cantilever beam is used as the elastic member. The strain gauges serve as the force sensor. The resistance in the strain gauges is changed as the strain variation in the beam due to force application, in generally, it is measured by a Wheatstone deflection bridge, its circuit configuration is shown as 1 in Appendix 1. The output from the bridge circuit is normally in millivolts which has to be amplified to an adequate level. After amplification, an analogue or digitized device is used to display the signal for further processing or display. General structure of the instrument for force measurement is shown as Fig. 1 in Reference. In this laboratory, a ready made cantilever rig with two strain gauges called Analogue Experimental Transducer is selected as a beam-type instrument for force measurement. Illustration of the cantilever rig was explored through achieving the following four objectives: Evaluate the cantilever system, design and build simple bridge and amplifier circuits using the rig and an experimental bread-board. Derive an overall equation for output voltage against the loading force. Determine the linear range and sensitivity of the force sensor system. Estimate the maximum loading force allowed for the system. According to the fundamental relationship for a cantilever with strain gauges, the strain produced at the strain gauges in terms of the force is  FORMULA  (1) Here the strain  FORMULA  depends on the length of the cantilever  FORMULA (m), the distance between the built-in point and strain gauges  FORMULA (m), the width of the cantilever  FORMULA (m), the thickness of the cantilever  FORMULA (m), the Young's modulus for the cantilever material  FORMULA and the force  FORMULA (N). The strain gauge factor sets up the relationship between the change in resistance and the strain  FORMULA  (2) And the Elastic modulus equation  FORMULA  (3) The relationship between the bridge output and the relative resistance change of the strain gauges.  FORMULA  (4) Here  FORMULA  represents the change of the bridge output,  FORMULA  represents the relative resistance change of the strain gauges,  FORMULA  is the resistance of strain gauges,  FORMULA  is the source voltage. <heading>Apparatus and Methods</heading>The apparatus was called Analogue Experimental Transducer, which consisted of a balance potentiometer, screw terminals, two strain gauges and a cantilever beam. At the free end of the beam, a nylon screw was attached for adding weights. The diction view of the rig is shown in Fig. 2 of Reference. The following procedure was used to obtain the basic experimental data: 1). Measure the geometrical dimensions of the steel cantilever and the location of the strain gauges. 2). Use the existing bridge circuit on the rig, connect it which the battery of 9V as the power supply. 3). Build a non-inverting amplifier with  FORMULA ,  FORMULA . 4). Check and test the amplifier with connecting it to a digital voltmeter. 5). Connect a capacitor of 100nF across the feedback resistor of the amplifier. 6). Connect the amplifier to the bridge circuits. 7). Zero the system when there is no loading force, and add progressively washers to the nylon screw. 8). Record the following <list> -- Loading force -- Output of the amplifier</list>9). Connect the output of the system to a data acquisition system which has an analogue-to-digital card plugged into a PC and driven by Labview. 10). Collect following data from the designed system <list> -- When the cantilever beam is not loaded with feedback capacitor -- When the cantilever beam is not loaded without feedback capacitor -- While taping lightly at the end of the beam</list><heading>Observations and Results</heading>The basic data collected, calculations from published values, as well as properties of the system, appear in Table 2 in the Appendix 2.  FORMULA  is the length of the cantilever.  FORMULA = 0.107m  FORMULA  is the distance between the built-in point and strain gauges.  FORMULA = 0.008m  FORMULA  is the width of the cantilever.  FORMULA = 0.013m  FORMULA  is the thickness of the cantilever.  FORMULA =  FORMULA . The recorded loading force and output of the amplifier was tabulated in Table 1, it was compared with predicted output which was calculated with Eq.1 using the measured values of loading force, and Eq.2 using the gauge factor from Table 2 in the Appendix 2, and Eq.4 using the source voltage from Table 2 in the Appendix 2. <table/>Errors were assumed to be a noise in the output of the amplifier due to the high gain used and the electromagnetic interference. <figure/>From Table 1, a graph of the output voltage against loading force was plotted, as shown in Figure 1. <figure/><figure/><figure/>Figure 2 displayed a graph of data against time when the cantilever beam was not loaded, with the feedback capacitor. Figure 3 displayed a graph of data against time when the cantilever beam was not loaded, but without the feedback capacitor. Figure 4 represented a graph of dynamic behavior of the cantilever. From the graph, the time needed for stabilising the output of the system after it was disturbed was about 0.5 second. And the resonant frequency of the cantilever system is 24HZ. <heading>Analysis and Discussion of Results</heading>Eq.1 can be used to derive the strain produced at the strain gauges in terms of the force F, as the parameters had been measured.  FORMULA   FORMULA  According to Eq.3, therefore  FORMULA , where  FORMULA  is the fatigue strength of the beam material,  FORMULA  is the modulus of elasticity of the beam material, appear in Table 2 in the Appendix 2. Combine Eq.1 and Eq.3, the maximum loading force allowed for this system can be achieved.  FORMULA   FORMULA  From Figure 1, the linear range of the force sensor system is 0~2.95N. and the gradient of the linear line is 11.33, which means the sensitivity of the force sensor system is 11.33. Combine Eq.1, 2 and 4, an overall equation for output voltage against the loading force can be derives, which is  FORMULA  (5) According to the Figure 1, sensitivity of the measurement system depends on the output voltage and the loading force, which is  FORMULA . Eq.5 shows that  FORMULA , as  FORMULA  is constant, the sensitivity will be very good as the cantilever beam is long, narrow, thin, high gauge factor and low Young's modulus. Assume the ambient temperature increases, the resistance of the two strain gauges increases, but the change in resistance over the strain gauge resistance does not change. From the Eq.4, as  FORMULA  is constant,  FORMULA  does not change, therefore, the output will not be affected by ambient temperature. The measured values of output voltage are within about  FORMULA  error compared with predicated values (Table 1). This is reasonable agreement. Furthermore, the errors show a tendency to increase with increasing loading force. The reason is that the electromagnetic interference becomes more and more serious as loading force is rising. <heading>Conclusions</heading>This experiment yields the following conclusions: The overall equation of output voltage against the loading force for the force sensor system, the loading force range for this Analogue Experimental Transducer is between 0 and 2.95N. Measured values of output voltage is within  FORMULA  error of predicated values, a result acceptable for all but the most carefully designed and executed experiments. Measured values of output voltage show the best agreement with predicted values at low loading force. That agreement decreases as the loading force increases, but this effect does not entirely explain the disparities. It indicates that the system is suitable for measuring low-level force. The ambient temperature does not affect the measured result. The uncertainty in the output voltage is the result of an error in zeroing the system when there is no loading force, then it may be possible to improve the accuracy by choosing a non-inverting amplifier with larger gain, but not exceeding 1000, and connecting a capacitor across the feedback resistor of the amplifier. 