<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The successful stories of different East Asian states are tended to be group together to form East Asian Development Models or theories by some scholar. Therefore the paper attempts to determine the relevance of these theories to the developmental experiences in two of East Asian States -- Hong Kong (HK) and Singapore Firstly, it explains the components of the theories of developmental states and finds the core elements of this theory. Then it tries to compare the feature of role of state in these two states instead of comparing the degree of state intervention. It describes how Hong Kong and Singapore government develop their economy under their faith in less intervention and government involvement respectively. It will be explained by using the theories This paper finally concludes that the theories can explain Hong Kong and Singapore's successful stories even though it has some mistake. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The economic developments of East Asian States were successful after 1950s. From 1965 to 1990, the average growth of GNP per capita in these states increased about five percent which is more than the amount in Latin America (about two percent).Some of the states including Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore can approach and enter into the high - income economies in the world. <fnote>World Bank, The East Asian miracle: economic growth and public policy (Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1993), pp.xvi&2 </fnote>Since these states have been growing in economy together, many scholars try to find the common feature of their successful experience in development and then develop as theories or models. This paper tries to find the theories of East Asian developmental state from different literatures. And then it focuses on the role of states theories, and finds the core elements of these theories. Many people always try to compare the successful stories in two of the East Asian States - Hong Kong and Singapore, since they are both small economies and have similar background. Therefore, this paper attempts to use the theories to explain their successful stories and determine whether the theories are relevance to their stories. <heading>Theories of East Asian Developmental States - The Role of states </heading>The successful stories of East Asian states can be explained by several ways including geography, history, culture and role of states. For the geography explanation, these states are proximity to the sea which can encourage the trade and investment with the outside world. If we take history into an account in the effect of the economic development, we can see that the cold war gave East Asia a chance to develop. During the cold war, the world was divided into two parts - Capitalist bloc (led by United States) and Socialist bloc (led by Soviet Union). In fact, the Asia-Pacific region had three socialist states including Soviet Union, China and North Korea in the 1950s .In order to prevent the spread of communism in East Asia, US gave the military and foreign aids (such as Japan), the chance of access to the world market (such as Singapore) to the East Asian States. In the cultural explanation, the hard-working of East Asian and close business relationship of the East Asian are helpful for its economic development. But if the geography, history and culture are the only explanations, other economies would have little to learn from successful stories of East Asia. So the theory or model of East Asian States can not be formed in this situation. But this is not the case from the experience of East Asian Development, since the role of government is also influential factor. Therefore, to find the theories of developmental states, the paper focuses on the economic policy formulated by the East Asian State. In fact, there are different interpretations of effect of the economic policy: <fnote>World Bank, The East Asian miracle, pp.81-84 </fnote><heading>Neo-Classical View</heading>The neo-classical view believes that the individual has economic rationality to pursuit their self interest, so the invisible hand of market can help the development of economy. In this interpretation, the limit of the government intervention and the market (including the enterprise) in the central position of economic development are the key of East Asia's success. Mackerras finds that 'every successful country (Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, Hong Kong, Japan) has relied upon on private enterprise and free market to achieve economic development'  <fnote>Colin Mackerras, Eastern Asia: an introductory history, (Melbourne: Longman Cheshire, 1992), pp.397-398 </fnote>In the economic relations (such as international trade and foreign investment) with the foreign countries, the neo-classical view uses the notion of comparative advantage to show that the relations are positive sum game. After getting the economic relations with the foreign countries, they will get some benefit such lower cost of national product from trade and raising capital from the foreign investment. Therefore, states should allow the foreign companies to access their national market, and free trade should be promoted. The successful East Asian state carried out free-trade by reducing the trade tariff (such as Japan and Hong Kong) and encouraged the foreign direct investment (such as Singapore). Haggards shows that the Latin American States (such as Brazil, Mexico) and East Asian States used different development strategic which can show their difference in the success of economic development. The former used the import - substitution strategy (more self-protected) is less successful than the latter the export-led strategy (less self-protected).  <fnote>Stephan Haggard., Pathways from the periphery: the politics of growth in the newly industrializing countries (Ithaca, N.Y. ; London : Cornell University Press, 1990), ch.2 </fnote><heading>Statist/ revisionist View</heading>The statist view was developed, because the neoclassical interpretation can not explain the existence of state intervention in the successful East Asia state. Mackerras finds that 'the weight of the government in the economy measured in terms of share of GDP in state enterprise is apparently greater in Taiwan and South Korea than in many Latin American countries'. <fnote>Mackerras, Eastern Asia: an introductory history, (1992), pp. 398 </fnote>The states played an important role in economic development, because they had power and resource to mobilize the different groups in achieving the developmental goal. For instance, 'Japan government invested in prioritized industries, gave incentives to encourage the establishment of corporations, and eliminated the pressure of International competition. ' <fnote>Andrew MacIntyre, 'Business, Government and Development: Northeast & Southeast Asian Comparsions', in Andrew MacIntyre (eds.), Business and government in industrialising Asia, (St. Leonards, NSW : Allen & Unwin, c1994), pp.6 </fnote>Matthews and Ravnehill argues that the export-led strategies adopted by some of East Asian States are a kind of state intervention. In order to push the export growth, the states targeted 'to strategic industries for special assistance on the basis on the basis of their perceived potential for promoting economic growth, rapid technological change and International Competitive." Therefore, the statist approach believes that the state intervention is important for economic development of East Asia <fnote>Trevor Matthews and John Ravenhill , 'Strategic Trade Policy: Northeast Asian Experience', in Andrew MacIntyre (eds.), Business and government in industrialising Asia, (St. Leonards, NSW : Allen & Unwin, c1994) </fnote><heading>Neo-classical View? Statist Approach? </heading>The theories will not be relevance to the experience of East Asian States, if we use either of the two interpretations of state intervention. Therefore instead of asking the extent of state intervention in the debate between the Neoclassical and Statist Approach, we should ask the 'quality' and 'kind' of intervention in answering the economic development in East Asia. <fnote>Mackerras, Eastern Asia: an introductory history, (1992), pp. 398 </fnote><fnote>Peter Evans, Embedded autonomy: states and industrial transformation (Princeton, N.J. : Princeton University Press, c1995), pp.12 </fnote><heading>State autonomy </heading>East Asian States and Latin American States both had the state intervention in the market. But the difference was the state behavior or attitude in the economic development. The latter was 'impartial predatory' and the former was 'developmental'. The core goal of East Asian state is to develop the economy. <fnote>Peter Evans, Embedded autonomy (1995), pp.12 </fnote>As the East Asian states are developmental, they didn't want to bias to certain group. They wanted to be the neutral bureaucrats. So they tried to be insulated and autonomous from the demand or pressure of the business group (especially the rent seeking group).But they still relies on the support from the business group in the development. Evans thinks that 'the states are embedded in concretes set of social ties that bind state to society and provide institutional channel for continual negotiation and re-negotiation of the goal and polices.' He described this state and society relationship as 'embedded autonomy'. Weiss has the similar argument and describes it as 'governed interdependence'. Therefore, the typical problem of state intervention in these states (such as rent seeking and corruption which are obstacle for national development) is less happened comparing with the other developing states. <fnote>loc. it. </fnote><fnote>Linda Weiss and John M. Hobson., States and economic development: a comparative historical analysis (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1995), pp.245 </fnote><heading>Shared growth policy </heading>East Asian states had the commitment to adopt shared growth policy during the developing process. Share growth policy is to equally distribute the fruit of growth to the public .Aoki, Murdock, and Okuno-Fujiwara think that this policy is the 'legitimizing objective of a neutral bureaucracy and its great achievement." During the development process, the neutral bureaucracy is very important for the state to achieve its legitimacy. Because if the fruit of growth is not equally distributed, the general public may think that the government is not fair to them. This may bring a lot of social unrest which are the obstacle to economic growth. Therefore, the shared growth policy including provision of education and welfare is also important to the economic development. <fnote>Aoki, Murdoch & Okuno-Fujiwara, 'The Marketing-Enhancing View', in Masahiko Aoki, Hyung-Ki Kim and Masahiro Okuno-Fujiwara (eds.), The role of government in East Asian economic development : comparative institutional analysis ,pp. 25 </fnote>The East Asian States have been successful in achieving shared growth. All of the Asian States increased in education expenditure in order to bring equal chance for the general public. Some states (such as Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan) carried out land reform by distributing the land to the peasant in order to stabilize the society. Therefore income distribution performance of East Asian states is better than the unsuccessful Latin American Countries. Between 1981 and 1990, the Gini Coefficient in the former is between 0.3 and 0.4, but the latter is more than 0.4. So the shared growth policy can also explain the successful of East Asian States. <fnote>World Bank, The East Asian Miracle, pp.74 </fnote><heading>Marktet Friendly/ Market Enhancing policy</heading>Another way to find the kind or quality of state policy is to combine the neoclassical and statist view. By getting the merits from both of them, we can find the policies which can help the successful development of East Asia states. In fact, the role of East Asian States can 'do less in those areas where market work and do more in those areas where markets cannot be relied upon.' And the World Bank describes it as 'Market-Friendly strategy'. Their role is limited to remedy market failure. They can 'facilitate the private-sector institution that overcomes the market and coordination failure due to the information asymmetry, incompleteness of market and limited of knowledge.' Aoki,Mudoch and Okuno-Fujiwara describe it as 'Market-Enhancing'  <fnote>World Bank, The East Asian miracle: economic growth and public policy (Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1993), pp.84 </fnote><fnote>Aoki, Murdoch & Okuno-Fujiwara, 'The Marketing-Enhancing View', (1997), pp.8-13 </fnote>To overcome the market failure, the states can use their strength in coordination and enough resources to 'ensure adequate investment in people (education), provision of a competitive climate for enterprise and openness of international trade and stable macroeconomic management ' The Latin America states were less successful comparing with East Asian because of their low and poor quality in investment in people, the closed international trade from import substitution strategy and instable management in inflation. <fnote>loc cit. </fnote>In the above elements, Evan elaborated the second elements -- provision of competitive climate for enterprise. Evan thinks the East Asian states are limited to be a 'midwife' and 'husbandry'. The role of midwife is to 'promote rather than policy the private groups by assisting the emergence of new entrepreneurial groups or inducing existing groups to venture more challenging kinds of production.' And the role of husbandry is to 'carry out research and development from simple signaling to something as complex as setting up state organization to take over risk complementary tasks." In fact, the states provide assistance to the business group including encouragement (midwife) and infrastructure (husbandry) in facing new challenge. <fnote>Peter Evans, Embedded autonomy (1995), pp.14 </fnote>To conclude, the market enhancing or market friendly strategy can be included the investment in education, provision of stable and open business environment, and the limited assistance of the business in facing new challenge. <heading>Flexible policy</heading>The last successful ingredient of the East Asia state is its flexible policy. The inconsistent of state intervention explained by the neo classical and statist view was happened in one country, because both of them only examine the intervention in the certain historical period. The degree of state intervention changes in different historical period. In fact, the East Asian states are flexible to change their intervention depending on the situation. For example, Japan decreased their highly selective intervention to exports from 1950s to 1980s in order to reduce the trade fiction with the countries such as United States. On the other hand, the unsuccessful Latin American states can be explained by its rigidity in changing the import-substitution strategy. Therefore, the theories of developmental states are the kind and quality of states intervention. The core characteristics of East Asian states are their embedded autonomy, and their shared growth, market enhancing or market-friendly and flexible states policy. The successful stories in two Asian economies - Hong Kong and Singapore - can also be explained by this theoretical framework. So the following sections show the characteristics of state intervention in HK and Singapore. <heading>The feature of role of state in Hong Kong and Singapore </heading>The Economic developments in Hong Kong and Singapore are so successful. Between 1950 and 1999, the GDP per capita in HK increased from $2218 (in Geary-Khamis dollars) to $20352 in 1999, while Singapore increased from $2219 to $23582. The GDP per capita in both economies increased about ten times within 50 years. So we can see that the explanations of their successful development are valuable to study. <fnote>Angus Maddison, The world economy : a millennial perspective, (Paris : Development Centre of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, c2001), pp.305 </fnote>As mentioned before, the successful stories can be explained by geography, history and culture. In the case of HK and Singapore, these factors can also explain the successl. In the geographical explanation, both countries have ready access to the sea, so they can easily get trade relationship with outside world. In the historical explanation, the Cold war gave them a chance to become strategic important location. They became the entrepot base. In 1951, at the peak of the Korean War, Hong Kong's trade was about three times that of its gross domestic product. In addition, the cold war gave HK a chance to develop tourism, HK became US naval military personnel leave centre because of this historical event. In the cultural explanations, both populations are predominately Chinese: comprising 98.5% in Hong Kong and 74.4 % in Singapore, cultural homogeneity can lead to the successful development .But these explanations are not useful to develop the developmental theories or models, since the other developing countries are difficult to change these factors. The developmental theories can be developed by the explanation of role of state in these two countries, since the countries can improve their state policy after learning this explanation. Thus, the paper focuses on the role of state in HK and Singapore. <fnote>Eileen Lim, 'A comparative study of industrialisation in Hong Kong and Singapore' (PhD dissertation, University of Sussex, 1971), pp.4 </fnote><fnote>Ibids, pp.2 </fnote><heading>The different extent in State intervention and its cause</heading>The difference between Hong Kong and Singapore is the extent of state intervention. Hong Kong is less role of government (state intervention), while Singapore is more. And this difference can be explained by the different historical background of state. <heading>Hong Kong</heading>Sir Philip Haddon-Cave, who was the HK financial secretary between 1971 and 1981, used the term 'positive non-intervention' to describe the government's believe in less state intervention. Because he thinks that 'the market force does effectively allocate mechanism. On the hand, the crucial role of government is to provide the stable framework of law and regulation and of fiscal and public expenditure practices.' The government strongly believed in the market which can effectively develop their economy because of some historical background.  <fnote>Howe, 'Growth, Public policy & HK's Economic Relationship with China', in John Ravenhill (eds), (Aldershot : E. Elgar Pub, 1995.), pp.521- 522 </fnote>In the early economic development in 1950s, Hong Kong did not need the state to give incentive to certain industries in order to develop their economy. Because, after the ruling of communist party in China in 1949, a large influx of refugee helped HK boost its economy. After the influx, the labor supply increased, and the economic active population increased to 57.4% % of total population in 1954. Apart from the labor supply, the influx of capital also increased. A lot of Shanghai capitalist (especially the textile capitalist) came to HK to build the light industry. <fnote>Eileen Lim, 'A comparative study of industrialisation in Hong Kong and Singapore', pp.34 </fnote>In addition, under the British Colonism, several large international enterprise such as HSBC, Jardine Matheson , and Swire group were well-developed before 1950. And on the other hand, the large foreign enterprises did not take away the capital from HK to their country. They still cared about HK's domestic interest. In 1960s, The HSBC bank gave the industrial and commercial support to the local enterprise such as Kowloon Wharf owned by Y.K.Pao. Therefore, the government did not worry about the lack of capital for economic development. <fnote>Howe, 'Growth, Public policy & HK's Economic Relationship with China', pp.520 </fnote>Yeung thinks that the less state intervention is caused by the British Colonism. 'The colonial state believed firmly in free trade and laissez-faire policies as encapsulated in neo-liberalism to serve the interests of their colonial masters and British capitalists'. The Hong Kong Bureaucrat was so conservative to carry out the significantly state intervention policy. Therefore, when Hong Kong faced the transformation from light industry to the high technology industry in late 1970s and early 1980s (caused by the restriction of textile export in Multi Fiber Agreement), the government only provided the basic infrastructure (such as building of industrial estate).On the other hand, when facing the same situation, the Singapore carry out strategy economic plan which included the investment in the business. By comparing with Singapore, Hong Kong is less in state intervention. <fnote>Henry W. C. Yeung., 'Neoliberalism, Laissez-Faire Capitalism and Economic Crisis: The Political Economy of Deindustrialization in Hong Kong' , Competition and Change , 4, 2, (2000), pp.133 </fnote><heading>Singapore </heading>Gong Keng Swee, who was the chief architect of the Singapore's economic development and former Minister of Finance in 1960s, believed that 'the state should formulate a set of coordinated government policies, mobilize savings and provide public goods to develop its economy.' Singapore leader believed in the government involvement because of another historical reason. <fnote>W.G.. Huff, 'The Developmental State, Government and Singapore's Economic Development since 1960', World Development, 22, (2000), pp.1433 </fnote>In 1960s, Singapore did not have the large influx of refugee which helped the economic development. Also they did not get the benefit from their hinterland (Malaysia) and neighbor countries (Indonesia) in the early development period (1960s) .In 1960s, the poor relationship between Singapore and Indonesia led to trade stoppage between two. And there was no free trade between Malaysia and Singapore between 1963 and 1965, because Malaysia wanted to protect its industries.  <fnote>Chew ECT and Lee E., A History of Singapore, (Oxford University Press: Hong Kong, 1991), pp.194 </fnote><fnote>R.S. Milne and Diane K. Mauzy, Singapore: the legacy of Lee Kuan Yew (Boulder: Westview Press, 1990), pp.131 </fnote>And Singapore faced the economic problem after the independence in late 1960s. As the withdrawal of British military, the job market in Singapore lost 38,000 place directly and indirectly. Unemployment was at a high rate of 13.5%. Thus, promoting economic development was necessary for job creation.  <fnote>Newman M. K. Lam, 'Government Intervention in the economy: a comparative analysis of Singapore and Hong Kong', Public Administration and Public Policy, 20, (2000), p. 397-421 </fnote>In addition, comparing with HK, the domestic private sector in Singapore was weak, and they were not able to help economic development. Therefore, establishment of state-owned enterprises and encouragement of the foreign capital was necessary in the Singapore condition. And state intervention was essential for Singapore's development. <fnote>Stephan Haggard., Pathways from the periphery: the politics of growth in the newly industrializing countries (Ithaca, N.Y. ; London : Cornell University Press, 1990), pp.101 </fnote>Until 1983, Singapore had 490 wholly or partially state owned enterprises (SOE). The state had major shareholding in such sectors as transportation (Singapore Airlines), petrol-chemicals, ship-repairing, shipping, engineering, construction and armaments. The state-owned enterprise can carry our some coordination work, while the market can't do it. The state own enterprises could effectively mobilize the private sector to increase national saving from $3220m in 1974 to $16543m in 1985. In fact, the high saving rate is one of successful element of economic development. So the 'visible hand' of SOE is beneficial for Singapore's economy. <fnote>W.G.. Huff, 'The Developmental State, Government and Singapore's Economic Development since 1960' (2000), pp.1428 </fnote><fnote>Jeffery Henderson, 'The Role of the State in the Economic Transformation of East Asia', in Chris Dixon and David Drakakis-Smith (eds.), Economic and social development in Pacific Asia (London : Routledge, 1993), pp.96 </fnote><fnote>I Jeffery Henderson., (1993), pp.1427 </fnote>To create good investment environment, Singapore had the heavy government intervention in weakening the labor movement. The government established the National Wage Council to control the labor bargaining power in 1971. In response to the transformation of industry, the Singapore government carried out the strategic economic plan in 1990s. The plan included the government participated in the joint venture and co-investment in some high technology sector.  <fnote>Chia Siow Yue, 'Singapore: Towards a knowledge-based Economy', in Seciichi Masuyama, Donna Vandenbrink, Chia Siouw Yue (eds.), Industrial restructuring in East Asia : towards the 21st century ,(Singapore : Institute of Southeast Asian Studies ; Tokyo : Nomura Research Institute, c2001), pp.181 </fnote>So, from the historical explanation, HK and Singapore had different degree of state intervention depending on their developmental needs. As long as the state intervention is beneficial to the economy, the high degree of state intervention is not a problem. The more important thing is how they do the state intervention. From the above explanation, we draw the conclusion to ask the kind and quality of state intervention instead of extent of state intervention in the East Asian States Developmental theory. So the kind and quality is more important to explain HK and Singapore's successful story. In the following section, the paper uses the above theoretical framework - state autonomy, and share growth, market enhancing, market friendly, and flexible state policy - to explain HK and Singapore's successful stories. The paper explains that these two countries succeed in the state autonomy. And then it explains how HK government and Singapore government develop economy under their faith in less state intervention and government involvement respectively. It will be explained by using the other theoretical components. <heading>Hong Kong and Singapore: Embedded Autonomy </heading>The bureaucrats in both Hong Kong and Singapore have the capacity to insulate the effect from the private sector. Since both countries had commitment to develop their economy, the bureaucrats did not allow any event such as rent-seeking and corruption to affect the fair competition in the market. Lee Kuan Yew, the founding father of modern Singapore, has the high commitment to his countries development. And he carried our many strict norms and rules in the countries, for example, ban chewing gum in order to maintain the city clean. Therefore, he did not allow anything such as corruption to "contaminate" his city. The legacy of British Colonism can also strengthen the capacity of the civil service in these two countries. The Britain left an independent civil service system to Hong Kong and Singapore. The civil service in these two countries is known as independence in terms of political and economical.UK also left the norm of high salaries in the civil service, the top-ranking official's salaries are as generous as the salaries of CEO in world's leading corporations. Therefore, the official does not easily get involved in the rent seeking activity or corruption. And the set up of powerful, permanent, and politically independent Anti-Corruption Agency has been found to be an effective strategy in both Hong Kong and Singapore. The Corruption Practices Investigation Bureau (CPIB) which is semi-secret organization was set up in Singapore, while the Independent Commission against Corruption (ICAC) was set up since 1974. <fnote>Shang, Ying, 'Curbing corruption: A comparative analysis of corruption control in Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan' (PhD dissertation, Harvard University, 2003), pp.6 </fnote>Both states are relatively strong, because they are not totally democratized. The states can maintain to be powerful without any 'democratic burden'. In Hong Kong, the governor was appointed by Queen of Great of Britain before 1997, and the Chief Executive is elected through the Chinese government controlled election after 1997.An the Hong Kong legislative council is formed from indirect election and is not powerful to alter the government's policy. The decision making is led by executive branch. In Singapore, the Party's Action Party has over 90 percent of total seat in the Singapore Legislative Branch for many years. The legacy of Lee Kuan Yew's leadership makes the executive branch to be powerful. And the society group is relatively weak in both states. In Hong Kong's colonial period , 'by selecting co-opting leading business and commercial elites into the governance process, the colonial succeed in absorbing conflicts of interest among people.' From the example of setting up National Wage Council, the Singapore government tried to control the labor union, so they can be autonomous from the pressure of the special interest groups. <fnote>Henry, 'Neoliberalism, Laissez-Faire Capitalism and Economic Crisis', pp.134 </fnote>Thus, we can see that these two countries have the autonomy from the business group or society and can effectively fight against rent-seeking activities and corruption. <heading>HK still has some state intervention</heading>Similar with Singapore, Hong Kong had some economy policy which subsidized to certain sector. This economic policy is always related to the welfare or public goods such as welfare public housing, education, and infrastructure, so many people misunderstand that Hong Kong does not have state intervention .The kind of policy is called as socio-economic policy. Between 1950s and 1960s, Hong Kong and Singapore started to welfare public housing to stabilize their economic environment .Due to their small geographical size, both Hong Kong and Singapore had the lack of land problem which caused the high land prices. But at the same time, the poverty problem existed in the early economic development. In Hong Kong, the influx of refugees caused that the labor supply was greater than demand, so the unemployment problem worsened in the 1950s. In Singapore, the UK military withdrawal resulted in high unemployment in 1960s. The low income labor is difficult to afford the high land prices. In order to eliminate the possibility of social unrest caused by this kind of poverty problem, these two states provided the shared growth policy -- welfare public housing problem. Therefore these states heavily subsidized in the public housing. In Hong Kong, state owned the land which allowed the state to engage in massive welfare expenditure. By 1987, more than 40 percent of population lived in public housing in Hong Kong. By 1993, 80 percent of the Singapore population lived in public housing provided by the Housing Development Board owned by the government. After having this housing policy (shared growth policy), the societies were more stable in these two countries. These countries do not have any violent social unrest related to the inequality problem. <fnote>Jeffery Henderson, 'The Role of the State in the Economic Transformation of East Asia', (1993), pp.100 </fnote><fnote>World Bank, The East Asian miracle, (1993), pp.163 </fnote>At the same time, the low - cost housing for workers helped to hold down wage demand. This brought the stability in the inflation rate in these two countries. Therefore, the housing policy was also a kind of stable economic management. The other kind of state intervention is the public goods such as education and infrastructure. Hong Kong and Singapore government increased the education and infrastructure expenditure, when the economy transformed from low skill-industry to high-skill industry. In fact, the transformation is changing rapidly and unpredictably during the developmental period. These two countries faced the increasing competition after the rise of other East Asian States (especially China) in late 1970s and 1980s. In fact, China has the competitive advantage of low labor product cost, so the attractiveness of Hong Kong and Singapore's manufacturing goods decreased in this time. At the same time, Multi - Fiber Agreement imposed by US restrict their amount of textile product. So, in order to keep the growth, they started to change to the more high-skill industry such as high-technology But since the transformation of market was so quick, the general publics can not easily response to the change. The general publics can not easily get the enough skills, knowledge and resource to face this new challenge. Therefore, the states can do the market-enhancing strategy by assisting the public (especially the business) to face the new challenge. They can increase the education and infrastructure expenditure to help the general publics. The provision of education helped the labor and capitalist get enough skills and resources, and the provision of infrastructure (such as the building high technology facilities) helped the capitalists to transform their industries. So when facing the transformation to high tech and knowledge-based economy, both Hong Kong and Singapore government increased the expenditure in the education and infrastructure. Starting from 1980s, Hong Kong government set up Industrial Development Board, increased amount of loan to the technical and tertiary education, and they built several industrial estates to support industrialization. When facing the similar situation, the Singapore did more than that. As mentioned before, they participated in the investment in the high technology industry. <fnote>Howe, 'Growth, Public policy & HK's Economic Relationship with China', in John Ravenhill (1995.), pp.79 </fnote>On the other hand, the provision of infrastructure can provide competitive climate for enterprise, since the superb infrastructure can attract the foreign direct investment. For example, in order to encourage the foreign direct investment, the Hong Kong and Singapore built the ports, airport, roads, telecommunications and a mass transit system. Apart from socio economic policy, Hong Kong has other kind of intervention which shows that Hong Kong economic policy is flexible to change depending on situation. Hong Kong dollar and stock market is vulnerable from some external event. In 1982, Sino-British negotiation caused the anxiety in public which sent both Hong Kong dollar and Stock Market Index to a crashing dive. In order to remedy this market failure, the government intervened in the stock and money markets by linking Hong Kong dollar to US dollar. This has since brought the stability to the Hong Kong economy, especially in the protecting economy against the effect of Tiananmen Square Event in 1989. When facing the speculator attack in financial crisis in 1998, Hong Kong government also intervened by using its foreign reserve to defends against the attack. After financial crisis, Hong Kong faced a long economic recession period. In order to recover the economy, the government used the public fund to build the Disneyland Park. <fnote>Peter Ferdinand, 'Hong Kong and the currency board system - A model for a globalizing World?', in Robert Ash, Peter Ferdinand, Brian Hook & Robin Porter (eds.), Hong Kong in Transition: one country, two systems, (London ; New York : RoutledgeCurzon, 2003), pp.62 </fnote>Since the Hong Kong government strongly believed in 'positive non intervention', they tried to limit the state intervention. But when their economy encountered some problem caused by market failure (such as the quick industrial transformation or the speculator attack), they tended to do the market-enhancing strategy. And their policy was also flexible to change to more intervention <heading>Singapore is open and market-oriented policy </heading>Many people think that the state intervention is equal to protectionist. Since the high state intervention will give the state more chance to control the number of foreign capital in order to protect its local capital. And many people think that the state interventions lose the economic freedom in the state. Since when the state intervene in the market, they try to control the activities of the certain industry for the sake of following its economic plan. But these two conclusions are not true for the Singapore's situation. For the first question, it can be explained by Singapore's desire. Since Singapore is small in geographical size which is lack of resources, they have to rely on the foreign capital to build up its economy. And its small size also cause that the agricultural sector is not influential to resist the transformation. So, Singapore does not have incentive to resist the foreign capital, Rather, they do more in those areas where markets cannot be relied upon to encourage the engagement of foreign capital in their development, they carry out the market- friendly strategy which are openness to international trade and foreign direct investment. There is no tariff (except food commodities) in the Singapore. To encourage the foreign direct investment, they gave some fiscal incentives such as tax holidays and accelerated depreciation allowance, ready-to-move into factory sites and a range of development expenditure including training and education effectively acted as subsidies to foreign direct investment.On the other hand, HK also do the similar kind of things to attract foreign capital. For the second question, the result of index of Economic freedom carried out by Heritage Foundation/Wall Street Journal can show the answer. Singapore kept to be in second place from 1995 to 2006 (Hong Kong is in 1 st place) in this index. The Heritage foundation defined Economic freedom as 'the absence of government coercion or constraint on the production, distribution, or consumption of goods and services beyond the extent necessary for citizens to protect and maintain liberty itself. In other words, people are free to work, produce, consume, and invest in the ways they feel are most productive.' The index found that Singapore is less in coercion or constraint on the economic activities. Because Singapore has 'good commercial law and the efficient way police handle nonpolitical crimes'  <fnote>Heritage Foundation/Wall Street Journal, Index of Economic Freedom 2006,  URL  Assessed on 09/02/2006 </fnote>Therefore, from the Singapore's experience, its legal system is essential can constrain the state intervention. The state intervention is not a great problem, the most important thing is the effective and fair legal system provided by government. And on the other hand, Singapore can adjust their degree of intervention, if they think that it caused some problem to its economy. In the first half of 1980, Singapore faced the' problem of over-regulation, high company tax rate, rising statutory charges, and a high Central Provident Fund contribution rate'. So the government has adopted some policies to 'reduce its direct involvement in the economy and has switched to a new emphasis of managing the economy through partnerships with business and labor.' ' The enterprise started to privatize rapidly in 1985, and the number of contribution of state-owned enterprise to GDP reduced to less than 10% in 1995." After this adjustment, the economy of Singapore rebounded in 1988. <fnote>Newman M. K. Lam, 'Government Intervention in the economy: a comparative analysis of Singapore and Hong Kong', pp. 404 </fnote><fnote>W.G.. Huff, 'The Developmental State, Government and Singapore's Economic Development since 1960', World Development, 22, (2000), pp.1429 </fnote>Singapore's economy policy can be described as 'planning market-oriented interventionism'. According to Huff, the planning in Singapore never involved in detailed blueprints, because of priority accorded to reaction to the international market, impossibility of predicting its course and need for flexibility to ensure a quick and competitive response. To conclude, since Singapore started the state intervention at the early development, they tended to remedy the problem of state intervention, and make the intervention more market-oriented. And they will reduce the state intervention flexibly, if they think that the excessive state intervention is the root of economic recession. <fnote>Ibid. pp. 1433 </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>The theories of developmental state (including embedded autonomy, and shared growth, market-friendly and flexible policy) are relevant to explain the successful stories in Hong Kong and Singapore. The embedded autonomy in HK and Singapore can explain that these states can prevent rent-seeking activities. The theories of shared growth, market-friendly and flexible policy can explain that Hong Kong government intervened in the housing and stock market under the faith in "positive non-intervention". And the theories of market-friendly and flexible policy can describe that Singapore government reduced the state intervention under its faith in the government involvement. But the theories still have some problem. Some of the components in the market friendly strategy (including ensure adequate investment in people, provision of a competitive climate for enterprise and openness of international trade and stable macroeconomic management) are too vague. The stable macroeconomic management is a way of the provision of a competitive for enterprise. In fact, the provision of a competitive climate for enterprise can be interpreted in many ways. Although the market friendly strategy fairly explains the HK and Singapore, it can't explain Japan which is still not openness of international trade. If the study is expanded into more than two countries, the theories will get the same problem with the neo-classical or statist view which can't reflect the reality. But, overall, the theories are relevance to Hong Kong and Singapore's situation. Different countries have different historical background. According to Path dependency theory, outcome of a process depends on its past history .So it is difficult to greatly change Hong Kong and Singapore in the faith in less intervention and government involvement respectively because of their historical background. But their economies are still successful, since the degree of intervention is not a key factor to affect the economy. The more important thing is how the state intervenes. From the Singapore experience, the government intervened in market oriented way. And then they adjusted and reduced the government intervention according to the situation. The other developing countries which wanted to follow the model of Singapore or Hong Kong should consider their background. When they follow a certain degree of intervention, they should be flexible to adjust it. To conclude, the successful stories in East Asia are worthy studying. But when other countries want to copy from them, they should consider their own situation first. 