<heading>Introduction</heading>CFS Insurance was formed in late 1890s, since then the company have expanded its range of services to remain competitive in market and providing better service to its customers. The operation Director has proposed re-structuring of company's operations department to provide better customer service and building close working relationship with High Street Agents. The purpose of this document is to present to the Board of Directors the broad plans for the implementation of the changes expressed by the Director. The document details the project plan, the approach for the re-structuring and evaluating the risks involved. <heading>Project Stakeholders</heading><list><heading> Key Project Stakeholders</heading>Managing DirectorOperations DirectorOperation Development TeamEmployeesHigh Street AgentsTrade Unions.</list>The stake/interest of the stakeholders depends largely upon their involvement in the project life cycle and the impact it would make on their current working style. <table/><heading>Stakeholder Management</heading>Stakeholder management refers to managing communication to satisfy the needs of, and resolve issues with, project stakeholders. Actively managing stakeholders increase the likelihood that project will not veer off track due to unresolved stakeholder issues. Different stakeholders will be managed in different ways depending upon their interest and impact over the project. Consultation and Negotiation on various issues with employees and trade unions through face-to-face meetings. When face-to-face meetings are not warranted or practical, telephone calls, electronic mails and other electronic tools will be used for exchanging information and dialoguing. Regular project review meetings so that key stakeholders assessment are an integral part of the project. This involves the Operations team and Operation Director, who will be meeting regularly in order to attain success. Maintaining close contact with the key stakeholders such as trade unions, employees to improve chance of determining stakeholder perception of the project. Providing on going, up-to-date status report to the Managing Director for use in developing and implementing of strategy. Ensure an explicit evaluation of probable stakeholders response to major project decision. Hotline numbers where stakeholder could call and ask queries relating to the project. <heading>Proposed Aim</heading>To remain competitive, profitable and reduce operational cost by re-structuring the company's operational department through creating multi-purpose teams; increasing flexibility among employees and providing Internet links to high streets agents to build closer working relationship. <heading>Proposed Objectives</heading><heading>Implementation Objectives:</heading>Objective 1: Type: Simple Description: Re-organise operation department into 10 teams each focussing on one geographic location Evaluation: Confirmation at the end that the objective has been achieved. Objective 2: Type: Quantitative Description: Identification of the specific needs of various geographic segments with regard to customer needs. Evaluation: Have a focus group that confirms that all needs have been identified. Objective 3: Type: Qualitative Description: Appoint team leader for each team who strive for consensus. Evaluation: Face-to-face interview with team leader and review their performance. Objective 4: Type: Simple Description: Install software to allow Internet communication with high street agents. Evaluation: Confirmation at the end that the objective has been achieved. <heading>Operation Objectives:</heading>Within 12 months, Objective 5: Type: Quantitative Description: To have reduced operation cost by X%. Evaluation: Set the initial target and compare the variance either adverse or favourable after every 3 months to make future predictions. Objective 6: Type: Quantitative Description: To have increased sales turnover by X%. Evaluation: After 6 months compare with last year financial reports and see the % increase to evaluate if the objective could be achieved or require action. Objective 7: Type: Qualitative Description: To have X% increases in number of insurance taken by each customer. Evaluation: Obtain figures of total number of insurances issued and compared at the end with new number. Objective 8: Type: Quantitative Description: To have all staff members able to deal with types of insurances except life. Evaluation: Mystery Shopper: A person appointed to deal with staff members for various insurances and evaluate their performance. Objective 9: Type: Quantitative & Qualitative Description: To have X% staff feels part of strong cohesive teams. Evaluation: Carry out survey for the staff affected by operational change and get views. <heading>Project Risks</heading><heading>Introduction:</heading>Project risks are uncertainties that threaten the goals and timetables of a project. When these uncertainties occur they can delay deliverable dates and cause possible budget overage that can undermine the confidence in the project and its leader. To identify the risks I have adopted the Failure Mode and Effects approach because of its natural way of expressing events. The probability of each uncertainty and level of impact occurring has been estimated on an arbitrary scale of 1-10. <table/><heading>Risk Management Strategy</heading>Risk Management is a process of the identification, measurement, and control and financing of risks, which threaten the existence, the reputation, assets or the personnel of an organisation or the services, it provides. <table/><table/>Risk 1: Mitigate and Share Outsourcing the software development activity of the project could reduce the risk. Good management skills would be needed to manage the control. If risk appears in the future it could be shared between both the companies hence reducing the overall impact on the company. Risk 2: Mitigate and Share The probability of risk could be reduced by putting extra time and cost in providing extensive training to the staff members to handle various types of insurances also taking into consideration their concerns. External trainers could be recruited if required to provide excellent training to employees after pilot phase evaluation. Risk 3: Mitigate and Allow Reduce the risk by having strong firewall and anti-virus software's meant to keep the data safe from outside interference. Risk 4: Mitigate and Allow Consulting them and negotiating on issues concerning them could mitigate the risk of trade unions having unhealthy attitude toward re-structuring. The process has been discussed in details under the project implementation strategy. Risk 5: Mitigate and Allow Putting extra time and effort in involving employees through out the complete process in order to motivate and gain commitment could reduce the risk. Establish hotlines to counter the spread of rumors. Make presentations; hold enterprise wide meetings and ensuring that top managing is accessible to quickly address concerns. <heading>Project Implementation Strategy </heading><heading>Introduction</heading>The project implementation strategy discusses various key strategic issues that were required to be considered in the project. The key strategy variables are discussed below: <heading>1. Pace of Change</heading>The speed with which the change is implemented depends mainly on two factors: Urgency of situation and responsiveness of the organisation to change. The situation is not an urgent situation and the general response of the employees toward re-structuring has not been very positive. Having a high pace change means reducing the involvement and empowering of employees that could lead to difficulties in future. A medium pace would be ideal in this situation where issues concerning employees can be taken into consideration and re-structure in a way that it's easy for everyone to adapt to the change. The project is expected to span over a period of 12 months. <heading>2. Pilot Phase</heading>When there is uncertainty about the value of project or about the way it is carried out, it's always a best practice to have some form of exploratory stage, which will help in reducing uncertainty. At the same time it has disadvantage of adding complexity and disruption to the project. In this project Pilot phase seems essential knowing the employees attitude and introducing of things that haven't been practice before. The team has recommended carrying out pilot phase by creating one multi-purpose team and providing them all necessary training to deal with various insurances. The performance of the team would be evaluated after every fortnight for period of two months. This would help in understanding any uncertainties that might crop up in future while reviewing the project after pilot phase. <heading>3. Pattern of Activities</heading><figure/>The pilot phase has serial relationship with All other activities, as it would be best to first execute the pilot phase and see the results and then carry out all other activities in parallel helping reduce time. <table/><heading>4. Implementation pattern</heading>For implementation I have chosen Progressive approach with vertical slices because of better control, time minimisation and better employees involvement. So progressively 10 teams would be created giving better and smooth control over the actions. <heading>5. Degree of empowerment</heading>There is widespread need to get the maximum commitment from employees. Various methods can be used to involve employees while making decisions through some would involve selling the idea and some negotiating and consulting. 1. Feedback Box - Providing opportunity to the members to express their views and ideas. 2. Question and Answers Session with the Operations Director and team to bring clear view of the aim and objectives of the project and answering any of employees concerns. 3. News Letters - Periodic newsletters providing up-to-date information regarding project. 4. Presentations: Where the team would tell about the new systems in details and consult people and similar for implementation of the systems. <heading>6. Support for Employees</heading>Continuous support for the employees is essential for increasing the prospect of successful change. The employees would be trained in groups to deal with various insurances except life and training of using software for communicating with the high street agents. It would be decided after the pilot phase if the training team is capable of training the employees to deal with all insurance except life or external trainers would be required to carry out the task. <heading>7. Trade unions involvement</heading>Trade unions in most cases are concerned with issues such as overtime, job looses, job description, salary etc. The best suitable way to involve them is through negotiation and consultation where trade unions will be told of the intentions behind the change and taking their feedback and negotiating on issues concerning the trade unions about employees. This would help in maintaining positive and good relationship with the trade unions. <heading>8. Project Team</heading>The team has divided the project into 5 various work packages. The package has been divided on the basis of different activities, which need to be carried out in the project. <figure/><heading>8. Strategic control. </heading>The Operation Director will exercise strategic control of the project as different key points in the project. The project has been divided into time and work based system. Since there is combination of serial and parallel approach in the project it could be difficult to control. If there are any uncertainties felt in the project, some of the critical activities such as training could be started ahead of formal approval for the stage of which it forms the part. <heading>Contract Strategy</heading>It's been decided to out-source the software development part of the project to some external contract. This would involve managing the contract and making sure that the software is installed on time without any delays. It would include having one contract manager who would look after the complete contract including communication with the contractors on company's behalf. <heading>System for planning and control of progress</heading>The project planning starts with division of project into activities, followed by estimation of their duration. Network analysis method seems more beneficial as compared to Gantt chart as it offers extensive information about time control and it also adds logic and analysis capabilities, which Gantt chart lacks. Control project and planning is exercised at more than one level: <heading>Strategic Planning and Control</heading>This is concerned with the top level management with includes company's Operation Director and Managing Director. The Operations Director has control on the overall implementation strategy and cost issuing. <heading>Operational Planning and Control</heading>This control concerns the project manager and the team that includes the Operation Team. The team will ensure that all are actions are successfully implemented and also keeping the project stakeholders informed regarding the project through project meetings. <heading>3. Day-to-day planning and Control </heading>Involving all the employees who work would be transformed and come under re-structuring including the IT Team who would be developing the software. <heading>Review Meetings</heading>Review meetings are regularly scheduled events to exchange information about the project. The Operations Director and Operation team plans to meet weekly to discuss all the issues relating to the project and providing project progress reports for future reference. Monthly meetings could be conducted with the trade unions so they have full updated information of about project progress. Weekly targeted meetings will be conducted with those carrying out the work so that everyone knows the progress of project and the expectations. Quarterly meetings will be conducted for finance with the key and high-level stakeholders to raise and discuss issues regarding the cost and control over the budget for the project. <heading>System for planning and control of expenditure </heading>The first decision for financial planning and control is to establish what parameters will be planned and monitored. Parameters for financial Planning and Control: 1. Cost: Taking cost as main parameter also makes it possible to make sensible comparison between cost incurrent and earned value. 2. Earned Value: The value of work completed will allow useful analysis in comparison with the cost. The earned value can be measured at any time with the Gantt chart where the progress of each activity is recorded for information and evaluation purpose. Commitment: This refers to commitment taken in the project that would entail the project in future cost. <heading>Planning and Control with Complex System</heading>The complex model is same as the time based system, except that a breakdown in work packages is carried out. Control is as for the time-based system, but it is exercised for each work package and over all project, this is beneficial as it's a long project and there is division of responsibility for different work packages. Also it gives us the information about how well we are doing in the project and if we are ahead or behind the schedule. It holds greater benefits as compared to work based model which only provides how well you did in work package but not how we are doing over all. This approach provides a lot of information regarding the project and future forecast. With Reference budget we will also be able to tell if we are over or behind the schedule. It would also provide us information of various variances that holds important information regarding project progress and cost such as: <list>Current Cost VarianceFuture VarianceSchedule VarianceEfficiency Variance</list>Reviewing the budget at end of pilot phase would be beneficial as where there could be possibility of bringing changes and knowing other key possibilities. The over all project control will be exercised by the project manager where as the work packages responsibilities will be taken by managers handling each package. Since the project would be controlled at various time intervals and work packages it would provide over all strong control over the finances and also forecasting of any deviation from the expected results by knowing the earned value of the project and comparing it with the expected cost. <figure/>In this model the financial measure of schedule performance is measured from the ratio of earned value to budget cost of work scheduled. <heading>Conclusion </heading>After carefully considering all the aspects of the projects, it is certain that the project could bring tremendous change in company's success by reducing various costs and increasing company's profits. The project is expected to span over period of 12 months. May be presently the employees are not very keen on this transformation but the team strongly believe with good management and involvement it would be able to gain all the confidence of the employees. <heading>Annex: Risk Management </heading>Project risk management includes the processes concerned with conducting risk management planning, identification, analysis, responses and monitoring and control on the project. The objective is to increase probability of positive events and reduce the probability of events having adverse effects on the project. In order to carry out the project I choose Failure Mode and Effect method and dividing the complete process into six different parts to have better control and understanding of risks involved. Risk Management Planning - Deciding upon how to approach, plan and execute the risk management activities for the project. Risk Identification - Determining which risks might affect the project and demonstrating their characteristics. Qualitative Risk Analysis - Prioritising risks for subsequent further analysis or action by accessing and combining their probability of occurrence and impact. Quantitative Risk Analysis - Numerically analysing the effect on overall project. Risk Response Planning - Developing options and actions to enhance the opportunity and to reduce treat to project objectives. Risk monitoring and control - Tracking identified risks, monitoring residual risks, identify new risks, executing risk response plans and evaluating their effectiveness through out the project cycle. All these six steps give extensive information about various risks involved in the project. The Failure Mode and Effect method benefits from Cause and Effect approach in many ways such as provides a well-documented record of improvements from corrective actions implemented and also its natural way of expressing risks and its probability. The risk management strategy provides idea of mitigating the risk through either sharing or simply allowing the risk to occur. <heading>Financial Control</heading>Performance Measurement Analysis: It helps to assess the magnitude of any variance that will invariably occur. The earned value technique compare the cumulative value of the budgeted cost of work performed at the original allocated budget amount to both the budgeted cost of work scheduled and to actual cost of work performed. The technique would be very beneficial in the project for cost control, resource management and production. An important part of cost control will be to determine the cause of variance, the magnitude of the variance and to decide if the variance requires corrective action. This technique involves developing these key values for each scheduled work package: 1. Planned Value: It is the budgeted cost for the work scheduled to be completed on a work based package component up to a given point in time. Earned Value: It is the budgeted amount for the work actually completed on the schedule work based package component during a given time period. Actual Cost: It is the total cost incurrent in accomplishing work on a scheduled WBS component during a given time period. The Planned Value, Estimated Value and Actual cost values will be used in combination to provide performance measures of whether or not work is accomplished as planned at any given point of time. The most commonly used measures are cost variance and schedule variance. The amount of variance of the CV and SV values tends to decrease as the project reach the completion due to the compensation effect of more work being accomplished. Forecasting about future of the project is very essential for project success, as it would decrease the uncertainties that could be faced in future. This would include making estimated of conditions in the project's future based on information and knowledge available at the time of the forecast. It would be generated, updated and reissued based on work performance information provided as the project is executed and progressed. 