In attempting to write about Robert Musil's encyclopedic novel The Man Without Qualities (Der Mann ohne Eigenshaften), one quickly begins to feel like a commentator without confidence. In some 1600 pages of published material, representing barely more than half of its projected size, Musil's unfinished work presents the reader with an incredibly complex and highly philosophical contribution to modern literature. Written over a period of two decades, the book reflects Musil's own philosophical and spiritual ambitions, offered in the story of its hero, Ulrich. The setting is Vienna, in the year just prior to the commencing of World War I. An iconic picture of the modern world, a wide cast of characters surrounded by the accelerating advances of impersonal technology variously respond to the apparent lack of a meaningful principle by which they can anchor their lives. Ulrich, a gifted man of remarkable intelligence, but mirroring the formlessness of the world around him, finds himself completely removed from any definite construction of his own identity, and so exists as the man without qualities. Setting aside his career as a mathematician, he decides to take a 'leave from life' (Urlaub vom Leben) for one year in order to determine that which modern man has lost: the right way of living. <fnote>Musil, Robert. The Man Without Qualities, Eithne Wilkins and Ernst Kaiser (tr.), London, Picador, 1979. References will be cited as MWQ, followed first by the volume number, then the page number. </fnote>With the eventual reunion with his estranged sister Agathe, Ulrich begins to uncover the true meaning of morality in a mystical state simply called the 'Other Condition'. It is in the unfinished and highly elusive elaboration of this Other Condition that we are offered a glimpse at Ulrich's (and Musil's) utopian vision. But although Musil's death prevented the publication of the sections that would deal most directly with the exact nature of this Condition and the revolutionary morality it could give rise to, the richness of the finished prose allows for a great deal to be argued for convincingly. This is in part because beyond the positive characterizations that we find almost exclusively in the third book of the novel, the reader can - from the very beginning - be instructed by the powerful negative current of brilliant satire and irony which Musil employs in order to vividly portray how not to live. What I want to suggest is that despite the ultimately speculative character of any account of what Musil's mysticism would truly be like and what kind of work it would do, there are interesting and valuable insights to be gained through an analysis of those 'characters gone wrong' with which Ulrich interacts. Now, to take a careful look at each and every 'character gone wrong' would be an endeavour far too lengthy to attempt within the space of the present essay; the victims of Musil's satirizing are many indeed. The focus must be narrowed to those which allow for the most specific and detailed comparisons and contrasts to be made. In what follows I will attempt to clarify some of the crucial elements of Ulrich's mystical experiences through a study of two secondary but vital characters: Moosbrugger and Clarisse. By noting the way in which they and Ulrich are described by Musil as undergoing an abnormal relationship with the space of their own bodies and the world surrounding them, the way to a deeper understanding of what Musil was intending with the Other Condition is made available to us. The problem of congruency between interior and exterior experience is introduced early on. We meet Ulrich in the second chapter, as he stands alone, separated by the glass of his window, gazing out into the street and its many bustling forms. Not only does his physical position relative to the city introduce a divide, but his playful exercise in attempting to bring into mathematical terms all that happens outside, "trying to calculate the incalculable," highlights the incompatibility between the personal world and the social world. Later, facing a group of violent men in an alley, Ulrich reflects: <fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 7. </fnote><quote>A great many people today feel themselves regrettably at loggerheads with a great many other people [...] After all, each thing exists only by virtue of its limitations, in other words, by virtue of a more or less hostile act against its environment: without the Pope there would have been no Luther, and without the heathens, no Pope, and so it cannot be denied that man's most deeply felt association with his fellow-men consists in dissociation from them. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 24. </fnote>Beyond this basic opposition among individuals, Musil also thematizes the conflict arising between reason and emotion, or logic and intuition, or the abstract and the practical. However, not being satisfied with merely lamenting the growing divide between the individual and its supposedly meaningful involvement in the social whole, Musil offers, with the Other Condition, the possibility of a synthesis of the two spheres. It attempts a "recovery of a suppressed half of the self". A mystical state in which moral intuitions are discovered, morality being the ultimate fusion of thinking and doing, the Other Condition is persistently described in terms of the transgressing or re-orientation of the boundaries between inside and outside. Although Ulrich's early experiences of this state are vague and unexpected, the idea of the alteration of space is already present. In a reflective mood after an intense conversation with Clarisse, Ulrich rides the tram home: <fnote>Luft, David S. Robert Musil and the Crisis of European Culture 1880-1942, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1980, p. 179. </fnote><fnote>Paulson, Robert M. Robert Musil and the Ineffable: Hieroglyph, Myth, Fairy Tale and Sign, Verlag Hans-Dieter Heinz, Stuttgart, 1982, p. 12. </fnote><quote>He shifted in his seat and considered the reflection of his face in the window-pane opposite, in order to distract his thoughts. But what happened after a while was that his head, floating there in the fluid glass, became wonderfully insistent somewhere half-way between the interior and the exterior of things, demanding some kind of completion. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 67. </fnote>It is the third book of the novel, however, where Ulrich's reflections are inspired by the growing intimacy with his sister, that the Other Condition is articulated with greater focus and self-awareness. He finally becomes aware what the real target of his life experiment is: "on this frontier between what goes on inside us and what goes on outside there's some communicating link missing nowadays, and the two spheres only transform into each other with enormous losses in the process". Ulrich describes the state to Agathe: <fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 89. </fnote><quote>One is linked with everything and at the same time can't get right to anything. There you are on the one side, and the world on the other, over-individuality and over-objectivity, but all almost agonizingly clear, and what at once separates and unites these generally fused elements is a dazzling darkness, an overbrimming and an extinction, a swinging in and out. You float like a fish in the water or the bird in the air, but there simply is no bank and no branch and nothing but this floating! </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 99-100. </fnote>That the Other Condition is illustrated by Musil in terms of these strange spatial experiences is interesting in its own right. What is even more interesting, and perhaps more valuable with respect to the explanatory work it can do, is the fact that Clarisse and Moosbrugger, both highly deviant from Ulrich and the synthesis he is trying to effect, each have experiences which are described by Musil in just the same way as what Ulrich undergoes in fleeting glimpses of the Other Condition. Being united in this way, we can, with close attention to what is problematic about Musil's two 'mystical counterexamples,' get a clearer picture of what the mystical experience of the Other Condition is actually like. Before our discussion of the Other Condition can begin in earnest, it is important to take note first of the nature of the peculiar experiences had by Moosbrugger and Clarisse. Hence we turn to a brief account of each character, along with the textual evidence needed to confirm the parallels with Ulrich's mystical experiences. Christian Moosbrugger is a man whose appearance betrays his character. Large, broad-shouldered and exceedingly strong, with "harmless-looking great fists", he has to the onlooker a good-natured and kindly face, and gives off an aura of innocence and goodness. But in fact Moosbrugger is anything but harmless. Having brutally murdered a prostitute, the latest of numerous past violent acts, he sits in prison, waiting while the legal authorities try to determine whether he is mad or sane, and thus, either responsible for his crime or not. Despite the legal dispute that various jurists engage in regarding the technical details of criminal responsibility, it is obvious that Moosbrugger is quite abnormal mentally. Having been raised in absolute poverty, with little to no education, he drifts from place to place working as a carpenter. But it is not only the temporary nature of his work that causes him to stay on the move. His severe mental instability and paranoia cause him eventually to flee from whatever place he finds himself in, and occasionally the authorities in addition. To his own mind, he is not willfully destructive, but is the victim of "an irresistible urge [that] from time to time cruelly turned his personality inside-out [...] he was seized by an uncanny feeling as though he were not quite firmly fixed inside his own skin". As Musil describes, Moosbrugger's condition is one in which inside and outside indiscriminately mix and double themselves: <fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 74. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 78-80. </fnote><quote>He would hear voices or music or a blowing and buzzing, also a whizzing and rattling, or shooting, thundering, laughing, shouting, talking and whispering. It came from everywhere at once; it was in the walls, in the air, in his clothes and in his body [...] Often he could not have exactly described what he saw, heard and felt; all the same, he knew what it was. It was sometimes very blurred. The visions came from outside, but at the same time a glimmer of observation told him that they nevertheless came out of himself. The important point was that it was not in the least important whether something was outside or inside: for him it was like clear water on both sides of a transparent glass wall [...] He thought better than other people, because he thought outside and inside. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 283-4. </fnote>In him the ability to distinguish between inside and outside is almost completely absent. Not only do the visions and voices have this double quality, but Moosbrugger's very person flows past the boundary: "now almost all the time he had the feeling of being spread out like a big twinkling pool that nothing could disturb [...] the table was Moosbrugger. The chair was Moosbrugger. The barred window and the bolted door were himself". At a frightening and pathological level, he is affected by a peculiar unity of being: <fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 111-2. </fnote><quote>It is probably easy enough to imagine human life flowing along like a stream; but the movement that Moosbrugger was aware of in his life was like a stream flowing through a large quiet lake. Flowing insistently onwards, it was also one with what was behind it, and the actual course of life almost disappeared in it all. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 281. </fnote>Unlike Moosbrugger's almost exclusive appearance in isolated chapters, where the strange and fascinating world of his thoughts is revealed, Clarisse interacts directly with Ulrich and several others. She is the wife of Ulrich's childhood friend Walter. A small-bodied but almost unfeminine woman, several years younger than both Walter and Ulrich, she is decisive, independent, obsessed with 'great ideas,' and holds silent power over her more docile husband. Her dark intensity and often cryptic exclamations lend her the quality of a woman with many secrets, and indeed, Ulrich often puzzles over the elusive depths of her personality. Although the Clarisse we meet in the beginning combines all these qualities with a brightness and contentment that makes her as a whole hardly more than eccentric, the stability of her condition steadily deteriorates into madness as the novel moves forward. Fiercely denying to have a child by the husband she finds increasingly repulsive, she becomes more and more dramatically attached to pieces of Nietzsche's thought (his works having been a wedding present from Ulrich), and is convinced that she must give birth to the great redeemer of mankind. Her fantasies and experiences become more elaborate and intense, and alongside this grows her fascination with Moosbrugger. When Ulrich refuses to impregnate an almost hysterical Clarisse, she turns to the metaphor of birth, and starts planning to meet and eventually free Moosbrugger from the mental hospital where he is being kept. Like the criminal she fixates upon, Clarisse too frequently has experiences where space is abnormally accessible: "On and off she had days, even weeks, when everything round about her was lighter and brighter than usual, as though it would not need much effort to slip right off into that and go walking about the world without oneself". And just as Ulrich spoke of the problem of connecting the two realms of the inside and the outside, Clarisse, though interpreting her experiences as signs from God, encounters exactly this: <fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 162. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 63. </fnote><quote>Both creatures had been put in her path by destiny, as a sign that she must act [...] None of these notions took such clear form in her, they lodged invisibly in the walls of the house, summoned but still keeping their answer to themselves; but what Clarisse really felt, as she came out on to the steps and saw the bird eating the caterpillar, was an ineffable correspondence of interior and exterior experience. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 307-8. </fnote>Even in conversation with Ulrich, she tries to convince him that this Other Condition, of which he has spoken only briefly to her, is exactly the state that she can achieve. She queries Ulrich, "didn't you yourself once say that the state we live in is full of cracks, through which, so to speak, another state, an impossible one, peers out at us?" and then exclaims: <fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 447. </fnote><quote>That hole is what we've got to get out through! And I can! I have days when I can slip out of myself. Then one stands - how shall I put it? - peeled out of a husk in the midst of things, and the dirty rind is peeled off them too. Or one is connected by the air itself with everything there is, like a Siamese twin. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 448. </fnote>Though disturbed by her visit, and convinced that she is truly mentally ill, Ulrich himself cannot deny the eerie kinship between his own thoughts and hers: "and yet during her attack, or whatever one might call the state she had been in a short time ago, she had said a number of things that were disconcertingly like some things he himself said".  <fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 451. </fnote>The parallels should be sufficiently apparent; now, interesting questions surface. What does this mean? Surely it is no accident that the experiences had by Moosbrugger and Clarisse, which in both cases are symptoms of mental illness, are so very similar in quality to Ulrich's articulation of the Other Condition. So, what was Musil trying to get across about madness and/or mysticism? I believe that the answer has many layers. Above I referred to Moosbrugger and Clarisse as 'mystical counterexamples'; with respect to the Other Condition, this is their vital function. Musil knew how difficult it would be to convey the sense of this mystical experiment, and how important it was that what he meant by mysticism was not confused with mysticism typically understood. Moosbrugger and Clarisse are signposts to Musil's uniqueness, as it is in observing the points of Ulrich's deviation from them that several essential characteristics of the Other Condition become most apparent. We now turn to an analysis of those deviations, in order to make clear three crucial aspects of the Other Condition. These three are: the inclusion of rationality, selfless love and the withdrawal from activity. Vienna 1913 was brimming with the accomplishments of advancing science and technology. The accelerating world of knowledge, prizing exactitude, specificity and rational fact, had far surpassed the world of feeling, the latter having started to cultivate many bitter anti-rational proponents. Ulrich, despite his natural inclination to the realm of precision and rationality, recognizes the problem that the world of feeling and emotion (which he connects with the project of morality) has long failed to make any advances within humanity, while science relentlessly achieves more and more. He complains to Walter and Clarisse: <quote>And at no time has the difference between the expert's experience and the layman's been as great as it is now. [...] But once I know that women five thousand years ago wrote word for word the same letters to their lovers as women do now, I can't read another such letter without asking myself whether there oughtn't to be a change for once! </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 253. </fnote>And so the Other Condition is for Ulrich part of an attempt to advance the realm of feeling, to bring the 20 th century and all its technology to bear upon morality. What this means is this mystical condition cannot be in conflict with rationality. Rather, it must be inclusive of the rational: "In his view there was nothing to be gained by giving oneself over to illusions that would not stand up to careful investigation. That, he exclaimed, was just like Icarus's wings of wax, which melted in the high air. If one wanted to fly not merely in one's dreams, one must learn to do it on metal wings".  <fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 116. </fnote>Though both Clarisse and Moosbrugger have moments where "like Ulrich, they feel themselves pressing through some "hole" or "tear" in daily reality," their experiences are untouched by reason. Moosbrugger is ignorant as a result of his upbringing, but more than that, in his condition he is unable to even employ language at an average level. His impressions and actions are based entirely upon the emotions which seize him at any given moment. Clarisse, though generally more functional, embodies the trend of anti-rationalism, and thinks of Ulrich: "He was intelligent, he was logical, and he knew a lot - but was that any more than barbarism?" Musil's portrayal of her connection with the irrational is best seen with respect to her and Walter's love of music. Ulrich has scorn for all music, declaring it "to be a failure of the will and a confusion of the mind". Peters notes that "although music can invoke the most subtle emotional states, it is unable to give expression to logical thought" and suggests that it provides "a fertile ground for sensuality and vague yearning". Regarding Clarisse's admiration for the philosopher-fraud Meingast, the narrator mockingly notes that "it was an emotion 'on the piano,' raging without full conviction" (III 137).  <fnote>Peters, Frederick G. Robert Musil: Master of the Hovering Life, New York, Columbia University Press, 1978, p. 231. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 57. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 50. </fnote><fnote>Peters, Frederick G. Robert Musil: Master of the Hovering Life, New York, Columbia University Press, 1978, p. 208. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 137. On this point see also vol. 1, p. 74. </fnote>Payne suggests that Moosbrugger's madness is a consequence of his inability to distinguish the poles of subjectivity and objectivity, i.e., a result of his being inside and outside: "He no longer has the sense of the necessary separation of self and world and, losing his grip on the polarity of subject and object, he can no longer freely determine what he does". However, we can now recognize this as an oversimplification of the case. If this were true, or at least if it were what Musil thought, then the Other Condition would essentially be mental sickness. What is far more plausible is that the conflation of inside and outside that affects Moosbrugger, which as we have seen is common to the experience of the Other Condition, is employed by Musil in order to draw our attention to the details beyond the more superficial and ambiguous accounts of mystical states. Although it remains open to question whether Musil was entirely successful in separating mysticism from madness, I believe Moosbrugger and Clarisse stand as evidence that a serious attempt was made. <fnote>Payne, Philip. Robert Musil's 'The Man Without Qualities' A Critical Study, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1988, p. 138. See also p. 147. </fnote>The first of these 'details beyond the superficial' we find is the inclusion of rationality. Although the Other Condition is a mystical state where one vividly experiences an expansion of self and an intensification of feeling, "it is a mistake to think this mode dispenses with all rationality". Ulrich refuses to pursue a thoughtless state of physical and mental abandon, and is rather seeking a balance of both reason and feeling, where "you feel yourself being embraced, enfolded, penetrated to the very heart by a pleasant sort of involuntary helplessness" and yet "you remain wide awake, your taste remains critical". Speaking to Agathe, Ulrich is always keen to justify their mystical conversations by the standards of reason: <fnote>Holmes, Alan. Robert Musil 'Der Mann ohne Eigenshaften' An Examination of the Relationship between Author, Narrator and Protagonist, Bonn, Bouvier, 1978, p. 147. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 67. </fnote><quote>There was nothing in this that need offend a man mathematically and scientifically exact; on the contrary, it made him think of the work of a psychologist whom he happened to know personally. This work assumed the existence of two main opposing groups of ideas, the one based on the condition of being enveloped by the content of experience, the other on the enveloping of this content by the subject. The inference was that this sort of 'being inside something' and 'looking at something from outside' [...] occurred in so many pairs of opposites both in experience and in language that it was justifiable to assume that behind them there was an archetypal ambivalence common to all human experience. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 23. </fnote>The second detail that becomes apparent in the light of the contrast of Moosbrugger and Clarisse is the presence of selfless love. A subtle but important theme and part of Ulrich's experimental target is the idea of an un-egoistic, possession-less, non-sexual love. His knowledge of this kind of love derives from the memory of what turns out to be his first experience of the Other Condition. As a young soldier, Ulrich falls deeply in love with a Major's wife, and he enjoys with her a brief affair. However, at the peak of his rapturous devotion to this woman, he flees from her. Living isolated in a cabin many miles from the life he left, he is inspired by the idea that this love of his is greatest when the act of possessing the beloved is abandoned. He stays alone in the woods and revels in the experience of a selfless connecting with everything around him. It is only years later, when he is reunited with his sister, that the memory of this kind of love is awakened. Moosbrugger's interactions with others are almost entirely negative. Even at the moments where he is most calm and self-possessed, he views his condition as something that makes him superior to other people, and a general mistrust and scorn of others always remains. At his worst, his phobias imprint themselves upon his perceptions, the voices he hears feed his paranoia, and he is possessed by the compulsion to defend himself from that which haunts him so vividly, actions which express themselves violently. The contrast made by Clarisse is less obvious. She is quite aware of the growing frequency and intensity of her mystical experiences, and rejoices in them. With Ulrich she shares the feeling of exaltation in these moments. However, the sense of connection that touches her is not one where the self is immersed in a state of un-egoistic benevolence, but is rather the sense of everything being connected to her. It is almost as though she becomes the dictator of the mystical realm. These moments are when the ineffable is possessed by her, where she figures ultimately as God's prophet. "Whereas Ulrich and Agathe are, so to speak, the apprentices of their love, learning from it and seeking to register its subtlest promptings, Clarisse does violence to love when it touches her, reshaping it to her ends." Her conviction that she is to deliver to the world the great Redeemer becomes the filter through which her experiences are altered; the arbitrary is seen by her as destiny, as signs sent by God to tell her that it is time for her to act. Moosbrugger suffers from the community that imposes itself inside him, Clarisse holds up the same community as her kingdom. <fnote>Payne, Philip. Robert Musil's 'The Man Without Qualities' A Critical Study, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1988, p. 192. </fnote>For Ulrich, the mystical experiences he shares with Agathe prompt him to abandon what he calls "the attitude of personal greed towards one's experiences". Rather than hostility, rather than an inflation of one's powers of possession, what he observes is a harmony right through to the depths of himself, and yet feels that at the same time it is almost at a distance to his self. While helping Agathe into her dress, <fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 74. </fnote><quote>Ulrich felt himself lapped by a pleasing sensation that it was hard to put into words, unless one were to say that his body was assaulted by a sense of equally having a woman and of having no woman very close to him; one could just as well say that though he stood there solidly with both feet on the ground he felt himself being drawn out of himself and over to her, as though he had here been given for his own a second and far more beautiful body. </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 274. </fnote>The arrogant attachment to the importance of self is lost once the ultimate state of interconnection is revealed; one is as much absent as present, as one's identity is this connecting and yet at no time stable as one among it all. It is this character of participation in the territory of love, rather than possession, that is made manifest to Ulrich in his relationship with Agathe: <quote>And what he thought was: 'The moment I manage to have to have no more egocentric and selfish feelings towards Agathe, and no single ugly feeling of indifference either, she draws all the qualities out of me the way the Magnetic Mountain draws the nails out of the ship! Morally I'm atomized into a pure and primal state in which I'm neither myself nor her. I wonder is that what's meant by eternal bliss?' </quote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 323. </fnote>The final point regarding the Other Condition made clear through the counterexample of Moosbrugger and Clarisse is the withdrawal from activity. What makes Ulrich a man without qualities is the one trait he possesses that overwhelms all chances for a stable personality - his sense-of-possibility. Finding no reason to grant what is any more worth or reality than what could be, his fixation on potentiality is in protest to the frozen and final sedimentation that occurs when something is realized: "this is why he hesitates to become anything. A character, a profession, a definite mode of existence - for him these are notions through which the skeleton is already peering, the skeleton that is all that will be left of him in the end". In direct contrast to an intuitive conception of morality (i.e. as the set of laws which serve to regulate behaviour in a given society), Ulrich's idea of morality is none other than imagination. For him a set of established rules to which one is expected to conform is nothing but a petrification of life; the experience of the Other Condition, where such intuitions regarding morality are felt so immediately, is just the opposite: "it was the infinite fullness of life's potentialities". Being such, one in the Other Condition is - much like the attitude of the experimental scientist - contemplative, passive, forever open and in process. This also means that the state is essentially antithetical to action. Ulrich laments "that of all the systems we have set up there is not one that possessed the secret of stillness" and he discusses with Agathe: "It's like a tall tree with no leaf stirring. And one can't do anything mean in that condition [...] but nothing bad can happen while the condition lasts; the very moment it does happen, the stillness and clarity tear to shreds and the miraculous condition ceases".  <fnote>MWQ, vol. 1, p. 297. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 430. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 430. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 2, p. 360. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 113. </fnote>Moosbrugger, as we have seen, is a victim of his pathology. The fears and visions which seize him so powerfully make resistance to act, and to act violently, entirely futile. He could never share Ulrich's passionate interest in morality, but is rather something of a disturbed animal - it is never clear when he could be set into a frenzy. In the case of Clarisse, the conviction that something must be done is at the very heart of her experiences: "willfulness, virtually unattached to any remotely reasonable aims, racks her small body". Though it is not beyond her mental abilities, she ignores all moral considerations, and clings only to a vague notion that her will is sufficient to bring about anything she wishes. The danger in this kind of attitude of made clear when, in response to Walter's jealous complaining about Ulrich, Clarisse orders Walter to kill Ulrich, without having ever thought this before, simply so that an idea would be put to action. This kind of impulsive energy to act is condemned by Ulrich when speaking to Agathe: "it's so easy to have the energy to act and so difficult to find a meaning for action!" As Jonsson notes, the Other Condition functions as something of an agent of undoing, in that it offers not a singular and thus necessarily exclusive and arbitrary entity as reality, but instead "negates ideological appellations and is thus forever deterritorialized". It is a state in which there is the passivity to remain formless, to allow the fullness of potentiality, where "personal identities, aesthetic entities, and cultural communities are open-ended processes intersected by multiple determinants".  <fnote>Payne, Philip. Robert Musil's 'The Man Without Qualities' A Critical Study, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1988, p. 176. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 87. </fnote><fnote>Jonsson, Stefan. Robert Musil and the History of Modern Identity, Durham, Duke University Press, 2000, p. 266. </fnote><fnote>Jonsson, Stefan. Robert Musil and the History of Modern Identity, Durham, Duke University Press, 2000, p. 268. </fnote>The contrast of the characters Moosbugger and Clarisse raise the interesting complexity of Musil's contemplative mysticism into focus. Although Pike claims that "the figure of Moosbrugger is so ambiguously presented that [...] his importance lies rather in what he means to the other individual characters in the novel," it has been made clear that the presentations of his and Clarisse's most private experiences, that is to say, that to which no other characters have access, are important to our interpretation of the Other Condition. Of course, despite the clarifications we have seen, significant question marks remain about what, with the presentation of the Other Condition, Musil is recommending. If "faith mustn't be even an hour old," if the Musilian subject must always prize the not-yet of mobile potential, we are left to wonder exactly how the utopian synthesis of reason and feeling could be made manifest in the world. However, although it is true that Musil's descriptions of the Other Condition do not amount to a positive picture of Utopia, I agree with Jonsson that rather what is being offered is the condition in which such a Utopia could be constructed. "Only a "being with possibility" is endowed with the senses needed to discover the right place to be zoned for the construction of a new world. [...] But if he is not to lose his unsettling ability, that highly prized sense of possibility, he must also renounce the decisiveness and resolve that at the same time are needed in order to bring forth even a vague blueprint of Utopia.[...] a guide showing the way to Utopia, and yet unable to settle there itself". Therefore, what Musil's synthesis would have amounted to in the practical realm, having been cultivated from his specific style of mystical experience, is a picture at which one can only speculate. For as Italo Calvino wrote, there is no better place to keep a secret than in an unfinished novel. <fnote>Pike, Burton. Robert Musil: An Introduction to his Work, Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1961, p. 194. </fnote><fnote>MWQ, vol. 3, p. 104. </fnote><fnote>Jonsson, Stefan. Robert Musil and the History of Modern Identity, Durham, Duke University Press, 2000, p. 150. </fnote>