<heading>Patient introduction and health problems. </heading>Patient P is a 36-year-old female who found a lump in her right breast mid 2002. Breast cancer was not diagnosed until early 2003 because P didn't inform anyone about the lump. At the time of surgery the lump was classified as grade 3. P underwent a mastectomy of her right breast in February 2003, P then had a course of chemotherapy and radiotherapy The chemotherapy regime she received included the trial drug taxotere. The side effects of the chemotherapy included itchy scalp, loss of hair, forgetfulness and the radiotherapy caused a large sore burn to the skin. P currently takes tamoxifen, salbutamol and beclomethasome dipropionate; the latter two control her asthma. Due to heavy smoking P suffers with recurrent chest infections. <heading>Social and material situation. </heading>P has five children, the eldest is eleven, and the youngest are the twins aged 18 months. P has repeatedly been the victim of domestic violence from her current long-term partner. P's family live close by, but their relationship is volatile. They disapprove of her partner and as a result their support is minimal. A lack of support especially with the children has had a detrimental effect upon P's health. P had very little time to rest and as a result was frequently admitted to hospital between chemotherapy cycles. Despite being offered respite care for the children she originally refused. Eventually P agreed to have the twins put into voluntary temporary foster care while she was receiving treatment to provide her with time to rest while the older children were at school. When her treatment ended P requested the twins be returned to her care. P feels her friends have not been very supportive and are frightened to come near her, as a result they have kept their distance and P's social life has diminished. P's illness has had a detrimental effect on her children. Different people often looked after the children, while P was in hospital and their lives have been extremely disrupted. The older children understand what is happening and are very frightened that their mother is going to die. P lives in a three bedroom terraced house rented from  housing association in . The house is not large enough for the family, it is rundown and in need of repair. The facilities in  are not ideal; many of the local shops have closed down. Those, which remain, sell a limited range of goods and are expensive. P also has to rely on public transport, having no car which is an additional cost. P is a full time mother. She receives income support, child benefit and housing benefit. Her partner is unemployed and is an additional drain on her income. P feels that she has enough money to feed the children and pay the bills but does not have any extra for luxuries or to treat the children. P did apply for a disability allowance after she became ill but her claim was rejected and so any additional costs due to her illness must come from her normal budget, adding a further strain. <heading>Psychological Status </heading>P believes she is going to die and is frightened to deal with her illness. She uses self-coping skills, such as busying herself with household tasks, looking after the children and smoking to avoid thinking about her illness. The side effects of the treatment P received meant that she had to deal with an altered body image such as the loss of her hair, this made her feel unattractive. Now that P's treatment has finished she feels a large support network with which, she had regular contact has disappeared. The uncertainty and waiting to see if the treatment has been successful is very unsettling and as a result P is very anxious. <heading>Agency One - Breast cancer care nurse</heading>The nurse's role was to ensure P understood what her treatment and the clinical trial involved including any side effects P may experience. P was happy to take part in the trial and was given the chemotherapy regime with taxotere. The nurse and the health visitor were in regular contact because of P's complex social situation which allowed the nurse to ensure P was getting the necessary support and that she did not recommend anything, which P could not realistically carry out. The nurse proved to be a huge support to P throughout her treatment. <heading>Agency Two - Social Worker</heading>Their role was to ensure the safety and wellbeing of the children. As P was struggling to cope with the children during her illness, the social worker found temporary foster places for all the children. P was reluctant for the children to be fostered as she felt they were her motivation to fight the disease. However as mentioned previously the twins were temporarily fostered. Social services were also very concerned about the safety of the children with respect to the incidents of domestic violence. A final warning had been issued to P and her partner, one more incidence and there would be a case review. However the aim of social services is to keep the children with their mum and so have provided her household help and help in getting the children into bed in an evening and funded nursery places for the twins twice a week. <heading>Agency Three - Health Visitor</heading>She has known and been involved with the family for many years. Her role is to see the family about basic childcare and parenting and development. Due to P requiring much support the health visitor has also taken an active role in her care. On several occasions she has taken P to her radiotherapy appointments. The health visitor provides consistency and stability by being the first point of contact. <heading>Management Plan. </heading>Patient P needs a management plan tailored to what she wants. This is in line with the NHS plan, "changes for patients". Which states that patient choice should be strengthened and their views about their care must be given greater prominance 1. This plan would need to meet P's biological, social and psychological needs, the "biopsycosocial approach". <heading>Health Needs</heading>It is vital that P attends her 3 monthly reviews with the oncologist, this allows her progress to be monitored. To allow P to keep the appointment, child-care and transport to the clinic need to be arranged. Social services make special arrangements for these days in terms of child-care and transport. This would involve liasing with the health care team to find out the date and time of P's appointments. P's blood needs to be monitored regularly for cancer markers, to ensure early action can be taken if needed. P currently takes tamoxifen; it is vital for her recovery that she continues to take the drug. <heading>Social Needs</heading>P's social needs are important in the management of her condition as her social context impedes upon her health. P needs help with the children, to allow her respite time to relax. The youngest children are not of school age and so appropriate affordable nursery care could be arranged. The nursery places currently provided by social services are temporary they are not a long-term measure. P needs financial help; this would give her the money to pay for nursery care and to cover any additional costs she may incur as a result of her illness such as transport, this may be unrealistic if P already receives all the benefits she is entitled to. Social services currently provide household helps, which should be continued as P finds this beneficial. The family needs a larger house, which would give them more space. This may calm the frustration and arguments that build up when people live in an overcrowded property. To implement this requires all agencies making a recommendation and supporting P's application to the housing association. However the house must also be within  as this is where P wishes to stay, the children would also not have to change schools thereby limiting the disruption to their lives. If P wishes to remain with her current partner, the issues of domestic violence need to be addressed and resolved. This may involve counselling for both parties to establish why the partner uses violence and how he can control this. Counselling for P would help build her self-confidence. Efforts should also be made to encourage the family to support P and to be involved with P and her children. <heading>Psychological Needs</heading>P needs stability and consistency, the health visitor service is key to this as it provides P with one point of contact. The health visitor can then delegate the problem to the relevant agency. This will help reassure P that her support mechanisms are still present despite finishing her treatment. One to one counselling should be offered to P, as she needs help in coming to terms with and dealing with her condition. As P worries about relapse she needs her ideas concerns and expectations listened to, reconstruction surgery could be offered, this would hopefully improve P's perception of her body image and give her self-confidence a boost. The management plan should maximise P's recovery by alleviating the health, social and psychological problems that have impeded on her illness. By meeting these needs it aims to improve her prognosis as much as possible. For the management plan to work it requires the continued communication between all agencies involved. 