The founding principle of the NHS was equity and to remove the financial burden of medical care. Despite this service, there still exists significant, differences in health and incidence of disease within the population (Moon & Gillespie 1995). These differences are known as health inequalities. Inequalities exist as a result of unequal social position, i.e. differences in socio-economic status, geographic location, gender, age and ethnicity and are an important issue as they can have a profound effect on people's lives. It is important we work to reduce them, because as highlighted by Mackenbachal. (2002) "they contradict values of fairness and justice and reducing inequalities will lead to better average health in the population as a whole". What can be seen from studies into health inequalities is that there is a clear class gradient. Blaine (1997) noted that "mortality rates increase in a step wise fashion as one moves from social class I (professional) to social class V (unskilled) with the mortality rate of the later being twice that of the former". <heading>How can these inequalities be explained? </heading>The first comprehensive report into health inequalities carried out was the Black Report; it was commissioned by the labour government in 1977 and published in 1980. It suggested four explanations of social class differences in health. <heading>1.Artefact</heading>This states that apparent differentials in health status between social groups are created by the process of measurement and data analysis rather than existing in there own right, often referred to as numerator/denominator bias. The explanation has been largely disregarded, Whitehead (1988) shows that evidence from "longitudinal studies such as the Whitehall study has provided fresh evidence of a social class gradient in mortality between different grades of the civil service". <heading>2.Social Selection</heading>This explanation accepts that health and social position are linked but it suggests we have a situation of social mobility and that the direction of causation is from health to social position. To an extent this is a real phenomenon because the disabled or chronically ill cannot work and so move down the social hierarchy but longitudinal studies have shown that at the very most this is a very minor contributor to socio-economic differences in health. <heading>3.Behavioural / Cultural</heading>This states that social class determines health through social differences in health damaging or promoting behaviours. Graham (1999) "estimated that health related behaviours like smoking, diet and recreational exercise account for between 10-30 per cent of the socio-economic gradient in mortality". The problem with the behavioural/cultural explanation is that it assumes individuals have the capacity to choose what behaviours they adopt. Blackburn (1999) highlights this isn't always the case "lower income families have poorer diets than high income families not because of poor knowledge about what constitutes a healthy diet or unhealthy attitudes, but because they cannot afford to buy the foods considered important for good health". <heading>4.Materialistic</heading>This suggests that social class determines health because "there are hazards to which some people have no choice but to be exposed to given to the present distribution of income and opportunity" (Shaw et al 2000). Housing would be an example, Blackburn (1999) states that "low-income families are more likely to live in a house, which is damp, in need of repair, overcrowded and poorly constructed". This is associated with higher rates of respiratory tract infections, especially in children. However the question has been raised as to whether the distinction between the behavioural/cultural and materialistic explanations is artificial, or whether in actual fact they are closely linked. Behaviours cannot always be separated from their social context; Whitehead (1988) illustrates this well by looking at childhood accidents. "The observation that children from lower social groups have more accidents than children from higher groups may be explained by the behavioural view as due to more reckless, risk taking behaviour in this group and inadequate care by parents. The materialistic view would highlight the unsafe play areas; the lack of fenced off gardens and the greater difficulty of supervising children's play from high rise housing. In the latter view, the environment is dictating the behaviour of the both the mother and child". With recent evidence suggesting, health inequalities are not confined to the poorest members in society, physcosocial explanations have come to the fore. Wilkinson (1999) states that "the driving force behind health inequalities in developed societies is not absolute differences in living standards but relative differences". Lynch et al (2000) state that "the perception that others around you are wealthier produces negative emotions, such as shame and distrust, which are translated inside the body into poor health by psyco-neuro-endocrine mechanisms and health damaging behaviours such as smoking". The neo-materialist explanation states that "health inequalities result from the differential accumulation of exposure's and experiences that have their sources in the material world" (Lynch et al, 2000). While it does not deny the negative psychosocial consequences of living in relative poverty it seeks to reassert the importance of absolute material effects on health. Inequalities in health can arise as a result of poor access to the health services. It is thought that disadvantaged group's experience a range of barriers to seeking and receiving medical care. This is supported by the Tudor-Hart inverse care law, which states the availability of good medical care tends to vary inversely with the need for it in the population. The Black report was not well received by the conservative government and it recommendations were not implemented. Subsequently there have been two main reports on the evidence for health inequalities. The health divide published in 1988 and the independent inquiry into health published in 1997. The recommendations of all these reports have instigated and influenced policies created by the government to tackle health inequalities. Health inequalities are being tackled on a broad front, first and foremost by reducing poverty, improving housing and working conditions. This is being achieved by improving benefits, increasing employment prospects and regeneration of deprived areas. Health inequalities are also being tackled through health policy by requiring the NHS to prioritise health inequalities. Specific health programs such as Sure Start target young families and children. Sure Start (2003) state that the primary aims are "to give the best start in life to every child, provide better opportunities for parents, affordable good quality childcare and ensure our communities are stronger and safer". Although it is an excellent initiative it carries the weaknesses of area based programs. Blackburn (1999) notes that "the health services can have little impact on the structural causes of poverty. However the nature and form of service provision has an important bearing on how low income families experience poor health in poverty". When considering what professional practise can achieve it is important to remember there is no single solution. This is because health exclusion and poverty are not experienced uniformly by individuals/social groups or across localities. Nor do practitioners/groups or organisations have similar or equal levels of resources, remits or concerns. Equitable healthcare provision according to need rather than equality in health care is needed. Good medical practise can help prevent and alleviate some of the worst affects of disadvantage on the health of individuals and challenge policy makers to develop more effective policies for tackling health inequalities. Poor practise by doctors can compound the effect of poor material circumstances on health. <quote>"Developmental programs must develop ways that give practitioners the knowledge and skills to integrate a poverty and health exclusion perspective into everyday practise" Blackburn (1999). </quote>The framework for achieving this has three key roles: <heading>Profiling and Monitoring</heading>This is concerned with generating data about the extent of health exclusion in poverty, its nature and causes. It is achieved by building up an area or patient population profile of health inequalities, allowing the doctor to identify and target the health needs and those needs, which are not being met in their area. The overall aim is to provide an equitable service. Once needs are identified this has to be rationalised into what can be paid for which is a highly sensitive and difficult task. <heading>Preventing and Alleviating</heading>This is about providing services, which prevent ill health and help patients to mitigate and cope with the health effects of social disadvantage. Doctors can maximise access to services and care by reducing the geographical, material, social and cultural barriers to accessing services. Doctors can maximise their patient's income and material resources by identifying people, slipping through the social security net and advocating for welfare rights provision. Financial costs of health promotion could be reduced for those most in need by the abolition of user charges, or providing "on prescription" exercise via gym membership, diet via slimming classes, counselling and alternative therapies. <heading>Working for Social Change</heading>Practitioners should support organisations, which lobby on social inequalities in health and professional organisations like the BMA. Locally the practitioner can ensure that health inequalities are addressed on agenda's about professional practise, this involves the practitioner being informed about the current situation of health trends. Health inequalities are complex problems and there is probably no one explanation, which can account for the inequality seen. However government has finally recognised health inequalities are a substantial and unacceptable problem in Britain. To deal with this comprehensive strategies for reducing health inequalities have been created. These strategies will hopefully in time will dramatically reduced and erase the problem. 