<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading>The Patient was advised by his GP to come into hospital, 's brother brought him into the  Hospital in  on  and he was seen in EMU (emergency medical unit). <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint</heading>Distended abdomen with intense intermittent pain. <heading>History of Presenting Complaint</heading>The patient's abdomen appeared to start to swell approximately 3 months ago but was not painful. The abdomen became more distended and painful over the course of last week and so the patient sought medical advice. The pain described by the patient as being a "widespread intermittent ache" radiating across the whole of the abdomen and feeling 'solid to touch'. It was not aggravated or relieved by anything including over the counter analgesia and was a 'dull ache' in character. The patient has not experienced any nausea and vomiting, rectal bleeding, change on bowel habits, heamatemesis, melaena or dysphagia.  has however had a few minor episodes of heartburn, but could not explain what triggered this. Patient has lost weight in the region of a stone in the last week, but has not experience a change in appetite although describes himself as "never being a big eater". <heading>Past Medical History</heading>The patient suffers with hypertension and has been taking Atenolol for approximately 10 years. He has no other significant history including no previous operations, diabetes, arthritis, asthma or heart problems. <heading>Family History </heading>There was no significant family history. <heading>Social History </heading>The patient is divorced from his wife with whom he had two children. He lives alone in a flat but has no problems with the stairs. The patient has been retired now for five years; his previous occupation was a carpenter. Smoking 0 pack years. Alcohol 6 units/week (lager or beer). History of drinking, 20 units/week 10 years ago. He has no known allergies. <heading>Medication </heading>Atenolol (100ml PO) This is a adrenergic receptor blocker used to control the patients blood pressure Lactulose (100mg PO) This is an osmotic laxative, which produces an osmotic diarrhoea and is useful in the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy. Spironolactone (100mg PO) This is a potassium sparing diuretic, which is used for oedema and ascites in cirrhosis of the liver. <heading>Systems Review </heading>CVS: No chest pain or palpitations. RS: No cough, wheeze, dyspnoea, haemoptysis or sputum GUT: No urinary problems CNS: No headaches, blackouts, dizziness, anxiety, weakness or visual problems. The patient Does describe a low mood state and so an element of depression is possible. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>'s history of excessive alcohol intake leads to a diagnosis of liver disease, this is most likely going to be cirrhosis as he has been drinking excessively for a long period of time. Cirrhosis of the liver can lead to portal hypertension. Portal hypertension is defined as a portal pressure of 10-12mmHg it arises in cirrhosis because the liver architecture is destroyed and it becomes congested. Portal venous blood can no longer escape through the normal channels of the sinusoids to central hepatic venules. This can lead to ascites because increased pressure in the portal system leads to transudation of fluid into the peritoneal cavity causing it to swell. 's history of a gradual swelling of the abdomen and generalised abdominal pain is indicative of ascites. Patients with liver disease may also show a low serum albumin due to poor liver function. Low albumin levels will also contribute to ascites by further reducing the plasma oncotic pressure. The social history given by  gives some insight in to why he drinks excessively. The patient admits that the divorce from his wife and the death of both of his parents in a short period of time led him to drinking as a way of coping. Upsetting and traumatic life events are a common cause for turning to excessive alcohol consumption as a way of coping with stress. Upon a general and abdominal examination I would be looking for clinical signs to back up the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease such as clubbing, palmer erythema, dupuytrens contracture, hepatic flap, jaundice, nutritional deficiencies, spider naevi, gynaecomastia, caputs medusa, ascites, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly and oedema. Due to weight loss another cause for this presentation could be a malignancy, possibly in the bowel and liver. <heading>Physical examination and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading><heading>General Examination</heading>The patient who can be described as a thin male of small build, was sitting comfortably in bed and fully alert. No sputum pot, urinary catheter or walking aids were present at the bedside. Upon inspection of the hands which were of normal temperature and not clammy, no clubbing palmer erythema, leukonychia, koilonychia or peripheral cyanosis were found. Dupuytrens contracture was present on the left hand and beau's lines in the fingernails. There was evidence of a hepatic flap. Pulse was 62 bpm and regular, blood pressure was 130/85 sitting up. Upon inspection of the face, there was some evident wasting of the temporal muscle; jaundice was noted in the sclera of the eye. No anaemia was seen in the conjunctiva. The tongue displayed no evidence of central cyanosis or nutritional deficiency. The patient had no lymphadenopathy or pedal oedema. <heading>Abdominal Examination</heading>Inspection: Dressing on the right lumber region, abdominal distension had significantly reduced since admission. There was evidence of two spider naevi above the nipple line and caputs medusa around the umbilicus. There was no evidence of gynaecomastia and no other scars were present Palpation: Upon initial palpation there was mild tenderness over the abdomen, especially around the area of the wound. The liver edge was palpated four finger breaths below the rib cage. The spleen and kidneys could not be felt on palpation. Percussion: When patient was lying flat, percussion was dull across both right and left flanks and tympanic over the top of the abdomen. When the patient was rolled into the right lateral position, percussion was tympanic over left flank. This is a positive shifting dullness test. Auscultation: Bowel sounds were present and there was no evidence of a renal or aortic bruit. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>The findings of the examination all point to alcoholic liver disease resulting in ascites. The positive shifting dullness test confirms the presence of fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The dressing on the right flank is from an abdominal drain, which was used to remove the excess fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The diagnosis of chronic liver disease is supported by a variety of the clinical signs seen. Dupuytrens contracture is a thickening of the palmer aponeurosis and often seen in alcoholic cirrhosis. Beau's lines seen in the fingernail are indicative of acute severe illness. The presence of a hepatic flap is characteristic of hepatic encephalopathy which occurs in severe hepatocellular disease and wasting of the facial muscles supports the patients account of weight loss. It is often the case that alcoholics do not have a sufficient nutritious diet, the patient also described himself of not having a large appetite so it is possible that  is not consuming sufficient calories. Spider naevi are seen in patients with chronic liver disease and are caused by local vascular dilatation. A key clinical sign seen in this patient was the yellow discoloration of the sclera indicating jaundice. Jaundice is by definition a serum bilirubin concentration of greater than 50mol/l. Bilirubin is the breakdown product of red blood cells, it is produced in the spleen and from there travels in the blood to the liver. In the liver it is conjugated into bile so that it can be excreted in the urine. Jaundice is divided into three types, pre-hepatic, hepatic and post-hepatic. Pre-hepatic jaundice arises from the increased breakdown of red cells. Post hepatic jaundice is caused by obstruction to bile flow at any point in the billary tree, most commonly from a gall stone. Hepatic Jaundice is seen in patients with alcoholic liver disease. It occurs because damage to the liver prevents the hepatocytes conjugating bilirubin into bile and so you get a build up of bilirubin in the plasma. It presents with yellow discoloration of the skin, dark urine and pale stools. Caputs medusa are seen when the veins around the umbilicus are dilated. This is a complication of portal hypertension, when portal pressure is raised one escape route for venous blood is via porto-systemic anastomoses, which open in response to increased portal pressure. The channels can become very distended with blood and are called varices. They are of huge clinical importance if they become very distended because they are fragile and can rupture. This is a serious complication resulting in torrential haemorrhage, which can be fatal. They are found around the umbilicus, in the anal/rectal area where they are known as haemorrhoids and in the oesophagus. Varices in the oesophagus are particularly vulnerable to rupture due to erosion by gastric acid. In summary,  has chronic liver damage caused by excessive long-term alcohol consumption. This has led to jaundice and portal hypertension resulting in the opening of porto-systemic shunts demonstrated by umbilicus varices Increased pressure in the portal system has led to transudation of fluid into the peritoneal cavity and the development of ascites. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Diagnosis: Alcoholic Liver Disease The patients symptoms arise from drinking too much alcohol, however the circumstances which lead this patient to drinking are key to his management. Due to the severity of the presentation it is likely that the patient is consuming far more than 6 units/week. Acceptance of a drinking problem by the patient is the first step in conquering the addiction. If he can be encouraged to stop drinking then his physical health will improve. The key to this is psychological; the precipitating event seems to be the divorce from his wife and the death of his parents. The patient may require some counselling about these events to overcome his addiction. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading>Full blood count Liver function tests Urea and electrolytes Endoscopy - Upper GI tract endoscopy showed the presence of oesophageal varices, although they were not bleeding. Abdominal ultrasound and Abdominal X-ray - To rule out any other possible causes i.e. malignancy. <heading>Reassurance and explanation</heading>Explanation to the patient how his drinking leads to these symptoms and what will happen with regards to his health should he continue to drink. <heading>Advice and Prevention - Refer for some addiction counselling.</heading><heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading>The serious complications arising from alcoholism and some insight as to why people turn to drinking to help them cope. 