<abstract>The purpose of this experiment was to investigate how effective the use of Lorayne's (1958) mnemonic technique was at improving memory of people's surnames immediately after learning and 24 hours after learning. The memory for names of high and low imageability was also studied. 40 participants took part, 20 were given the mnemonic technique to use and 20 were not instructed as to how to remember. There was a significant difference recall between the technique group and the control group, F(1,38) = 8.911; p< 0.05. There was also a significant difference between the recall of high and low imageability names, F(1.38) = 6.203; p< 0.05. There was no decline in recall after 24 hours. The mnemonic technique, therefore does help recall and is useful for memory in the long term as well as in the short term. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>In everyday life, people come across social situations in which they are required to remember people's names. Lorayne (1958, cited in Morris, Jones and Hampson, 1978) devised a mnemonic technique for improving recall of surnames when given the faces of the corresponding people. The technique involved creating a visual image that was similar to the surname or easily reminded the person of the surname. For example, for a Mr. Gordon, the name can be converted to garden. The next stage was to select a prominent feature of the face and interact the image with that feature. In the example, this could be Mr. Gordon's large nose and the visualisation could be a garden growing over his nose. Morris, Jones and Hampson (1978) carried out an experiment to test the effectiveness of this mnemonic technique. They tested 40 participants, 20 were placed in the mnemonic group and given the technique to use, and 20 were placed in the control group and given no technique. They found a significant difference between the recall of the mnemonic group and the recall of the control group, with recall being higher for the mnemonic group. The aim of the current experiment was to develop Morris, Jones and Hampson's (1978) experiment further by testing the recall of participants 24 hours after learning as well as immediately after. If Lorayne's mnemonic technique was to be useful in everyday life, it must help people remember names for a long period of time, not just a few minutes. If the technique was a success, it would mean that a person could remember someone's name on their second meeting, which could be days after their initial meeting. There are many theories of forgetting, including Tulving's (1974, cited in Eysenck and Keane, 2000) cue-dependent forgetting and context-change theory. This theory concentrates on how the information to be remembered is encoded and how this produces a unique or distinctive trace that can be retrieved easily. Applying this theory to the mnemonic technique, it can be assumed that making a face distinctive and memorable in this way, will help prevent it being forgotten. A similar theory was developed by Craik and Lockhart (1972, cited in Bower and Karlin, 1974). Their 'depth of processing' approach stated that material is more likely to be remembered when a strong memory trace is created by high levels of processing. Richardson (1999) suggested that higher levels of processing, and consequently remembering, can be achieved if the material has high imageability. In this experiment, names were chosen for either their high or low imageability, in other words, how easy it was to form a distinctive, clear image from the name. It could then be hypothesised that names with high imageability would show better recall and less forgetting between the two trials than names with low imageability. <heading>Method</heading><heading>Participants</heading>40 participants took part in the experiment. They were an opportunity sample of volunteers known to the experimenters and their ages ranged between 18 and 70. The participants were split equally between two conditions so there were 20 participants in each condition. None of the participants were psychology students so they had limited knowledge of the specific mnemonic technique being studied. <heading>Materials</heading>In both conditions, participants were shown 20 pictures of single faces. The pictures were found in a range of newspapers and had to meet several criteria. They had to be all of similar size, printed in colour and not pictures of famous people that would be recognised. The last criterion was judged by the experimenters and faces were rejected if they thought they looked familiar. The faces were cut out and glued on to card and a surname written at the bottom. In order to choose what surnames to use, two volunteers were given a list of 60 surnames. They were then asked to give each surname a rating from 1 to 5. A 1 represented the name being very easy to use the mnemonic technique to remember (high imageability), eg if the surname was Baker, it would be easy to form a visual image of a bun. A 5 therefore represented the name being very difficult to use the technique to remember (low imageability). The combined scores for each surname were then calculated and the names with the ten lowest scores and the ten highest scores were selected for use in the experiment. The twenty surnames were randomly assigned to each picture. <heading>Design</heading>A 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design was used. The first independent variable was the use of the mnemonic technique. The design for this variable was between subjects because half of the participants were taught the technique to use and the other half were not taught a technique. The second independent variable was the difficulty rating assigned to each surname. The design for this variable was within subjects because all participants were given all the names to remember, both difficult and easy categories. The last independent variable was the time period between learning the names and being asked to recall them. The design for this variable was also within subjects because all participants were tested a few minutes after learning and 24 hours after learning. The dependent variable was the number of names correctly recalled. <heading>Procedure</heading>Participants were tested in small groups of no more than four people. Participants in the same group were given the same condition, either 'mnemonic' or 'no mnemonic'. The participants were given basic written instructions which were then elaborated on by the experimenter. Participants in the 'mnemonic' condition were then taught the technique using example cards similar to the test cards. Each participant was asked to describe an image they had formed for one of the example cards to check that they understood the technique. Participants in the 'no mnemonic' condition were just asked to try to remember as many names as possible. They were also shown the example cards to show what they might expect from the test cards. Before beginning, the participants were asked to remain silent so as not to distract others. Each card was then held up for 15 seconds, one immediately after the other. The name was read verbally by the experimenter as well as being visually available for participants to read underneath the picture. When all 20 pictures had been shown, participants were given a distraction task of counting backwards in threes from 750 to prevent rehearsal. This lasted about three minutes. Each participant was given an answer sheet with the numbers 1 to 20 written down the side. Each picture was then shown in turn in a different order, with the name folded behind out of sight. The participants were asked to write down the name of each person on the answer sheet. The experimenter moved on to the next picture only when all participants in the group said they were ready. The same recall task was repeated 24 hours later although the order of the pictures was changed again. <heading>Results</heading>The means and standard deviations for the number of correct recalls are shown for each main variable in Table 1. A three-factor mixed analysis of variance was conducted on the results. The main effect of technique was significant, F(1,38) = 8.911; p< 0.05. The main effect of imageability was also significant, F(1,38) = 6.203; p< 0.05. There was no significant difference between the results of session 1 (the initial test) and session 2 (the test 24 hours later). There were also no significant results for any interactions of the main effects. <table/><heading>Discussion</heading>The mnemonic technique did improve recall overall for the surnames and the results therefore agree with the findings from Morris, Jones and Hampson's (1978) experiment. The results also show no significant difference between the recall in session one and session two so memory for the surnames did not decline over 24 hours. However, it is not possible to conclude that the mnemonic technique is the reason for the lack of decline, because similar results were found for the control group. It may be true that memory for names of people does not decline over a 24 hour period regardless of what memory strategy is used. It is possible that participants placed in the control group used their own imagery technique to help them remember the names because they were given no instructions about how to remember. This would account for the greater number of high imageability names being remembered in both control and technique groups and could be the reason for no decline being found between sessions. However, whatever techniques were used, they were not as effective as the technique being taught. For further research on this point, it may be useful to instruct the control group about how to remember, for example, by asking them to repeat the name over and over again, instead of allowing them to use their own imagery technique. The great variation between individual scores in both the technique and control conditions can be explained by Paivio's (1971, cited in Richardson, 1999) research using his 'Individual Difference Questionnaire'. From this questionnaire, Paivio distinguished between two types of individuals; those people who habitually used forms of thinking based upon imagery, and those who use forms of thinking based upon verbal processes. Those who use verbal processes would struggle to use imagery in either condition. This would especially account for the few low scores obtained in the technique condition where participants found the mnemonic technique difficult to use. Overall, Lorayne's (1958) mnemonic technique does help to improve memory of people's names in the short and long term, but it must be considered that not everyone is suited to the technique, and some people may find that their own techniques are just as helpful. 