<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>Following a detailed analysis of Radstone Technology PLC's Annual Report and Accounts for the financial year ending 31 st March 2005 and extensive research into the entity's performance since the financial year end, it appears that financial reports can provide invaluable, accurate data about the present and future performance of an entity. This report provides an insight into the kind of information financial reports can provide from a shareholder's point of view and investigates how useful and valid this information is when drawing conclusions about an entity's financial prospects. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Annual financial reports are generally considered to be a useful source of financial data, but do they really provide a true and fair view of an entity's financial position and can they be used to make accurate predictions about the future of an entity? This report examines the contents of the Radstone Technology PLC Annual Report and Accounts for the financial year ending 31 st March 2005 and contains an analysis of the entity for the financial year based on this information. It seeks to examine how useful a basis this provides for analysing the entity's performance, both during this period and extrapolating into the future. Several financial ratios were calculated and the results analysed to gain an understanding of the entity, as represented by the annual report. The report was also examined for evidence of its reliability - for example, standards adopted and adjustments made - to see whether the information gathered from the analysis was valid and gave a true and fair representation of the entity's financial state. In order to establish if the annual report provided a good basis for gauging future performance, it was necessary to research the entity's financial position and how it had changed since the 31 st March 2005. This was achieved by examining a variety of documents such as the interim report published by Radstone Technology PLC in September 2005, the London Stock Exchange website and various news articles. The information contained in the most recent annual report was then compared with the results of this research to establish whether the annual report provided useful and valid information about the future of the entity or not. <heading>Evaluation of Past Performance</heading><heading>Assessment of Performance</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>There are many ways of measuring how successful an entity has been over a period of time. In accounting terms, it is conventional to measure success in terms of monetary value of various aspects of the entity. Which aspects are chosen for examination will depend on exactly who wishes to know how successful the entity is and what their interest in the entity is - for example, an employee of an entity would have very different interests to those of a customer of the entity. Here, the interests of an ordinary shareholder will be considered and measures chosen accordingly to examine how successful the entity (in this case, Radstone Technology PLC) has been to date. Ten measures which may interest ordinary shareholders are detailed and analysed below. <heading>Measure 1 - Profit Before Tax, Exceptional Items and Goodwill</heading>A very simple way to measure how successful an entity has been is to examine the profit it has made over the past year. The profit before tax, exceptional items and goodwill basically gives a value for the amount of money an entity has made through trading after its expenditures. In 2005, Radstone Technology PLC made a profit before tax, exceptional items and goodwill of £8.51m, which is a fairly substantial proportion of their £49.89m turnover [1]. It is also up £1.13m on the 2004 figure, and is roughly double the value from 2001. <figure/>As can be seen here, profits have increased year on year since 2001, suggesting that the entity is financially stable and improving with time. <heading>Measure 2 - Return on Capital Employed</heading>According to J. R. Dyson, Return on Capital Employed (or ROCE) is "[t]he best way of assessing profitability" [2]. Essentially it shows the amount of profit generated relative to the amount of money which was invested to generate that profit. Unfortunately, there are many different ways of calculating the ratio. In its most basic form, it can be expressed as:  FORMULA  (1.1) The fact that "profit" and "capital" can be defined in many ways is what allows for variations on this basic equation. One possible variant - which is the one used here - uses the following definitions in the equation:  FORMULA  (1.2) This particular definition reflects "how profitable the entity has been in relation to what it has taken to finance it" [3]. For 2005, Radstone Technology PLC had a ROCE ratio value of 17.70% [4]. This value means little on its own but is more useful when compared to performance in previous years: <figure/>The most striking thing here is the huge drop in 2004 from 25.89% in 2003 to just 6.95%. One factor which will have contributed greatly to this was the exceptional loss of £3,508k in 2004, accompanied by an exceptionally large long-term loan of £16,230k [5]. The company appears to be beginning to recover from this in 2005 as the ROCE has increased, though this may be skewed by the exceptional gain of £2,912k due to disposal of freehold buildings/land and a subsidiary undertaking. Overall, the entity is not doing as well from this perspective as it has in previous years but it appears to be progressing well and returning towards previous levels. <heading>Measure 3 - Turnover</heading>Turnover is another useful measure of how profitable an entity is, as it shows how much money the entity made overall (i.e. revenue from sales). Radstone Technology PLC had a turnover of £49.98m in 2005 [6], though several important factors affected this value, for example the very weak dollar will have had a considerable effect on the value of the turnover in the USA compared to that in the UK and Europe. However, the 2005 value is an improvement over that in 2004 and in general the trend is upwards, suggesting that the company is performing well at trading. <figure/><heading>Measure 4 - Gross Profit Ratio</heading>Gross profit ratio is a measure of "how successful the entity has been at trading" [7], i.e. the profit generated relative to the sales made. It is almost always defined as follows (allowing for accurate comparisons between entities):  FORMULA  (1.3) In 2005, Radstone Technology PLC had a gross profit ratio value of 51.19% [8], which has been steadily increasing over the past 5 years. This suggests that the entity is improving its profitability compared to its turnover - however it is important to examine both the profit and the turnover when considering this ratio as a high gross profit ratio could still be achieved even with a considerable drop in both profit and turnover. The large difference between 2003 and 2004 is at least partially due to the decrease in turnover in 2004, however even with this drop the entity is still generating a reasonable level of profit and overall appears to be doing well financially. <figure/><heading>Measure 5 - Acid Test Ratio</heading>The acid test ratio is a liquidity ratio, meaning that it is a measure of how much cash the entity could have quickly by liquidating its assets [9]. It compares the value of the current assets (not including stocks as these may not be able to be turned into cash quickly) to the value of the current liabilities using the following formula:  FORMULA  (1.4) <figure/>As the graph above shows, the entity's acid test ratio value has never dropped below 1.00 - the value some recommend as a rough guide, below which one should be cautious - and is generally relatively high. This suggests that it is in an excellent liquidity position and hence would be able to meet its immediate financial commitments were it to liquidate. In 2005, its value is 1.47 [10] which implies that were it to liquidate now it would be more than able to cover its liabilities, putting it in a good position financially. <heading>Measure 6 - Trade Debtor Collection Period</heading>Very simply, the trade debtor collection period is a measure of how quickly an entity collects the money it is owed. This is very important as "if the debtors are slow at paying, the entity might find that it has run into cash flow problems" [11] and it is a useful measure of how efficiently an entity is operating. It is defined as follows:  FORMULA  (1.5) Radstone Technology PLC had a trade debtor collection period for 2005 of 101 days [12]. In the UK, the median debtor collection period is around 50 days [13] which suggests that Radstone Technology PLC may not be very efficient at collecting its debts. Over the last 5 years, there has been a general upward trend in the trade debtor collection period, however this appears to be settling at around 100 days: <figure/>The entity may be struggling to collect its debts promptly, which could potentially lead to future cash flow problems. Having examined other ratios, Radstone Technology PLC does not appear to be having serious financial problems at present however it will need to monitor this closely and perhaps tighten up on its credit control procedures in order to avoid this becoming a problem in the future. <heading>Measure 7 - Trade Creditor Payment Period</heading>Another ratio which is commonly used alongside trade debtor collection period is trade creditor payment period. This is a measure of how quickly the entity pays its creditors off, which can indicate how efficiently the entity is operating and, like trade debtor collection period, may reflect cash flow problems within the entity [14]. It is calculated as follows:  FORMULA  (1.6) Radstone Technology PLC had a period of 62 days for its trade creditor payment period in 2005 [15], which is slightly above the average payment period of 45-60 days [16]. Over the past five years, the value has fluctuated but the overall trend is downwards, which seems perhaps a little strange given the increasing trade debtor collection period. It is likely that they are finding it increasingly easy to pay off their debts, however this must be monitored to avoid problems as if the discrepancy between the two ratios becomes too large the entity may find itself with cash flow problems. <figure/><heading>Measure 8 - Dividend Yield</heading>As the entity is being examined from the point of view of an ordinary shareholder, it is important to consider investment ratios. Dividend yield is a very useful measure for ordinary shareholders as it shows the "rate of return that an investor gets by comparing the cost of his shares with the dividend receivable" [17], i.e. it reflects the return they are getting relative to their investment in the entity. It is calculated as:  FORMULA  (1.7) Note that it may also be expressed as a percentage. Radstone Technology PLC only began releasing dividends in 2002 so the values for dividend yield are generally low, as would be expected for a "small to medium size, expanding business which has not been on the market for long" [18]. The value has been increasing year on year, in spite of increasing share prices, suggesting that the company is in an excellent position from an investor's point of view. <figure/><heading>Measure 9 - Earnings Per Share</heading>Another useful investment ratio is the earnings per share ratio which essentially reflects how much the entity has earned relative to the number of shares it has in issue. This is important to ordinary shareholders as it puts "the profit into context" [19]. The equation for its calculation is:  FORMULA  (1.8) The following graph shows how Radstone Technology PLC's earnings per share has varied over the past 5 years: <figure/>The overall trend is increasing, however there is clearly a significant drop in 2004 (which may be attributed to the loss already discussed for this year), and a significant increase in 2005 to a value of 25.97 - an increase of over 20 on the previous year [20]. This is likely to be at least partially due to the acquisition of Octec Ltd. which will have had a large effect on this ratio, so it is important to monitor this in the future to get a more accurate picture of the usual operation of the entity and see if the growth is sustainable. <heading>Measure 10 - Gearing Ratio</heading>Finally, another useful investment ratio is the gearing ratio, which can give an indication of how risky an investment an entity is. It compares how much of the entity is financed by loans and how much is financed by shareholder funds; clearly a high level of loans implies that an entity is risky from an investor's point of view as if the company gets into financial difficulty and cannot pay off its loans, the shareholders will lose out [21]. It can be calculated in several ways but to allow for a fair comparison with its peers it is important to select the same method for all entities. For this reason, the following equation (as used by the Fame database [22]) will be used:  FORMULA  (1.9) On its own, a gearing ratio for an entity is of little value. However when it is put into context by comparing it to previous years' values or to those of its peers it can be a useful way to assess how risky an investment an entity is. The graph overleaf shows how Radstone Technology PLC's gearing ratio for 2005 compares with those for its peer entities as given in the Fame database [23]. Radstone Technology PLC sits 7 th lowest amongst its 15 peers, though several of the entities around it have very similar gearing ratios, and it is considerably lower than many of the entities, 5 of which have gearing ratios above 100 compared to Radstone Technology PLC's value of 45. Recalling that a low gearing ratio suggests a less risky investment, Radstone Technology PLC seems to be a fairly safe investment compared to its peers. <figure/><heading>Assessment of Reliability</heading>This data is very useful, however as with all information it is important to consider how reliable the sources are. In this case, the source of the financial information is the Radstone Technology PLC annual report for the financial year ending 31 st March 2005. As much of the data contained within the report is fairly subjective, various standards and adjustments will have been employed in order to ensure the data gives a "true and fair" representation of the entity's financial state. One example of such an adjustment is depreciation, which takes account of the fact that fixed assets - such as machinery - will lose value over time. Clearly depreciation is difficult to measure so a reasonable method of estimation must be used; as different methods will produce different results, the exact method chosen will have an impact on the reported profit for the entity. In the case of the Radstone Technology PLC annual report, the depreciation values are clearly detailed in the Notes to the Financial Statements [24], and the method used (a "straight line basis over their estimated useful economic lives") along with assumptions about working lifetime are also documented. While this method will clearly not be absolutely accurate, it is a reasonable approximation and the estimated useful economic life values appear to be reasonable, suggesting that the depreciation adjustments made are fair. These will help to provide a valid and accurate impression of the entity's financial position by reflecting the fact that fixed assets are not likely to be worth the same amount from year to year, and hence the reported financial value of the company is altered accordingly. Another useful adjustment takes account of the fact that some services provided during the accounting period will not yet have been paid for. Some money will therefore need to be allowed (accrued) for these services, leading to an entry in the financial statements as "accruals" for the year. In the Radstone Technology PLC annual report for 2005, this can be found on page 47 [25] and is listed under Creditors: amounts falling due within one year. This shows that account has been taken of these values and the profit has been adjusted accordingly, however there is no explanation of where the figure for accruals has come from or how it has been calculated, so it is not possible to say how accurate an estimate it is, and therefore it is not really possible to conclude how fair the value is. The Notes to the Financial Statements note that applicable accounting standards in the UK have been adhered to when preparing the statements [26], suggesting that they will provide a valid comparison when related to those of one of its peers. This is very useful as many financial measures included in the statements are far more useful when used for peer comparison than as stand-alone figures. The group finance director acknowledges the requirement to adopt IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) in the financial review and states that "[t]he applicable standards have been identified and reviewed to ensure that the relevant data is being captured" [27], which will allow for even wider compatibility when comparing the accounts to other entities. Not only have relevant standards been adopted, suggesting that there is at least some degree of regulation in the way the accounts were constructed, but they have also been examined by an external auditor, who has certified that the accounts present a "true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group as at 31 March 2005" [28]. This alone does not necessarily indicate that the accounts are indeed "true and fair", however external auditing is good practice and provides some reassurance that the accounts have been satisfactorily prepared and, combined with the adjustments and adoption of standards detailed above, suggests that the financial report should indeed present a reasonably true and fair assessment view of the entity's performance. <heading>Recommendations to Shareholders</heading>Given the results from the ratio analysis, and the assessment that the values are reasonably reliable, it seems that at the financial year ending 31 st March 2005 the entity was improving in profitability and was a fairly safe investment for the year. The share price is increasing over time, as are the investment ratios in general. There are no indicators evident at this stage which would suggest the entity's performance is going to seriously decline in the near future, implying that shareholders would have been wise to at least retain their shares and possibly to increase their investment by purchasing more. It seems reasonable to expect that the entity will continue to perform well and, therefore, that the shareholders will see a good return on their investment. <heading>Assessment of Future Performance</heading><heading>Predicting Future Performance</heading>Although we have noted that the annual report appears to give a reasonably accurate view of an entity's present financial position when interpreted appropriately, it is important to establish also whether it is a good indicator of future performance. As it is now around 9 months since Radstone Technology PLC published their last end of year report, there is plenty of data available on their more recent activities which can be used to provide a comparison between the sort of performance which could be expected from the annual report and their actual performance. An interim financial report was published in September 2005 [29] which provides a good source of specific financial data for the period since the end of year report, and the London Stock Exchange website [30] has various data on share prices and the general financial performance of the entity. In addition, various newspaper articles - for example those in the Financial Times - provide extra background information on the entity's activities and performance. Further sources used for specific areas of research can be found in the references section below. From the ratio analysis above, it appears that the entity is in a good position financially. There are no immediately obvious causes for concern which would suggest that performance is likely to change for the worse and the outlook for the entity appears good. Their order book is growing and the recent acquisition of Octec is likely to aid this further, although the effects of this may not be evident for some time. Overall, the picture of the entity presented by the annual report appears to be an optimistic one, predicting further development and research, leading to increased orders and, hence, profits. <heading>Performance to Date</heading>According to the interim report, since the last end of year report was published Radstone Technology PLC has been doing well. The entity was still experiencing growth in sales, its order book was at a record high and it was predicting to exceed the value of orders booked and shipped within the second half of the year compared to 12 months ago [31]. Underlying losses had increased a little but this was principally attributed to new product development, which had required expenditures above those in the same period during the previous year. Gross profit margin had decreased overall from last year, down by 4% to 37.3%, however this was partially attributable (2.1%) to the weak US dollar and overall gross profit was still increasing over 2004 so this is not necessarily a significant cause for concern [32]. The need for defence equipment, such as that supplied by Radstone, is still very strong with the ongoing war in Iraq and general arming of the US military. Radstone Technology PLC "sells more than half its output in the US" [33] and so has profited greatly with the demand for "smart" military equipment and "increasing investment in technology to achieve a network-centric battlefield" [34]. As the threat of terrorism and uncertainty of war looks set to remain for the near future, it is likely that Radstone will continue to benefit and will most likely continue with the upward trend in its order book. However, in order to continue to remain competitive it has been forced to increase spending on research and development which has caused increased losses. The weak US dollar coupled with the large percentage of business which comes from the USA has also contributed to smaller profits than could otherwise be expected; it suffered "to the tune of about Pounds 1.5m in the full year from a change to its dollar- hedging rates" [35], leaving sales for the year down by around £0.3m [36] in spite of its strong order book. <heading>Comparison of Performance to Expectations</heading>On the basis of the above research, it appears that Radstone Technology PLC's recent performance tallies fairly well with the predictions which could reasonably be made on the basis of the information contained in the annual report. The outlook presented for the entity was perhaps a little overly optimistic, however when factors outside of the entity's control - for example, the weak US dollar - are taken into account, its financial position is generally within expectations based on the annual report. This suggests that consulting annual reports is a worthwhile practice which can provide some very useful information about an entity's current and future financial prospects. As with all research, annual reports should not be taken as the only source of information about an entity and research into the appropriate market sector(s) and examination of recent relevant news reports can provide valuable additional information which will allow more accurate predictions to be drawn. However, as a general basis for drawing conclusions, it appears that annual reports are an invaluable source of information and should be consulted as part of any investigation into an entity's financial position. 