<heading>Introduction:</heading>In order to exam whether 'A happy worker is a productive worker', it is worthwhile to look back the literature which deals with the relationship between satisfaction and performance. Academics and researchers proposed different views about this issue, Bradfield and Crockett (1995) concluded that there is little evidence to suggest that employees' attitudes bear any simple or appreciable relationship to performance on the job. However, by contrast, Herzberg et al (1957) provided a quite different conclusion: there is frequent evidence to suggest that positive job attitudes are favourable to increased productivity. Facing these contradictory opinions, the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance will be examined in detail firstly. Then the determinants of job performance and job satisfaction will be discussed, finally the conclusion and suggestions for management in the real world will be provided. <heading>Relationship between Job Satisfaction and Job Performance:</heading><heading>Satisfaction causes performance; a happy worker is a productive worker. </heading>According to Greene (1972), a proposition widely agreed by researchers and often identified with the so-called Human Relations Movement is that a happy worker is a productive worker, which means the degree of job satisfaction felt by the employee determines his/her performance, in other words, satisfaction causes performance. A number of academicians have found it quiet appealing, Vroom's (1964) valance-instrumentality- expectance model is an example of theory-based support for the satisfaction causes performance case (Greene 1972). In Vroom's model (Huczynski and Buchanan 2001), 'valence' refers to the perceived values or degree of preference that an individual has for a particular outcome; 'instrumentality' refers to individual's perceived likelihood that good performance will lead to values reward and 'expectancy' concerns the individual's perceived likelihood that effort will result in good performance. The force of the motivation to work hard is the result of the multiplication of above three variables (Huczynski and Buchanan 2001). Thus it is fair to say from Vroom's model that job satisfaction reflects the valence of the job and the function of valence of the job is the force to motivate employees to work harder. Thus satisfaction should be and it is negatively related to absenteeism and labour turnover, thought the empirical evidence for valence also leads to higher performance is less (Greene 1972). In Vroom's twenty-three field studies which examined the relationship between satisfaction and performance showed that satisfaction explained less than two percent of the variance in performance (Greene 1972). However, Shaw and Blum (1965) reported that group performance is, in part, caused by group's awareness of member satisfaction. In addition, Sheridan and Slocum (1975) indicated that job satisfaction was found to affect the performance of the operative level of employees but not for managers. Therefore, based on the above analysis and evidence, the possibility that job satisfaction leads to work performance still remains, although it might for some employees and under some conditions (Greene 1972). Argyle (1987) also produced similar result which is absenteeism and turnover did have a direct relationship to levels of satisfaction, but productivity only did so for highly skilled or intrinsically motivated employees. Individual differences were very significant; some people may work harder when less satisfied while some people may work less hard when more satisfied. In addition, the underlying belief of Herzberg's (1966) two factor theory proposed that increased job satisfaction is an important source of motivation and will lead to better performance since job satisfaction is associated with increased productivity and reduced turnover, absenteeism (Eugene 1987). The two sets of factors mentioned by Herzberg are motivator and hygiene factors. Motivator factors are those producing good feelings in the work place and thus lead to high levels of job satisfaction, motivation and performance, which include achievement, recognition, responsibility, advancement, growth and the work itself (Huczynski and Buchanan 2001). By contrast, hygiene factors are those remove, prevent job dissatisfaction but do not contribute to motivation and performance, which include pay, company policy, supervision, status, security and working conditions (Ibid, 2001). Therefore, in practice, managers should build motivators into the jobs to promote job satisfaction and improve hygiene factors to minimize dissatisfaction hence increase productivity. Moreover, job enrichment, such as make tasks more interesting, involving and rewarding can be used to increase motivation and performance (Huczynski and Buchanan 2001). As Paul et al described (1961:61) job enrichment 'seeks to improve both efficiency and human satisfaction'. Janson's (1971) study about the effect of job enrichment of typists, Ford's (1969) nineteen job enrichment projects at American Telephone & Telegraph all provided support evidence for this proposition. However, Orpen (1979) found that enrichment caused significant increases in employee job satisfaction, job involvement, and internal motivation and led to significance decrease in absenteeism and turnover but had little impact on performance. Also, the social, cultural, organizational and environmental factors might make 'more satisfaction, more performance' relationship less likely (Thonpson and McHugh 2002). <heading>Performance causes satisfaction: a productive worker is a happy worker</heading>The second proposition concerning the relationship between satisfaction and performance posits that satisfaction, rather than being a cause, is an effort of performance (Porter and Lawler 1968). According to Porter and Lawler (as showed in the figure), the effort expended on the task depends on the perceived values of rewards plus the expectation that performance will lead to reward. Moreover, job performance depends on individual perception, individual abilities and traits together with role perceptions. Furthermore, differential performance determines rewards and produces variation in employee's expression of job satisfaction (Huczynski and Buchanan 2001). Two types of rewards are intrinsic (refers to the feeling of challenge, achievement and success) and extrinsic (refers to organizational rewards such as pay, promotion and benefits). Here, rewards serve as a moderating variable and satisfaction comes from the receipt of both intrinsic and extrinsic rewards which are the consequences of performance, although intrinsic need satisfaction was more closely related to performance than was extrinsic need satisfaction (Eugene 1987; Greene 1972). <figure/>At the empirical level, this position has received support from a number of studies. For example, Greene (1972) and Bowen and Siegel (1970) reported that the correlations between performance and satisfaction were significantly higher than the correlations between satisfaction and performance. Additional support for this proposition was offered by Farris and Lim (1969) who reported that performance leading to satisfaction but the mediating variable is leader behaviour (Greene 1972). Other variables, such as occupational group (Doll and Gunderson 1996), self-esteem (Greenhaus and Badin 1974), job values (Locke 1973) and ability (Carlson 1969) have also been suggested as the variables moderating the relationship between performance and satisfaction (Greene 1972). Moreover, Sheridan and Slocum (1975), using a cross-lag correlation design, tested causal relationships between work performance and four different measures of job satisfaction over a one year period, indicated that performance caused satisfaction for a line and staff management sample. In addition, Wanous (1974) collected job satisfaction and performance data from 80 newly hired female telephone operators after one and three months' work experience. A combination of cross-lagged and dynamic correlations was used to make causal inferences about the satisfaction-performance relationship. When job satisfaction was split into extrinsic and intrinsic components, the findings suggested that performance causes intrinsic satisfaction and extrinsic satisfaction causes performance. Although literature reviews and a number of empirical studies have focused on the performance-to-satisfaction relationship, only a few investigators have directly examined the issue of causality. Clearly a more logic view is that performance is determined by people's efforts to obtain the goals and outcomes they desire, and satisfaction is determined by the outcomes people actually obtain. <heading>Determinants of Job Performance and Satisfaction:</heading>Empirical support for each of the theoretical positions outlined above has been weak, With respect to the first assumption (satisfaction causes performance). Steers stated that "the fact that workers are satisfied does not mean they will necessarily produce more, only that they are satisfied" (1981: 309). Regarding the second position (performance causes satisfaction), he said that "there is no compelling argument that performance must necessarily cause satisfaction, particularly if performance goes unrewarded" (1981:310). （Petty et al 1984）In other words, employee satisfaction does not necessarily lead to high employee performance, while highly productive employees are not necessarily the highly satisfied employees. The underlying reasons are both job performance and job satisfaction are caused by a variety of factors. <heading>Determinants of Job Performance:</heading>A basic conceptualization of the determinants of job performance was pointed by Vroom (1964), which is, performance is determined by people's ability and motivation. Similarly, Porter and Lawler (1968) indicated that performance was caused by the multiplication of effort, abilities and traits of the individual and role perception. Although it is clearly that ability and motivations are the two most significant determinants of job performance, Campbell and Pritchard (1976) criticized that these ideas are too simple, excluding other factors outside the individual that can still impact job performance. Facing this problem, Blumberg and Pringle (1982) proposed a three-way categorization of variables determining job performance, adding another influence factor which they termed 'opportunity' into it. Therefore, in the following sections, the determinants of job performance will be mainly analysed based on this model. <heading>Ability:</heading>Traditionally, identification of people's abilities, usually through cognitive tests, is required in the successful performance of a job (Fleishman 1975). Moreover, Hunter and Hunter (1982) found that these tests have been successful at predicting people's job performance in a number of settings and across many job categories. Indeed, Hunter and Hunter (1982) provided evidence that cognitive tests tend to be an important determinant in job performance. A more causal approach to understanding the impact of ability on job performance has been presented by Hunter (1983). Through the findings, Hunter (1983) suggested that general cognitive abilities and people's previous work experience directly affected people's level of job knowledge and job performance. Job experience enables people to gain competence and thus perform better, evidence has shown that the length or amount of job experience affects people's performance (Waldman and Spangler 1989). Therefore organizations which attempt to get the most capable and suitable people for the jobs, induced psychological tests and required pervious work experiences when they are recruiting and selecting employees, since most organizations believe that people's ability and past experience will play an important role for their future job performance. <heading>Motivation</heading>According to Waldman and Spangler (1989), a second factor for the determinant of job performance is the broad theoretical area of motivation. Motivation is defined as 'the cognitive decision-making process through which goal-directed behaviour is initiated, energized and directed and maintained' (Huczynski and Buchana 2001:240). Motivation concerns factors push or pull people to behave in certain ways; it is the factor but not the only factor which influences work performance (Arnold et al 1998). In the literature, there are two main categories of motivation theories, which are content theory and process theory. Content theories examine what motivates people through the concepts such as goals, needs and 'motivators'. Widely known theories in this category include Maslow's 'Hierarchy of needs' (1963), which suggested that people are motivated by a number of factors at work, aiming to satisfy one particular need before moving to another factor in the higher level of the hierarchy; Alderfer's (1972) EGC theory argued that it was more realistic to consider three basic needs for people, which are existence needs, relatedness and growth needs; Also McClelland's (1961) need for achievement theory and Herzberg's (1966) two-factor theory which has been examined above. While process theories examine how behaviours are selected, directed, initiated and maintained, as in the work of Vroom, Porter and Lawler (which have been mentioned in the above section) and Adams (Thonpson and McHugh 2002). Equity theory is based on the perception of 'fair treatment'. The most influential work done by Adams (1963) argued that people are motivated to act in situations which they perceive to be inequitable or unfair. Inequality occurs when people either get more or less than they think they deserve and the more intense the perceived inequality, the higher tension and stronger the motivation to act (Huczynski and Buchana 2001). The implementations of motivation theory in practice are diverse. The ideas of job design and restructure in order to satisfy people's needs and thus increase their satisfaction and performance are widely used. Moreover, since money is not the only motivator for people, other motivators such as self-esteem also played a role, therefore when designing reward systems, various reward systems should be used, people should not only be rewarded by financial items such as pay but also be rewarded by non-financial items, such as promotion. However, the difference among individuals and countries towards the value of incentives may cause different patterns of behaviour even in the same situation. Such as in China, people will place sense of belongingness and love higher than self-esteem and self-actualization (Nevis, 1983). <heading>Opportunity</heading>Besides ability and motivation, researchers have claimed that opportunity variables including available resources for people (such as the quality of equipment and material), working conditions, leader behaviour, and co-ordination of team members are also the determinants of job performance (Waldman and Spangler 1989; Arnold et al 1998). Matsui et al (1987) showed group process may enhance individual performance, having group goals cause people to accept more difficult goals and develop a sense of shared responsibility for the achievement of individual goals. Moreover, leadership style has been considered as a factor affects job performance (Waldman and Spangler 1989). For example, leadership which emphasized the use of contingent rewards will enhance individual's performance-outcome expectancy beliefs and hence improve their performance. Therefore, based on the above analysis, it is fair to conclude that job performances are determined by a variety of factors. A happy worker might be a productive worker but a productive worker may also be caused by individual's ability and previous experience or may be motivated by the potential chance of getting higher pay and promotion. <heading>Determinants of Job Satisfaction</heading>In addition to the determinants for job performance, scholars have also been interested in why some people report being fell satisfied with their jobs, while others express much low levels of satisfaction (Locke, 1976). According to Agho et al (1993), job satisfaction is defined as the extent to which employees like their work. It is employee's attitude towards their jobs or work environment; it can be either negative or positive. Moreover, two general categories of antecedent variables associated with job satisfaction have been defined, which are environmental and personal characteristics (Ellickson and Logsdon 2002). Environmental determinants refer to the factors associated with the work itself or work environment such as pay and promotion, supervision, fair evaluation of work etc. Ellickson and Logsdon (2002) indicated that promotional opportunities and pay have a positive link with job satisfaction. Brown and Mitchell (1993) found that there was significant negative links between organizational obstacles (such as insufficient training, unsafe work environment, uneven work distribution) and employee job satisfaction in the study of bank employees. In addition, the positive relationships between supervisors and employees contribute to the higher level of job satisfaction. Ting (1997) reported that government employees who enjoyed a supportive relationship with their supervisors experienced higher levels of job satisfaction than those who did not. Finally, Blau (1999) provided evidence for the positive relationship between employee performance appraisal satisfaction and overall job satisfaction. While personal factors refer to individual attributes and characteristics, such as age, gender and personality and so on. Although Ellickson and Logsdon (2002) found that gender and age had a weak relationship with job satisfaction, personality might play a role in determining job satisfaction. For example, optimistic people might be more easily satisfied and feel happier than those pessimistic people. Besides environmental and personal characteristics, social, cultural and situational factors may also affect job satisfaction. For example, Herzberg (1987) indicated that managers, skilled worker's satisfaction were caused by 'motivator' factor while unskilled worker's satisfaction appeared to be dependent on hygiene factors. Thus a productive worker might be a happy worker as discussed before but not necessarily a happy work, a happy worker might be caused by the good work condition, attractive payment or the worker himself or herself personality. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>To sum up, the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance is still debatable due to the weak academic and empirical evidence. Also, it is find that job performance is mainly determined by ability, motivation and opportunity, while job satisfaction is affected by environmental, personal, social, cultural and situational factors. Thus, a happy worker can be a productive worker or vice verse, however, employee satisfaction does not necessarily lead to high employee performance, while highly productive employees are not necessarily the highly satisfied employees. Moreover, the causality between job performance and job satisfaction might not be the interests for management in practice; however, in order to win in the increasing competition, effective manager can provide both productivity and satisfaction for the organizations. The techniques such as 'goal setting' and 'job enrichment' can be used jointly. The increased autonomy, feedback and task identify that typically accompany job enrichment programs should facilitate management to gain higher levels of employee job satisfaction. On the other hand, the use of goal-setting program should enhance employees' task performance. Lastly but very importantly, the existence of individual differences and culture differences should be taken into account when management are seeking for greater job performance and job satisfaction. 