<heading>Website Report</heading>When analysing a website, it is important to appreciate its purpose and audience. Charter88 is a causal pressure group that endorses codification of the British Constitution alongside electoral reform and an attempt at "unlocking democracy" (a term taken from the 2002 campaign document.) The organisation places consistent emphasis on its membership size, stating that over 85,000 people have signed the charter to date. Therefore, the website is chiefly aimed at first persuading the reader to sympathise with the aims of Charter88 and to then convince potential signatories to join its cause. With increased popular support comes greater influence when in conference with governmental departments and it is therefore essential that the website, as an important campaigning device, is effective in its aim. The effectiveness of a website, regardless of its purpose, can depend on a number of factors including coherent design, ease of navigation and relevance or value of the provided information. The front page of a website is often as far as the average user will travel and so all relevant information needs to be clearly presented. The layout of Charter88's front page is neatly organised; a practical navigation bar rests under a site logo and slogan at the top of the screen. The slogan, "Campaign for a modern and fair democracy", quickly informs the user of the organisation's chief aim whilst leaving some ambiguity for further investigation. There are a series of recent news articles positioned under a single image illustrating general election votes compared to seat allocations, visually informing the user of the distortion of the first past the post electoral system. The site, as well as being vibrant at first glance, is lacking in unnecessary graphics allowing for faster loading times and more focus on text. It is, as one would expect of a pressure group so dependent on membership size, extremely easy to become a signatory and effectively join Charter88's cause. Towards the top left-hand-side of the front page are two hyperlinks, the "Add your name to the charter" link sends the user to an easily comprehendible signatory form, whereas the "make a donation" link directs the user straight to a simple donation form. The figure quoted above the two links is the number of so-called 'active signatories'. There is no explanation on the website as to what is meant by an active signatory, though it is an impressive figure nonetheless. Below this box is a helpful list of upcoming events, currently including the organisation's OGM and AGM. This allows for campaigns to be advertised and provides opportunities for users to get involved as clicking on the event leads to more information on how to attend. <fnote> URL  Accessed 22nd April 2006. </fnote>The site, at first glance, seems lacking in sufficient content but this is not the case as the navigation bar provides easy navigation through what turns out to be a very deep website. The 'news and comments' section provides the latest information on Charter88's campaigns and concerns. A slightly outdated topic added on 9 th February 2005 comments on the launch of an "Elect the Lords Campaign", highlighting the importance of donations and claiming the effectiveness of contacting MPs. This section is extremely easy to navigate and the lack of unnecessary images reduces loading times whilst leaving the user undisrupted to read the news and comments. The main problem here, and indeed throughout the site as a whole, is the lack of recent additions. The most recent news item was added in April of 2005 and it seems that, throughout the site, there is a lack of current information. This is incredibly detrimental to the overall sense of the site; not only does it undermine the communicative link between the site user and Charter88 but it reduces the effectiveness of the site at attracting members both to the organisation itself and local campaigns. <fnote> URL  Accessed 22nd April 2006. </fnote>Despite this, there is an extensive archival function to the site, as it documents many related press releases and publications including Charter88's Parliamentary Bulletin, 'Central Lobby'. This bulletin, although published infrequently, offers an in-depth guide to the aims, tools and results of the organisation. The most recent issue, published in April 2005, comments on Constitutional Reform, the Armed Forces Bill, ID cards and reform of the House of Lords as well as issues such as devolution and elections. The key concern for Charter88 is to increase democracy and freedom throughout Britain and it seems that this is continually addressed, debated and advocated in all of its publications. The main source of analysis comes from articles contained in Charter88's Citizen magazine. There are many convincing critiques, editorials and interviews available online. Writers for Citizen include singer-songwriter Billy Bragg, Charter88's once-director Pam Giddy, Body Shop Founder Dame Anita Roddick, as well as MPs and academics from across the country. The range of writers reflects the broad demographic which Charter88 seek to capture. The site mainly appeals to those who have already joined Charter88, as there is a large amount of information regarding the organisation's successes throughout the site but it is difficult to interpret for prospective signatories. This suggests that, though there seems to be a desire for new signatories, they are presumed to have at least a basic understanding of Charter88's aims and objectives before visiting the website as the 'about us' page speaks only in vague ideological terms, and does not act as a true indicator of the organisation's immediate intentions. Therefore, to further its effectiveness, the site is in need of a page clearly stating the influential actions of Charter88, reporting how government reacted to campaigns and how joining the group would further increase its influence. Motivating apathetic signatories and appealing to prospective ones is something that every pressure group website should do. Sites belonging to the likes of Amnesty International, Greenpeace and Oxfam, huge groups with large resources for professional web designers, are efficient in attracting members by providing clear and impressive information on their influence. Aims, resources and results should be clearly stated, as a high membership figure is not enough to convince indifferent users. <fnote> URL  Accessed 30th April 2006. </fnote><fnote> URL  Accessed 30th April 2006. </fnote><fnote> URL  Accessed 30th April 2006. </fnote><heading>Effectiveness Report</heading>When judging the effectiveness of a pressure group such as Charter88, it is essential to first establish its aims and objectives and then, taking into consideration factors such as resources and the external environment, analyse its results. The fundamental reason for the existence of pressure groups is to organise the public in order to better influence governmental decisions between elections. The extent to which this increases the democratic process of governance is debatable but it offers an alternative output of political pressure for those who feel strongly on a particular issue. Therefore, it is not a pressure group's function to hold legitimate power or wield the ability to arouse obedience, but to influence those in government that exercise this power. The following is an analysis of the extent to which Charter88 is effective in influencing government taking into consideration its resources and initial intentions. A causal group endeavours to support an explicit objective. In the case of Charter88, this is the advocacy of British constitutional and electoral reform in order to "demand political, civil and human rights in the United Kingdom." There is a fundamental objection to the treatment of the British public as subjects rather than citizens and a call for the codification of inalienable rights rather than the existence of limitations to personal freedom. The original charter was very similar to the United States Declaration of Independence in that it was very brief and advocated the liberty of those within the polity. Drawing on the works of John Locke, Montesquieu and other liberal thinkers, Charter88 attempted to entrench some of the ideas held in the uncodified, and so-called fluid, British Constitution; bringing together concepts established in the 1689 Bill of Rights, The Parliament Acts of 1911 and 1949, and most recently The Human Rights Act of 1998. The dominant themes in the original charter are the transparency and accountability of Parliament, the structure of the House of Lords and the electoral system used in The General Elections. As well as this, the issue of devolution to regional and local governments is raised. <fnote>The Original Charter,  URL  Accessed 1st May 2006. </fnote>Solutions to these apparent problems are offered within the charter. Firstly, it is suggested that Executive powers and prerogatives should be subjected to the rule of law and that freedom of information and open government should be established. Alongside this, the reformation of The House of Lords is advocated in order to create a "democratic, non-hereditary Second Chamber." A reversal of the current relationship between Legislature and Executive is also commended by proposing that the Executive must be "placed under the power of a democratically renewed Parliament and all agencies of the state under the rule of law." These reforms are suggested with the intention of increasing the accountability of Parliament and further entrench Montesquieu's theory of the separation of powers in the British system. Furthermore, the persistant digressions to civil liberties such as the freedom of assembly, association, expression and privacy as well as freedom from discrimination and detention without trial enforce the natural rights established by John Locke. Furthermore, the topic of free and fair elections is addressed with the proposition of a fair electoral system of proportional representation. <fnote>The Original Charter,  URL  Accessed 1st May 2006. </fnote>These are the aims of Charter88, they are the reason for its existence and purpose of its efforts. Like many causal pressure groups, Charter88's objectives are not to maximise its members' economic or professional position, but to further the intention for freedom and democracy. Their objective is not a simple one. To fundamentally reform a political system is no easy task, especially for a pressure group. The governmental points of entry available for Charter88 may be fewer than for those groups with a less politically controversial or damaging aim, such as the Snowdrop Campaign to ban handguns following the Dunblane Massacre in March 1996. In this respect, the organisation can be seen as attempting to influence not only those in government who wield the legitimate power, but also the electorate who have the ability to indirectly form Parliament and may be more sympathetic to their intentions. A political party may not be sympathetic to a pressure group who seek to completely alter the electoral system that keeps its members dominant in Parliament. Nor would it be inclined to implement reforms that increase the accountability of The House of Lords through elections; giving it as much representative right as the House of Commons and perhaps leading to consensus politics or gridlock. Now that the main aims of Charter88 have been established, it is necessary to look at the resources available, and the methods they deploy in order to achieve their aims. For this analysis, the typology of factors affecting pressure group effectiveness established in Wyn Grant's Pressure Groups, Politics and Democracy In Britain (Grant, 1989) which draws on the works of Presthus (1973, 1974); Schmitter and Streeck (1981); and Whiteley and Winyard (1987). Three typological catagories can be analysed in regards to pressure group effectiveness: features of the domain the pressure group seeks to organise, the resources available, and features of the external political and economic environment. <fnote>Grant, W. (1989), Pressure Groups, Politics and Democracy In Britain, Hemel Hempstead: Philip Allan. </fnote>The first category of analysis is concerned with the characteristics of potential members or, in the case of Charter88, signatories. As a causal group, membership size is important as it is a strong indicator to the government of how big a proportion of the electorate are sympathetic to the group's aim. Therefore, Charter88 has no membership critiria. The objectives of the organisation may appeal to a broad demographic as the furthering of liberty, accountability and representation are issues consistantly raised in the media. Recent controversial bills such as the Racial and Religious Hatred Bill, the Terrorism Bill and the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Bill are said to be reducing democracy and infringing personal liberty. The almost universal appeal of Charter88's intentions may yield a large membership, but the intellectual quality of its members - the degree to which they are specialists in the field of liberty - is hard to judge in the absence of entry requirements but it can be assumed that the average level of expertise is lower than for those members of a pressure group with a tighter membership criteria. The issue of competition between pressure groups also falls under the first category of analysis, as it may hinder the group's ability to gain members. Formed in 1988 by 348 activists and intellectuals, Charter88 was loosely based on a 1977 Czech dissident movement called Charter 77 but had little overlap with the interests of any British pressure groups. In fact when faced with a groups following similar objectives, The New Politics Network and The Active Citizens Transform, it entered into partnership with them in order to maximise resources and membership. This also helped avoid the government being made able to choose which group to listen to and to therefore cause conflicts between them. The second category of analysis focuses on the resources available to the pressure group. Charter88, as mentioned previously, has a very large membership size. Thought to be the biggest political pressure group in Britain not dedicated to the welfare of animals or the environment, the power of 85,000 activists should not be underestimated. However, this assumes that all members are active. In fact, the ease of becoming a member results in a lot of people pledging their support for the group but being apathetic in campaigning. The membership figure quoted therefore refers to the total number of signatories to the charter, many of which do not attempt to influence the government or further the aims of Charter88. Even if a large part of the membership did want to campaign, there is little oppertunity for sanctioning and the organisation may end up as being little more than a grassroots lobby rather than a catalyst for a shift in public opinion. However, Charter88 have always had a close relationship with the Labour Party. Andrew Puddephatt, the pressure group's once-director claimed that the purpose of its formation was "a general expression of dissent" against Thatcherism. In the run-up to the 1997 General Election, Tony Blair claimed that he "subscribe[d] to the vast bulk of Charter88." When elected, it seemed that New Labour would offer the opportunity for Charter88 to cross the bridge from outsider to insider pressure group and allow them to work alongside the governmental system rather than seek to influence it through direct or indirect action and lobbying. However, Charter88, as its website claims, still employs techniques associated with outsider groups, such as street vigils, protests at rights violations and rallys. As it is still seeking to influence public opinion rather than work quietly behind the scenes, it is debatable as to the extent to which Tony Blair subscribed to Charter88. <fnote>New Labour's gurus: Redesigning Britain's constitution, The Economist, 30th October 1997. </fnote><fnote>Blair, T., quoted in New Labour's gurus: Redesigning Britain's constitution, The Economist, 30th October 1997. </fnote>It could be said that the reforms that came with New Labour were not in fact influenced by Charter88 but were purely a result of the external economic and political environment, the third point of analysis. New Labour promised reforms to the House of Lords, Devolution and Regionalisation as well as Electoral Reform. The early reforms to the House of Lords could have very easily been attributed to the inbuilt Conservative majority in the hereditory peers that became increasingly apparent in the 1980s. Devolution could have been a reaction to the Scottish and Welsh nationalists gaining support in Labour constituencies. Even the credit for the referendum on reform of the electoral system can be put down to the effectiveness of the Labour Campaign for Electoral Reform. <fnote>Despite the creation of an Independent Commission in 1997 that looked into alternative electoral systems, the recommendation of the 'Alternative Vote Plus' system has yet to be implemented. </fnote>It is therefore debatable whether Charter88 is an affective or reflective pressure group, that is to say it may mearly follow public opinion rather than influence it. In terms of Richard Rose's typology of a group's goals and wider cultural norms, Charter88 may have witnessed a "gradual increase in the acceptibility of political values supporting pressure group demands." The group may be able to claim credit for incorporating the individual reforms into a proposed constitution even before New Labour existed to execute them, but it was not often consulted when the reforms were going through Parliament. Charter88 may still benefit from New Labour's reforms; though not able to fully take credit for them, it may use the success of the reforms to advocate its other, more controversial and ambitios proposals. The codification of the British Constitution will not be an easy reform to get through Parliament, but if it seeks to entrench the rights of citizens and further the representative makeup of government, then it may be able to refer back to previous reforms that have furthered similar aims successfully. <fnote>Rose, R. (1974, p.253), cited in Grant, W. (1989), Pressure Groups, Politics and Democracy In Britain, Hemel Hempstead: Philip Allan. </fnote>In conclusion, Charter88's aims seem to correspond with the overall desires of the electorate and, though their resources in terms of expertise and access to government may be limited, their objectives are slowly being fulfilled with or without their influence. Perhaps this is ironic, as the very fact that such a group is able to see quite radical reforms through Parliament suggests that there is a high level of democracy and political freedom in the British governmental system and thus undermines Charter88's initial objection. Nevertheless, the group can claim to be an influential part of an interesting time in British political history and can rest assured that, despite the occasional bill, their aims are being slowly embraced by both the public and the government. In attempting to research the workings of Charter88, I found it difficult to aquire any information regarding funding. Though it is not their legal obligation to disclose their accounts, these figures would have been of use when judging the effectiveness of the group in relation to campaign costs, administration and other expenses. As well as this, there was a distinct lack of up-to-date information in regards to the group's achievements, giving the impression that they have withdrawn their attempts to influence government since the 2005 General Election. The methodological problem of comparing the effectiveness of a pressure group such as Charter88 - with broad and to some extent unreachable aims - against that of a group with narrower, more immediately attainable aims such as the aforementioned Snowdrop Campaign, was difficult and did not produce significantly interesting results and was therefore ommitted from this report. 