<heading>I. INTRODUCTION</heading>The nature of human motivation is a complex and puzzling mystery. Since it is established that performance in the workplace depends on how much and on the reason why an individual is willing to act (Gellerman 1965: 7), the question remains on what best explains human incentive. The purpose of this paper is to assess which motivation theory best explains people's willingness to work hard. The paper reflects on human motivation with relevance to different views on human nature, and examines a selection of individual needs and motivation theories. There are two main types of motivational theories, namely content and process theories. The main difference is the assumption on individual needs at work. Content theories assume that all people have the same set of needs, and that these needs motivate behavior (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 193). In contrast, process theories assume that all humans have different needs, and focus on how cognitive processes, or "the way we take in and process information about ourselves and the world," (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 193) influences these needs. Process theories are more concerned with explaining the effect of individual differences on the level of motivation, so that motivation is a result of "social comparison processes" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 233). Content motivation theories are more relevant to explaining people's willingness to work hard, because underlying human needs are the core motivators affecting people's willingness to work hard. <heading>II. INDIVIDUAL NEEDS</heading>It is vital for motivation theories to consider four influential individual needs in the work place, which are the competence, achievement, affiliation, and money motives. 'The competence motive' is the desire for job mastery and professional growth. Robert White suggests the competence motive to be based on the assumption that a person is not only "a vehicle for a set of instincts" (Gellerman 1963: 111), but is also eager on discovering and fulfilling their potential. It is assumed that humans are keen on manipulating their environment to pursue goals. Thus, competence is a key motive affecting job success, because people who have faith in their own ability to influence the environment do tend to succeed. On the other hand, individuals with a strong achievement motive perceive accomplishment as an ends. Achievement-motivated employees search for the opportunities to obtain successes that are "hard but are not unobtainable" (Gullerman 1965: 126), and thus, tend to outperform others by constantly challenging themselves. The reasonable degree of risk involved in the goal-attainment process encourages employees to set realistic goals and to maximize their abilities. Affiliation is another individual need, which refers to the "social drive to be associated with others in interdependent relationships, involving using others for help or support without making them responsible for problems" (MerckSource, 2006). Affiliation can be considered as a means to an end or an ends itself - people socialize with fellow workers for specific purposes, such as favors or protection, or simply for enjoyment (Gellerman, 1965). The affiliation motive considers the fact that humans are social beings, and thus, tend to create informal work groups. Employees seek motivation and support to work hard from peers in informal work groups. The artificial barrier helps the modern employee escape from the "lack of control over one's working environment" (Gellerman 1965: 120). Last but not least is 'money's' particularly complex role as a motivator. Unlike other individual needs, money has "no intrinsic meaning on its own" (Gellerman 1965: 168), and can "therefore absorb whatever meaning people want to find in their lives" (Gellerman 1965: 168). Some people associate money with its rational economic value, while others view money as more of a representation of status, achievement and other intangible goals. The ability for money to satisfy rational and irrational individual needs ensures that it is never oversupplied, so that nobody refuses it, nobody returns it, and people who have lots of it will generally want more. <heading>III. HUMAN NATURE</heading>Before analyzing the various content theories, it should be noted that human incentive is intricately linked with human nature. Since humans are unique and diverse, it would be too narrow to use a single motive or a single set of assumptions to explain employee motivation. Schein (1992) proposed that the best approach to managing people is dependent on the person and context in his 'complex' model of human nature. He considers the fact that human nature is complex and malleable, and thus, concludes that human needs differ between individuals. The contingency theory of motivation confirms this view by suggesting that motivation varies on a case by case basis. So, only a customized approach to motivating employees would be able to motivate people to work hard. Yet this approach is limited in application. It would be, for example, unrealistic to have an independent rewards system designed for every employee in the organization. It would be even more impossible to devise a theory that would take account of all the possible individual differences. Alternatively, there are two generalized ideas on human nature in motivational theories. Hobbes argues that humans are, by nature, lazy, greedy and pleasure-seeking individuals. People are not self-motivated, so they have to be controlled by incentives or rewards in order to achieve results. In contrast, Rousseau's theory on human nature depicts humans as generous and creative individuals. It is perceived that organizational constructs have denied individuals from freely expressing their creative nature. These should be removed to encourage engagement, and thus, motivate better performance and productivity. Employing two universal schools of thought on human nature suggests that people have the same set of needs and should, therefore, be treated in the same way. Douglas McGregor took Hobbes' and Rousseau's view of human nature onto a secondary level of assumptions (Fincham & Rhodes: 202). McGregor's Theory X takes on Hobbes' perspective of control, and assumes that people are "rational economic men" (Fincham & Rhodes: 202) who require rewards or even coercion to motivate them to work. Alternatively, McGregor employs Rousseau's viewpoint of engagement in Theory Y, and deduces that people are "complex men, possessing a bundle of social and self-actualizing needs" (Fincham & Rhodes: 202). When given the appropriate stimulation, people will be able to "show high levels of responsibility and self-direction" (Fincham &. Rhodes: 202). Nevertheless, McGregor's comment on how "humans are malleable" (Schein 1992: 126) does, again, underlie the problem of the oversimplified characterization of human nature. It is accepted that individual needs do change over time and place. Yet the assumption of having a "single strategy that will keep morale and productivity high for everyone everywhere" (Gellerman 1963: 175) must be maintained in order to conclude a 'best' theory explaining people's willingness to work hard. <heading>IV. MOTIVATION THEORIES</heading><heading>FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL REWARDS SYSTEMS</heading><heading>i. MCGREGOR'S THEORY X</heading>In practice, a rewards system is one of the most common methods of motivating people. A rewards system is designed based on the 'rational economic man' model in McGregor's Theory X. Since employees in an organization are assumed to be lazy and unwilling to work, a combination of financial and non-financial rewards are used as motivators. Financial rewards are used to satisfy the money motive, while non-financial rewards are used to satisfy other needs, such as the achievement and competence motives. Rewards are designed to motivate employees by providing them with relatable incentives, which work in line with the organization's general objectives. Rewards systems typically use a combination of financial and non-financial rewards. Some of the more effective financial rewards systems provide performance-related incentives, such as profit-related pay and profit sharing. Other one-off incentives such as individual bonus payments and non-financial incentives such as increasing job titles also have a similar impact upon employee motivation. Rewards are particularly effective in enhancing short-run productivity, because rewards systems are often designed to be short-term oriented. Yet incentive plans are not effective in the long run, because employees are only motivated by short-term incentives. According to Alfie Kohn, there are six main reasons why rewards do not work. First, not everyone views pay as a motivator (Kerr 1997: 19). Although many people are unsatisfied with too little pay, this does not necessarily mean that increasing pay will increase motivation and risk-taking. Secondly, the manipulative effect of rewards creates a high level of insecurity in the relationship between employer and employees (Kerr 1997: 19). Since the employer determines what rewards are suitable, employees are likely to experience a strong sense of control in the long term. This ruptures the employee-employer relationship, so that the employees are not working with the organization's best interests in mind. Thirdly, the competition for such rewards destroys cooperation among employees (Kerr 1997: 20). People may treat each other as obstacles to their own successes. The absence of feedback, social support and room for self-determination further diminishes the employee's sense of status in the organization (Kerr 1997: 20), which ultimately de-motivates the employee to work hard. <heading>ii. MCGREGOR'S THEORY Y</heading>On the other hand, Herzberg and Abraham Maslow proposed two content theories based on McGregor's Theory Y. Both theories assume that the 'complex man' have a set of "social and self-actualizing needs" (Fincham & Rhodes: 202), which need to be inspired in order to show a "high level of responsibility and self-direction" (Fincham & Rhodes: 202). Instead of implementing methods of control, the role of management is to remove the high level of routine in organizations and to create opportunities for stimulating employee motivation. Since it has been suggested that ineffective managers are often associated with McGregor's Theory X (Sturdy 2005, personal communication), content theories based on Theory Y should provide a better explanation for employee motivation. <heading>HERZBERG'S TWO-FACTOR THEORY</heading>Herzberg conducted a set of interviews with a selective group of professionals, consisting of accountants and engineers. The interviewees described when they felt satisfied and dissatisfied about their job. The incidents representing sources of satisfaction included "achievement, advancement, recognition, autonomy, and other intrinsic aspects of work" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 199), whereas those representing sources of dissatisfaction such as "working conditions, salary, job security, company policy, supervisors, and interpersonal relations" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 199). Herzberg termed the sources of satisfaction as motivators, and the sources of dissatisfaction as hygiene factors. Motivators stimulate people to work hard continuously to achieve job satisfaction, whereas hygiene factors only reflect the "acceptable work environment" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 199) and affect job dissatisfaction. Since "motivators reflected people's need for self-actualization, while hygienes represented the need to avoid paid" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 199), both factors stem from completely separated origins. The key motivators identified in the sample of interviewees are the sense of personal progress, responsibility and recognition attained from the profession. The interviewees' positive attitude towards regular managerial feedback also shows the important effect of the competence and achievement motive in this theory. There are, however, many questionable areas in Herzberg's two-factor theory. Firstly, the selective group of professionals may have established a bias by attracting a similar group of achievement-oriented employees. A study conducted by Schneider and Locke in 1971 also discloses how job satisfaction and dissatisfaction are dependent on both motivators and hygiene factors (Fincham & Rhodes 201). This contradicts the idea of motivators and hygiene factors having independent origins. A more important point to consider is the tendency for interviewees to internalize explanations of successes, and externalize explanations of failure (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 201). The subjective and personalized experiences of employees have probably created biased definitions for motivators and hygiene factors. <heading>MASLOW'S 'HIERACHY OF NEEDS'</heading>An alternate theory is Maslow's idea of individuals being motivated by a hierarchy of needs. This hierarchy separates individual needs into two sections, so that self-actualization and self-esteem are listed under higher-order needs, while social, security and psychological needs are listed under deficiency needs (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 195). Maslow argues that there is a 'psychological growth' from the deficiency needs to the higher-order needs. This means that once a need at one level of the hierarchy is satisfied, its impact on our behavior decreases. The need at the next level will then become the more influential impact on our behavior (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 193). Although Maslow makes many generalizations in his theory, he also accepts discrepancies resulting from individual influences (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 197). An example is a hunger striker who satisfies higher-order needs by going on strike, despite having the unsatisfied psychological need of hunger (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 198). This theory accepts that the 'psychological growth' from deficiency needs to higher-order needs is disrupted in such cases. Maslow's acceptance of discrepancies also shows that he is aware of Schien's 'complex' model of human nature and the contingency theory of motivation, despite recognizing Rousseau's generalization of human nature. Since this is not specifically mentioned in the rewards systems and Herzberg's two-factor theory, Maslow's considerations for individual differences makes his theory a better explanation of motivation. In addition, Maslow's hierarchy of needs accounts for all four important individual needs discussed above. The higher-order need for self-actualization is reflected by the achievement and competence motive. The idea of 'self-actualization' itself refers to the "need to develop one's full potential" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 195), which involves the idea of discovering and fulfilling their own potential in terms of job success. The competence motive assumes that people have faith in their own ability to influence the surrounding environment, whereas the achievement motive assumes that individuals are devoted to maximizing abilities and achieving set goals. Both competence and achievement motives show that individuals are strongly motivated by their need for self-actualization. The money motive and the need for affiliation are reflected by Maslow's deficiency needs. Although the money motive symbolizes a complex range of ideas, Maslow has taken into account of its rational economic value under psychological and security needs. The intangible representations of money, such as status, are included as part of the higher-order self-esteem needs. Social needs, on the other hand, include the need for affiliation, because social needs refer to the "need for satisfactory and supportive relationships with others" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 195). By considering this need, Maslow distinguishes the hierarchy of needs from Herzberg's two-factor theory and rewards systems. <heading>V. CONCLUSION </heading>Maslow's hierachy of needs is the best model explaining human motivation, as it is based on a universal prediction of individual needs and behavior, but it also considers the exceptions made for individual differences. This model is also the most persuasive one of all, because the generalization of human needs includes the most important individual motives of competence, affiliation, achievement and money. Although, in reality, socio-demographic influences such as gender and culture should be considered as well, these factors are not the determining forces affecting motivation - human nature and human needs have a much more significant impact on affecting people's willingness to work hard. 