In his, "Second Treatise of Government", Locke gives seemingly conflicting responses to the above question. On the one hand, Locke has several conditions attached to how much land and perishable goods any human can accumulate, stemming from his Christian belief that, "The earth and all that is therein is given to men for the support and comfort of their being". Locke believed that the earth, given to mankind in common by God, must be able to support the entire human species. This, according to Locke, could not be possible if men were allowed to accumulate possessions limitlessly, as this could leave others without the ability to preserve their lives. However, it is important to see that Locke attaches these conditions to meet the end of preserving mankind; they do not necessarily have to be followed if there is an alternative, which does not break the fundamental laws of nature. The advent of money brought about this alternative, one in which man did not have to work his land to provide his sustenance, nor would he even have to own land to be able to access food; he could simply buy it. Before the creation of a monetary economy, unlimited accumulation was unjustified, according to Locke. However, since its creation, it no longer leads to the problems that it once did, and so are no longer relevant in Locke's theory of property accumulation. <fnote>Locke, "Second Treatise of Government", (Dover Publishers version, 2002), II, 26 </fnote>When we investigate why Locke attached his conditions to property accumulation, we can see why they are less relevant in a modern day, monetary society. For instance, his first provision was that men could only take from the common stock by mixing their labour with raw resources to produce something of significant improvement. This was a rational check to ensure that no man would let any of his products go to waste, or acquire things that are superfluous to his needs, as it is irrational to labour on a product simply to let it spoil. Also, Locke clearly argues that earning at the expense of others' pains was, "not the ground which God had given in common with others to labour on". Each man then, should be entitled to earn from his labour, something impossible in a pre-monetary society without his own land. However, the introduction of money allows land owners to employ labourers to work their land for them. Locke asserts that, "man has a property in his own person... The labour of body and the work of his hands, we may say are properly his". A wage labourer does not have the fruit of his labourers arbitrarily taken for him; he simply exchanges them for a commodity of equal, or at least an agreed, value. As a man's labour is his property, he is well within his rights to sell it in this way. It can be reduced to a commodity, as gold and silver, or walnuts and plums, can be. And so, if man can earn his entitlement from his labour in the form of gold and silver, rather than perishable items, then there is no longer a need to anymore that property stems from mixing your labour. This allows the unlimited accumulation by some, without injury to others that is impossible in non-monetary society. <fnote>Ibid, II,34 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, II, 27 </fnote>Locke secondly demanded that nobody took more than there was "enough and as good left in common for others", and so originally required that no man took so much as to leave none for others. However, Locke also believes that taking from the common stock can actually increase the land available to others, and so this idea, added with the context of a monetary economy, lets us see that it can be justified to accumulate more than is needed. Locke states that, "he that encloses land, and has a greater plenty of the conveniences of life from ten acres than he could have from an hundred left to nature, may truly be said to give ninety acres to mankind". By increasing the productivity of land, you decrease the area which you need for sustenance, the remainder of which is added to mankind's common. Yet, if you could take ten acres of land and make it sustain one person, you could also take ten thousand acres and make it sustain one thousand people, where it would once only sustain one hundred. Here then, is a way of accumulating limitlessly, as the greater the accumulation of productive land, the more you can give back to the commons whilst sustaining the same amount of people. This is only possible where the excess of products can be given to others for an equivalent value, instead of spoiling. As it is irrational to expel labour without reward, then a non-spoilable commodity of equal value must be exchanged for this extensive labour, something possible in a monetary system, but not before. <fnote>Ibid, II, 27 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, II, 37 </fnote>Still underpinning both of these provisos however, is the concept of non-spoilage. If man accumulated land that was both efficient, and paid men to work on his land for him, this would still be unacceptable if the excess products went to waste. Locke believes that, "nothing was made by God for man to spoil or destroy", rooted in his firm Christian belief that the world was given to man by God, to enjoy, but not waste. Locke's original provisos ensured that this would not happen, as each man would labour on his own land, and would not produce more than he could use, leaving nothing to waste. An alternative method came about with the introduction of money, which Locke explains, "if he would give his nuts for a piece of metal... and kept those by him all his life, he invaded not the right of others... he wasted not the common stock". The use of non perishable money is essential to Locke's justification of accumulation. A man who exchanges any commodity for this money, be it his labour, land or products, has not wasted the common stock. He has accumulated more than he can use, but the excess has been sold to others, and therefore not spoiled. This moves mankind out of a sustenance economy, where each man must have his own land, to a capitalist economy, where this is no longer necessary. It is logical to Locke therefore, that man can accumulate land or other non-perishable products without injuring either God or other men, and so is justified in doing so. <fnote>Ibid, II,31 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, II, 46 </fnote>To fully understand how Locke has managed to undermine the stipulations he self-imposed, we must understand his motives of discussing property rights. First, it was to satisfy his Christian belief that man, "as much as he can, to preserve the rest of mankind, and may not... take away or impair the life... of another". He also wants to ensure that none of God's gift to mankind, "The Earth and all that is therein", goes to waste. If we see his ideas in this sense, Locke only requires that nothing is wasted, and that all men are sustained; to what extent is not important. Indeed, where Locke says, "it is plain that men have agreed to disproportionate and unequal possession of the earth.... By receiving for the overplus gold and silver, which may be hoarded up without injury to any one", he recognises inequality, and is not concerned by it. It seems apparent from this that Locke sees unequal property ownership as fair, as it injures nobody in a monetary society. Furthermore, private property will benefit everybody, whether owner or labourer, as he argues "A king of a large and fruitful territory there [in America, with uncultivated terrain], feeds, lodges, and is clad worse than a day-labourer in England". Because of these benefits, Locke sees no problems with unlimited accumulation by some, and so sets out to reconcile these rights with his concept of justice. In fact, Locke actively seeks to justify unequal, and unrestricted, accumulation. To this end, property rights are rooted in natural law, as civil law cannot restrict these natural rights of man. This is why Macpherson claims that, "Locke's astonishing achievement was to base the property right on natural right, and then to remove all the natural law limitations from the property right". This he does, with the introduction of a monetary, and capitalist, society. <fnote>Ibid, II, 6 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, II, 26 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, II, 50 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, II, 40 </fnote><fnote>C.B Macpherson, "Locke on Capitalist Appropriation", The Western Political Quarterly, Vol. 4 No. 4 (Dec 1951) page 4 </fnote>The reason that Locke originally attaches his three provisos to property ownership of labour mixing, non-spoilage, and leaving, "enough and as good" is not because he believed in an equal society with equal ownership. Instead, it was to ensure that every human being could sustain themselves, without being impeded by others, which is a fundamental law of nature, and that the world, as a gift of God, was not wasted. All other rights and rules stem from these basic premises. Since the introduction of money, there are new ways to achieve these ends. Labourers can sustain themselves by working for others, and expansive areas can be owned by one person with the assurance that nothing is wasted, by selling on his products for non-perishable money. Finally, the common stock can actually be increased in this way, by making land more productive, being able to sustain a higher population with the same land. The use of money makes Locke's limits on accumulation unnecessary, and so he does not attach significance to them in a modern society. Lock worked to protect the two above fundamental laws, and his provisos stem from these. Still, no man can hoard up food and shelter at the expense of others, as this would break these fundamental laws. However, when discussing land, wealth, elaborate foods and possessions, the use of money does protect these basic laws, and so the provisos can be ignored, and unlimited accumulation of these things can be justified using Lockean principles of property rights. 