This statement, made by a World Bank Vice President, is evidence of an increasing awareness across the world that water resources have tremendous potential to create interstate problems and conflicts. In Post-Soviet Central Asia, water has proven to be an irreconcilable dilemma. The legacy of Soviet central planning with relation to water has left severe economic, political and ecological tensions in the region, which the five successor states have yet to solve, and yet, there is only limited time to solve this water crisis. Soviet planning in the 1960s had created a fully co-ordinated and centralised water management system. Though this system was, and still is, an ecological catastrophe, nevertheless, it was easy to manage as a single entity. With the collapse of the USSR in 1991, this system must now be managed by five autonomous and competing states, each with varying needs and priorities for their water. With attempts at co-operation so far having little impact, a great deal of tension has built up surrounding the access to water resources. And yet, there is little chance of a military conflict over the issue, although, as we shall see, there continues to be an indirect conflict emerging through the use by the states of economic constraints upon each other. To understand why this has happened, we must first deal with the varying dimensions to the 'Central Asian Water Crisis', and then study why the numerous alternatives to conflict that have been attempted so far have been largely unsuccessful. However, even though co-operation has been unsuccessful, this does not imply that military conflict is inevitable; although the future of Central Asia looks bleak, this does not mean that will necessarily be direct inter-state conflict arising from its current water crisis. Of course, war and military intervention are not the only types of conflict that can arise over water. In such a complex geo-political context, the conflicts that arise around water focus on human security and battles for economic supremacy in the region. If we concentrate on these issues of conflict, then Central Asian water crisis does not look stable at all. Water, as well as necessary for life, has also been essential for the economies of many central Asian states, particularly since the 1960s, as 87% of water usage in Central Asia is for agricultural purposes. It is in this economic sphere that water has caused the greatest tensions. In the region, this has taken the form of a conflict between the interests of downstream, largely agricultural states, and upstream states that require water for hydroelectricity. Unfortunately, upstream states need to release water in the winter months, when demand for electricity is at its peak, whilst downstream states require this water in the summer when irrigation is most crucial. This problem is most apparent between Uzbekistan, a downstream state, and Kyrgyzstan, an upstream state on the Syr Darya, who rely on hydroelectricity created at the Toktogul plant. Uzbekistan however, requires most of its 58.3million km 3 quota of water from the Syr Darya in summer, to irrigate its cotton. Since 1991, this has been a cause for increasing tension and hostility, as the bilateral agreements formed to alleviate this issue have been unsuccessful. This disparity between the needs of upstream states and downstream states has been the biggest cause of concern so far, but, as we shall see, this does not necessarily increase the opportunity for inter-state conflict. <fnote>Hyde-Price, A. (1993) "Eurasia" in Thomas, C. & Howlett D. (Ed.) Resource Politics: Freshwater and Regional Relations Philadelphia: Open University p163 </fnote>The over-arching cause of the entire Central Asian water crisis was the nature of which the USSR collapsed in 1991. With no large scale demand for independence in Central Asia, it was instead thrust upon them when the European Soviet States of Ukraine, Belarus and Russia declared their own independence, without whom the USSR was unsustainable. The five Central Asian states, whose economic welfare was maintained by central management and subsidies from Moscow, were catapulted into crisis. For instance, there was no problem between Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan concerning the Toktogul Dam under Soviet central administration; Kyrgyzstan was compensated for not using the Toktogul hydroelectric station during autumn and winter, as Moscow gave it one billion m 3 of natural gas, a million tons of coal, 400,000 tons of heating oil and $600 million to maintain water installations and for economic needs. In this way, the needs of both upstream and downstream states were met. However, since independence, this compensation has been replaced with bilateral agreements. Since Dushanbe cannot afford to give compensation on this level, the current levels do not cover Bishkek's requirements; when Kyrgyzstan runs out of imported hydrocarbons, it will turn on its hydroelectric station. When this happens, Dushanbe in turn reduces its barter quotas of gas and oil for the next year, which exacerbates the problem year on year. Central planning also accounted for Uzbekistan to acquire a 'cotton monoculture' in its agriculture, to the extent where agriculture makes up 38% of Uzbekistan's GDP. Cotton is the main product, accounting for 2.053million hectares out of a total of 4.020 in 1986, despite Uzbekistan being a downstream state. Of course, under central planning this did not matter. This central planning, which was workable under the old Soviet system, has sown the seeds of the current crisis, and helps us to understand why any conflict might arise. <fnote>Kemelova D. & Zhalkubaev G. (2003) "Water, Conflict, and Regional Security in Central Asia Revisisted", " New York University Environmental Law Journal Vol. 11 Issue 2 p480 </fnote><fnote>CIA Factbook, Available at  URL  Accessed 23rd April 2006 </fnote><fnote>Kobori I. & Glantz M. (1998) Central Eurasian Water Crisis New York: UN University Press p42/43 </fnote>The Soviet tendency for giganticism, whilst showing contempt for the environment, has also been the cause for the most serious problem in the Central Asian water crisis, the environmental destruction which has caused many health problems for the people in the region. Soviet planning involved irrigating the entire region, as it created large collective farms, from the Amu Darya and Syr Darya, which in turn stopped these rivers contributing to the Aral Sea. In 1960, the sea covered 66,900km 2, with a volume of 1,090km 3. By 2000, due to the intensive irrigation system set up during the Soviet era, it had in fact split into two seas, with a combined area of only 25,217km 2 and 212km 3 volume. By 2011, it is expected that it will become three separate bodies of water. This 'disappearing sea', an environmental calamity in itself, has had various other secondary effects on the environment. Fish stocks from the sea are dying out; salinized land, left behind from the retreating shoreline, are swept throughout the region by desert winds, which make large areas of land unsuitable for agriculture. However, it is not only salt that is present in this soil. According to Glantz, "documented regional effects have only recently been exposed to the public: high infant mortality and morbidity rates, a sharp increase in oesophageal cancers, directly attributed to 'poisoned water' resources... and a life expectancy in some areas of about 20 years less than the CIS in general". 'Poisoned water' refers to the chemicals that are used for agriculture in states further upstream from the Aral, which are then transferred downstream and dry out with the retreating water, being dispersed through the littoral states of the Aral, in particular Kazakhstan. These problems, caused by the Soviet central planning, have caused further tensions between the successor states. Even if these problems do not create the same hostilities that economic concerns have, they are still an additional dimension to the current water crisis. <fnote>Kobori I. & Glantz M. (1998) Central Eurasian Water Crisis New York: UN University Press p44 </fnote><fnote>ILEC/ Lakenet Lake Basin Management Initiative, (2003) "Aral Sea Lessons Learned: Draft Final Report" p6 </fnote><fnote>Kobori I. & Glantz M. (1998) Central Eurasian Water Crisis New York: UN University Press p48 </fnote>As if these concerns were not enough to create a crisis in Central Asia, there are still many more extenuating circumstances that make the situation worse. To begin with, despite the Soviet creation of massive agricultural plains throughout the region, concentrated in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, the climate is highly unsuitable for efficient water usage. Cotton in Central Asia requires 13,000m 3/ha, which is substantially higher than in other cotton producing countries. In addition, the arid climate ensures excess water evaporates quickly, and salinized dust is carried by desert winds. Again, in the centralised Soviet state, this was of little concern, and the economic dependence on cotton has left these states with no choice but to carry on with its production. However, due to this monoculture, particularly of Tajikistan which has no oil or gas of its own to diversify its economy or fulfil its own power needs, with the loss of Moscow's support, they must now further expand their agriculture, with irrigated land in the region increasing by 7% between 1997 and 2000; added to this were plans for an extra 450,000 hectares in Turkmenistan and 500,000 in Tajikistan in 2005. This increase in agriculture, along with a decrease in regional co-operation and without any further input of water resources, has made the crisis more severe since 1991.And yet, since 2001, the problem has been even worse, with increasing amounts of water being diverted to Afghanistan from the Amu Darya to help with the reconstruction effort after the recent conflict, leaving even less resources for the five Central Asian states. If the current water crisis seemed destined for conflict in the early 1990s, the circumstances that have emerged since have made the current water problems even worse, and tensions higher. <fnote>Spoor M. & Krutov A. (2003) "The Power of Water in a Divided Central Asia" Perspectives on Global Technology and Development Vol. 2 Issue 3 p601 </fnote><fnote>International Crisis Group, (2002) Central Asia: Water and Conflict ICG Asia Report No. 34 p9 </fnote>Clearly, the 'Central Asian Water Crisis', as the problems in this region are often labelled, is not one crisis at all, but a complex and integrated collection of crises, economic, environmental and political, which originate from the Soviet period, and the manner in which it came to an abrupt end. From this, it is apparent that these crises are serious, and need addressing, yet the way in which attempts have been made to address them so far have been highly unsuccessful. A variety of attempts and suggestions have been made to solve the crisis peacefully, through regional or bilateral treaties, the creation of regional water management bodies, and inviting assistance from outside the region, from foreign states and the U.N, to NGOs. However, as each of these attempts have floundered due to the attitudes and priorities of the five Central Asian states, in particularly with regards to Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, the chance of conflict, be it economic or military, increases. Before we can fully assess whether there is potential for conflict over water in Central Asia, we must examine why there has been so little progress down the route of co-operation and compromise. Natural resources, particularly water, are ill-suited to arbitrary national borders, as the water system must be taken as a single entity, rather than five competing interests for its use. With this in mind, the five concerned states entered into the Almaty Agreement in 1992 to regulate water consumption, with each state agreeing to abide by existing Soviet water quotas. This attempt at regional co-operation is perhaps the most effective way of avoiding conflict in the region, but it has so far had little success. Although it would be simple if the basins of the Amu Darya and Syr Darya were managed as a whole, as they were in the Soviet era, economic and political realities have made this method of management unfeasible. Whereas Uzbekistan was singled out by Moscow to be the largest cotton producer for the USSR, other states, such as Tajikistan, who can no longer be economically sustained by Moscow, now wish to expand their agricultural sector. However, the Almaty Agreement restricts them to the same quotas as had existed before, only 15% of the Amu Darya flow. These quotas need serious revision, but this has proven impossible whilst each state attempts to gain as much as possible from the water source, which is essential for economic prosperity. A string of regional summits have been held since 1992, and they all end with promises of change and solutions, but are never followed up with action. Since agricultural expansion, and therefore economic success, is inextricably linked to water resources, there can be no meaningful or workable regional co-operation; the circumstances of which the USSR collapsed have ensured that each state views the water crisis as a 'zero-sum' game, in which maximising individual advantage is essential. Unfortunately, whilst this mindset prevails, regional co-operation cannot exist, and conflict becomes more likely with individual states in competition with each other to maximise its benefit. <fnote>Sehring J (2004) "Water Policy in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan: Problem Perception and Agenda setting", CESS Paper 5th Annual Conference 2004 p4 </fnote>However, it is not just the circumstances of the attempted regional agreements that have limited their impact, and the commitment to them. The way in which these agreements have been set up, the lack of enforcing and monitoring powers of regional bodies, and the prioritising of national interests over regional interests, have all contributed to the lack of progress being made to solve the water crisis amicably. A series of summits throughout the 1990s set up the Interstate Co-ordinating Water Commission (ICWC), an Interstate Council for the Aral Sea Basin (ICAB) and an Interstate Fund to save the Aral Sea (IFAS), with the latter two merged into a single IFAS in 1997. The ICWC has two executive agencies, Basin Water Management Associations (BWAs), one for the Amu Darya and Syr Darya respectively. Although these bodies are charged with monitoring the suitability of quotas, and monitoring compliance with them, they do not have free movement throughout the region; visas are required for visits to water management plants and hydroelectric stations, which mean that surprise inspections cannot take place. Because of this, it is very difficult to monitor whether there is compliance with quotas in the inspectors' absence, which essentially makes their role as scrutinizers meaningless. There is also suspicion that these bodies are inherently biased towards Uzbekistan, as all the headquarters of the ICWC are located in Uzbekistan, with the exception of its secretariat, a rather weak body, that is based in Tajikistan. With this suspicion, it is unsurprising that only two nations, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, have kept up payments to the body, and its decisions are largely dismissed or ignored when they do not serve national interests. This is a reflection of a much wider attitude towards regional co-operation, as national interests are always seen as coming first. Unfortunately, as little can be done unilaterally to solve this crisis, this attitude towards regional co-operation is a primary factor in the increasing likelihood that the water crisis will be solved through conflict rather than co-operation. <fnote>ICG Report (2002), p8 </fnote>The emphasis on national interest over regional interests can partly be explained culturally, with importance given to patrimonial figures throughout Central Asia who are expected to look after their 'family' first and foremost. However, this state-centred focus is primarily explained by the economic necessity of such a policy, again a legacy of Soviet management and the circumstances of independence. As most of the problems concerning water seem long-term, and most of the advantages for its use are short-term, many Central Asian states cannot afford to focus on long-term solutions. Instead, they must focus on short term gains, which in turn mean that little is done about environmental damage, increasing efficiency in agriculture, or creating a sustainable regional water management system. It is because of this necessity that such little has been done to act upon outside involvement on the water crisis; the U.N in particular has taken an active role in publishing recommendations on the water crisis, as has the International Crisis Group. However, these recommendations have had little impact for a variety of reasons. Because of the complexity of the water crisis, recommendations tend to be for long-term reforms that can create sustainability. Unfortunately, these states cannot afford to act in the long term, as Uzbekistan's cotton monoculture cotton requires annual harvests, and Kyrgyzstan requires electricity every year. Again, because of the system of management in the USSR, these states are 'locked in' to these necessities; nothing can be done to change current circumstances. Outside reports also tend to focus on what is the most devastating effect of the water crisis, environmental degradation. Again however, the states involved are more concerned with short term economic gain, rather than the long term sustainability that they should be concentrating on. Because the economic situation makes long term sustainability or regional co-operation unworkable, increasingly there is little room for a peaceful solution to the crisis. Although the best chance of a resolution lies in these regional solutions, states can also act unilaterally to improve their own water efficiency. As it has been estimated that around 50% of water that is diverted for irrigation does not even reach the crops it is intended for, and up to 70% in Tajikistan is wasted, states improving efficiency by lining irrigation systems and canals would alleviate much of the water crisis. However, this is again a long term, and costly, solution that would be difficult to finance without the funding that Moscow was once able to provide. In Uzbekistan for instance, 34,200km of irrigation canals are unlined, from a total of 47,700km; the cost of lining these is too high for either the state or farmers to pay. Inefficiency is exacerbated by the fact that the irrigation system in use was designed for large scale collective farms, but must now be used by small scale private farmers. Again, as with most of the Central Asian water crisis, the lack of water efficiency across the region has its roots in Soviet times, when water was a free commodity. As such, there was no incentive to use water efficient irrigation, or line canals. The move to a market economy has left the successor states with a dilemma, as farmers cannot possibly afford to pay for the water they use. Therefore, it is still a heavily subsidised commodity, and so there is still little incentive to improve efficiency. Again, improving efficiency is a long term solution that must be undertaken if the water crisis is to be solved peacefully. However, in the current economic climate, it is easier for states to blame each other for the lack of water resources, and put pressure on each other to increase the amount they can access, than to find a long term, sustainable solution. <fnote>ICG Report (2002), p6 </fnote><fnote>Spoor M. & Krutov A. (2003) "The Power of Water in a Divided Central Asia" Perspectives on Global Technology and Development Vol. 2 Issue 3 p609 </fnote>It is evident that, whilst long term solutions must be found to solve the water crisis peacefully, there is very little that can be done to pursue these solutions. Each state must pursue its own national interest, for short term survival, as Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan rely on water for their cotton, and Kyrgyzstan relies on it for hydroelectric power. Meanwhile, Tajikistan seeks to improve its agriculture, and so first requires a rise in its annual quota as set down in the Almaty Agreement. The water crisis in Central Asia is long term; yet, the needs of the riparian states are short term, and acute. Only Kazakhstan arguably has the biggest interest in pursuing long term goals, as it bears the brunt of environmental damage to the Aral Sea, and also suffers the greatest health problems from the secondary effects of this catastrophe. Because of this focus on short-termism, it might seem logical that the various tensions will spill over into a conflict, which would solve the short-term problems that long term peaceful solutions cannot. Yet military conflict, though possible, is highly unlikely in Central Asia with regards to water, simply because it would solve very little of the crisis. As has been stressed so far, there is very little that can be done in the short term to solve the crisis; the solution to the problems, as recognised by academics, scientists, NGOs and the U.N, are all long term, such as increasing efficiency in water usage, and an end to the cotton monoculture that exists in large swathes of Central Asia. Contrary to the accusations of many Central Asian states in relation to each other, there is very little that any can do to alleviate the current crisis without incredible economic hardship. Furthermore, such conflict will not solve any problems in the short term; for instance, it has taken forty years to deplete the Aral Sea by the current amount and even with a complete halt to water usage upstream, it would take decades to see any improvement to the situation. Likewise, there is little that an invasion of Kyrgyzstan would do to improve the water available to Uzbekistan. Moreover, there is the possibility that Kyrgyzstan could use the Toktogul as an offensive weapon in any large scale conflict, by destroying it, flooding downstream Uzbekistan and negating the entire reason for the original conflict. Although this has not been publically expressed by Bishkek, Tajikistan have expressed a willingness to use the Syr Darya as a weapon in any conflict. Because of this precarious balance of power with regard to water, and the limited benefits that military conflict would create, there is only a slim possibility of wide scale war in the region in relation to the current water crisis. <fnote>Allison R. & Jonson L. (Eds.) (2001) Central Asian Security: The New International Context: London: Brookings p76 </fnote>In spite of this assertion that interstate conflict is unlikely are consistent proclamations by regional leaders that war is a distinct possibility. One Uzbek official is on record as saying that, "Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan will defend themselves by whatever means necessary [if Syr Darya supplies are cut off]. However, this must be examined in the political context of the region, in particular with relation to Uzbekistan. The creation of five autonomous states in Central Asia after the collapse of the USSR was met with mixed reaction; as Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan were eager to see a regional approach to common concerns, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, led largely by the personalities of Karimov and Niyazov, favoured a more state-centred approach. For instance, in 2000, the OSCE attempted to organise a regional conference to address the water issues; however, it was meaningless when Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan stated that they preferred bilateral arrangements, despite their ineffectiveness. These two leaders in particular have had a difficult time co-operating with each other, due to personality clashes, and the desire of both to make their nation a regional hegemon. Because of this political animosity between various regional governments, a great deal of conflictual rhetoric has circulated over a variety of issues, including water. However, as we have already seen, a 'water war' would solve little of the current crisis, in either the long or short term. This must be remembered, and the threats of war and conflict must be examined not as legitimate statements of intent, but as part of a tense political climate in the region. <fnote>ICG Report, p7 </fnote>More likely is an increase in the economic conflict that is currently being waged in Central Asia, as this pressure can, so it is hoped, further national interests and influence bilateral agreements more successfully than war can. When Kazakhstan failed to transfer energy and pay outstanding debts to Kyrgyzstan in late 1997, the latter cut off its water supply to put economic pressure on it to comply. The continuing disagreement between Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan concerning their barter agreements over the Toktogul is also an example of this economic pressure. In 1998, after Dushanbe had cut off electricity supplies in the winter to Bishkek because they had released water that was not in keeping with the agreed 'cotton optimal' policy, Kyrgyzstan announced plans to charge Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan for the water it used. These disagreements are characteristic of the entire region, and demonstrate how, when conflict arises over water, it is often more productive to place economic pressure to influence other nations decisions. However, it is unclear where this 'tit-for-tat' conflict will end. Whilst in the long term these disputes are very harmful for the water crisis as a whole, they do serve to further the short term interests of the concerned states. Whilst the Central Asian governments are concerned more with short term than long term gain, and in fairness, the circumstances in which they are under leaves them very little choice, than this type of economic conflict is only likely to increase in frequency and ferocity. Although inter state conflict may be improbable, this does not mean that there is stability in the region. Rather, there are opportunities for conflict on smaller, sub-national levels, even between states themselves, although this is difficult to confirm. It is claimed that there has been a small scale secret war between Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan since the 1990s over the Amu Darya, including a massacre of Uzbek troops in Turkmenistan in 2001. At a more local level, tensions between Kyrgyz and Tajik farmers have erupted over access to local water resources. The restraint on national governments not to wage war on each other, that, "going to war is a very expensive way of controlling resources", does not apply at a local level, and the rewards can be much higher for a village that needs water to survive, than it can to a government, who must consider the water crisis as it affects the entire Aral Sea basin. Water can also exacerbate existing local conflicts, with increasing economic pressure adding to ethnic tensions on borders or multiethnic areas. Furthermore, there is evidence to suggest that, as land becomes arid and agricultural opportunities cease in many areas of Central Asia, they are replaced with local militias, terrorist organisations, and drug trafficking to replace the security that agriculture once afforded them. Clearly, the water crisis in Central Asia is more than just a dispute amongst nations; the bulk of the problems are faced by everyday people, and this is where tensions rise, and conflict, can emerge. <fnote>Sievers E. Water, (2002) "Conflict and Regional Security in Central Asia" New York University Environmental Law Journal Volume 10 p370 </fnote><fnote>International Crisis Group, (2002) Central Asia: Water and Conflict ICG Asia Report No. 34 p11 </fnote>As this suggests, the current water crisis has made Central Asia a dangerous region. However, if states are unwilling to pursue long term strategies to solve the crisis, and direct conflict is unlikely, it is currently very difficult to judge what the outcome of this crisis will be. Certainly, time is running out, especially to save the Aral Sea. Outside assistance appears to be the only course of action left to solve this crisis, but attempts so far have been unsuccessful. Israel, a state familiar with water conflict, with its record surrounding the Jordan River, ran a scheme to help Uzbekistan in 1996 by developing water efficiency technology. This was duly ignored when it was cheaper for farmers to use excessive subsidised water than to maintain the technology that Israel supplied. A second, more dramatic plan that is considered is a Siberian-Aral canal, a former-Soviet scheme that would refill the Aral from Siberian Rivers. During Soviet times, this would have been funded by Moscow, and there is still a call for Russia to fix the damage it has done to the water management system of Central Asia. However, there is little motivation for Moscow to fund a project in former Soviet states, so this looks like an unlikely solution. Secondly, there is no guarantee this project will not damage the Irtysh River, where the bulk of the water would come from, in the same way the Aral has been decimated. In any case, though it might save the Aral Sea, it would not solve the major regional disputes concerning the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers. Outside assistance to solve this crisis, although possible, must still rely on the political and economic investment by riparian states into long term solutions; it is still this investment that is lacking in Central Asia. Even when considered separately from the current political circumstances, the chances of solving the Central Asian water crisis is slight. Even if all technological and agricultural changes were implemented, the current crisis would take decades to solve. To do this, there must be an emphasis on fighting the causes of the problem in the long term to create sustainable water consumption. However, when considered with the current economic and political climate, this looks increasingly impossible. As states look to short term solutions and gains, the long term factors causing the crisis are only exacerbated. This, along with severe political tensions in the region, explains why multilateral agreements that could solve the crisis consistently amount to nothing. However, this situation cannot simply be blamed on a lack of understanding or political will; in many ways, the nature of Soviet rule, and the nature of its collapse, thrust these five states into the current crisis without an alternative. It is evident that the current crisis will not be solved by any short term efforts, and this includes interstate war. Indeed, despite the rhetoric espoused in the region, it is evident that war will not solve any aspect of the crisis, which is what makes it so unlikely. However, this does not rule out the destabilising of local areas, and the increasing of local ethnic tensions due to the water shortage in Central Asia, nor does it imply that the concerned states will stop their dangerous economic battles with each other. It is now all but inevitable that the water crisis will create incredible economic and environmental hardship for the people of Central Asia. What is not inevitable however is the eruption of a 'water war. There is, and increasingly will be, conflict, but it is not conflict in the traditional understanding of the term. 