The decline in voting in Britain, at all levels of government, has given the impression of a decline in popular participation, and seems to suggest an apathetic electorate who do not care about becoming engaged in politics or democracy. However, to infer this simply from studying electoral turnout ignores the multiple 'entrance points' into modern politics, which allow for people to become engaged in democratic participation in non-traditional ways. Although there is a decline in voting, interest groups especially single issue groups, are flourishing. There is also an increasing trend of participating on an individual level; activities such as boycotting certain products, or buying fair trade goods. This reflects the changing nature of democracy, not just in Britain, but in the world as a whole. With increasing consensus in 'Westminster' politics, and Britain as a whole, on traditional economic and welfare issues, there has been a shift towards participation on behalf of 'post-materialist' issues, which has shaped this change in the way we participate, and the focus of participation. Democratic participation is no longer being exclusively exercised at the polls to influence Westminster; people are using their wallets and social conscience to lobby for change at a local, national and global level. These changes in democratic participation have many possible explanations. The historic low turnouts of 2001 and 2005, at 59.3% and 61.3% respectively seem to indicate that 40% of people simply do not care enough about politics or democracy to participate. This seems to be supported by another traditional indicator of participation, party membership. In the 1950s, 1 in 10 people were members of a political party; that has now dropped to 1 in 50. However, this trend does not necessarily indicate a decline in participation, merely a change in the methods used. A Citizens Audit in 2000-2001, indicated that, in the past 12 months, 75% of those interviewed had engaged in at least one activity intending to influence decision making. The majority of these activities were undertaken at an individual level, such as donating money, or signing petitions. This change is indicative of a wider change in lifestyle, and what Robert Putnam would describe as 'social capital'. The behavioural changes brought about by the rise of television, internet, e-mail and online shopping have permeated political participation too. It is no longer necessary to join a political party to support them; you can now pay a donation by direct debit over the internet, or sign an internet petition to show your support for a particular issue. This has been expanded in recent years, particularly through the internet, with 'weblogs' and political websites gaining increasing prominence in election campaigns as a way of participating. The decline in voting and party membership has shown a fall in traditional participation, but this is equal to a rise in new, individual forms of participation arguably brought about by a changing, more inter-connected and globalised world. <fnote>Electoral Commission Report, "Election 2005: Turnout", 19th October 2005. Available from  URL  Accessed 9th February 2006 </fnote><fnote>Whitely, P. "Civic Renewal and Participation in Britain" Available from  URL  p.15/16 </fnote><fnote>Whitely, P. "Civic Renewal and Participation in Britain" Available from  URL  p.7 </fnote><fnote>Putnam, Robert, (2001) "Bowling Alone: the collapse and revival of American community" New York: Touchstone </fnote>Globalisation in its more radical sense may also explain the changing nature and focus of democratic participation in Britain. The creation of a neo-liberal, market orientated world has taken a great deal of decision making power away from national government, as has further integration into the E.U. To add to this, there is no longer any great debate in mainstream society in ideological terms, with the rise of New Labour, particularly the rewording of Clause IV, being the symbolic evidence of this. Therefore, the way people participate has had to change. The 'Make Poverty History' campaign in July 2005 was intended to target the G8 meeting; however, African poverty was not even an issue just two months earlier in the General election. This is because of a belief that Britain as a nation state cannot single-handedly affect this issue. It takes the co-operation of the G8, World Bank, IMF and U.N to effectively deal with global poverty, and in these bodies, the general public have no democratic vote, and are certainly not invited to join these organisations. Because of an increasingly globalised world, the forms of participation must change, from parties to pressure groups, and from voting to 'consumer power', such as buying Fair Trade products, for in the modern world, it is not only our own nation states that have power, but also supranational bodies, TNCs, and other foreign governments. Changes in participation do not indicate a crisis for democracy, simply a change in its form and focus, to adjust to a more sophisticated and complex political reality. However, globalisation alone does not explain why people seem to care less about the issues that were at the heart of political debate twenty years ago. For instance, it does not explain why debates over the poll tax been replaced by those about climate change. Increasingly, Britain is becoming a nation of post-materialists, a fact hat David Davis recognised when he coined the term, "The Wristband Generation". Research carried out by De Graaf and Evans suggests the emergence of a new generation concerned with post-materialist issues not connected to the accumulation of wealth, but connected to lifestyle, the environment and social justice. Crucially, they also claim that the most likely to be post-materialists are the higher educated and more affluent, the group who traditionally are highly politically engaged. In the economic turmoil of 1945-80s, politics was dominated by protests from trade unions, such as the miner's strike of 1984, and economics dominated the political scene. Debates focussed around the welfare state, taxation, employment and inflation. In contrast, the 1990s and 21 st century, where Britain has been relatively untouched by economic strife, has seen a rise in new issues. Recent political issues which have resulted in large scale participation are anti-war marches, anti-poverty movements, and fox hunting demonstrations. None of these issues are related to economics, and could all be said to be 'post-materialist'. Post materialist issues, as well as often being determined at a supra-national or non-governmental level, are also highly salient. As such, they rarely feature in election campaigns, and political parties barely differ in their stances on them. The increasing post-materialism of the British, especially those who are traditionally politically active, has led to a move away from traditional participation and towards the creation of New Social Movements, to fight for the issues that the modern electorate truly care about. <fnote>Davis, David, Conservative MP, 7th November 2005. Found at  URL  Accessed 9th February 2006 </fnote><fnote>De Graaf, N. & Evans G. (1996) "Why are the Young More Postmaterialist? A Cross-National Analysis of Individual and Contextual Influences on Postmaterialist Values", Comparative Political Studies Vol. 28 No. 4 p.608 </fnote>A further change in the role of government helps us explain why the participation habits of a large proportion of Britain have changed. The 'hollow' or, 'watchdog state' thesis demonstrates the shift in responsibilities for many services away from government and into the private sector. Central government has devolved or delegated responsibility for a lot of public services, with the independence of the Bank of England, the privatisation of coal, steel, telecommunications and rail services just a few examples of this trend over the last twenty years. As such, there has been a perception that changes in these areas cannot be made by central government. This trend is set to continue further, with the creation of 'trust hospitals' in 2004, and current education proposals which set to further delegate responsibility for key services away from Westminster, to quasi-autonomous bodies. This key change in the role of the state may help to explain why people no longer actively participate in traditional ways such as joining political parties or voting in elections, as these methods can no longer affect a great deal of provisions. This is supported by 'Citizens Audit' data that suggests that in the previous 12 months, 25% of parents had tried to change the way education was provided, and 50% of people had tried to improve working conditions. However, this was not attempted by group activities designed to lobby government. Instead, people went directly to headmasters, or LEAs, or their employers in a more individualist manner, to bring about change. Again, this behaviour does not indicate a decline in participation, as is often suggested; rather, a change in the methods used, and who they are targeted at. <fnote>Whitely, P "Civic Renewal and Participation in Britain" Available from  URL  p.26 </fnote>In Britain, there has been a noticeable decline in interest and participation of traditional politics. Trust in MPs is at an all time low, and cynicism dominates attitudes to central, as well as local and European organs of government. However, 'politics' is not a synonym for government; political decisions are made in a variety of ways, by a variety of people, all over the world, whether it is a change in refuse collection or international sanctions on Iran. It is a mistake to suggest that a decline in traditional participation indicates a decline in all democratic participation. A change in the nature of government, the power of government to affect change, and the issues which people are interested in has led to a change in the political behaviour of many people. The growth in Fair Trade products in particular has shown that, whilst people may not lobby their MP for trade justice, they have made a conscious political decision nevertheless to try and bring about change. It also demonstrates that economic well being is not what many people now care about, but instead hold post-materialist values. A growth of individualist participation mirrors a wider social change that puts emphasis on individualism, but this does not mean that people are not participating. The nature and focus of 'democracy' in Britain is indeed changing, away from influencing central government through voting. However, this does not necessarily mean that political participation is in decline in modern Britain. <fnote>MORI statistics (2003) indicate 75% of people responded 'some/never' to "How much do you trust national government to put the needs of the general public before the needs of themselves or their political party?" "Trust in Public Institutions: New Findings" available from  URL  Accessed 8th February 2006 </fnote>