Rousseau put huge significance and value onto the concept of freedom, it was something he thought everyone desperately needed as a fundamental part of their humanity. Yet in his theory he demands individuals submit to the state and, more importantly to the immutable general will which acts for the benefit of all society and thus logically appears to be asking individuals to sacrifice freedom for the greater general good of all. It leaves us asking what Rousseau regards as more important, general will or individual freedom as there appears an inherent contradiction between the two. For Rousseau all problems stem from society, it is inherently bad and has a corrupting influence on men turning them into vain and selfish individuals where they had previously "lived free, honest, healthy and happy lives". The establishment of property, money and industry within society lead to mans greed, as he farmed he wished to own and as he owned he began to wish "to occupy the whole of the land" In this sense humans have become slaves, to their own selfish desires and bound by others into negotiations made to try and benefit themselves. Rousseau recognises that individuals cannot return to their state of original perfection, instead there needs to be a corrective invented within society to protect all individuals but in a way in which "man remains as free as before". Has Rousseau set himself an impossible task? In his social contract Rousseau set out to claim and illustrate that, in fact, "a free will can exist only as part of a rational political order" . <fnote>Rousseau, J. (Watkins, K trans/ed) (1953) Political writings : containing "The social contract," "Considerations on the government of Poland," and part 1 of the "Constitutional project for Corsica" London : Nelson. Social Contract 1:6 </fnote>In Hobbes man has to sacrifice his liberty to a leviathan for the greater gain of his security, entering into a safe and civil society and leaving the savage world where threats are all around. Rousseau prides his contract on getting around what he sees as Hobbes's inherent problem, the concept that humans have to submit unyieldingly to an authority external to them. To give up ones freedom is, for Rousseau, rendering one unable to enact moral actions, surrendering our humanity in such a way equates to us becoming slaves. This is because, for Rousseau, the sovereign (that is the creator, legislator and enforcer of the general will) is in fact collective man himself. That is to say man gives his liberty away to himself, as Rousseau said "each man, in giving himself to all, gives himself to nobody". The sovereign instigates only the general will which, by definition, will only act in the interests of society as a whole. Within the social contract everyone agrees to the same conditions and therefore all are equally willing to cooperate. Having committed totally to the social contract and to the general will individuals will not oppose the state as it attempts to enact the general will. This is because the state or sovereign, which makes the general will, is in fact collective society itself. Finally Rousseau argues that within the social contract all are equal and so people can have their natural freedom, even if it be due to collective autonomy as opposed to the natural autonomy of actions prior to society developing. <fnote>Rousseau, J. Social Contract 1:6 </fnote>Rousseau differentiates between what he calls natural, moral and civil freedom. A natural freedom would be one where man governed himself with total free will and autonomy from all other men, free from any from of social interaction. This, however is impossible within society as it exists now because man has already been corrupted and is inextricably linked to his own desires and within agreements made with others. However within a social contract, where no man is above another imposing decision upon him, man can have his natural freedom and be autonomous in his actions. So too man will discover another type of freedom which redeems himself and allows himself to become free in his higher self- that is free from amor se soi (vanity/selfish love). The social contract, a constructed covenant between all other members of society, grants or entails mans civil freedom, or rather it is a "precondition of the civil freedom". By civil freedom man is referring to the idea of ownership and man's freedom of actions to do whatever is within law. However it is freedom of a higher level which more concerns Rousseau, which he feared lost with Hobbes and the Leviathan. Rousseau considers that the social contract renders the individual free morally to develop their virtues, to have one's higher self free is infinitely valuable and frees one or animal like appetites which previously had man ensnared. In this sense the social contract, by creating a form of political community "embodies" moral freedom. The idea of civil freedom works so long as the law within which one has to act is the law of one's own making. This entails that the general will, which made the law, must be the will of every individual which seems logically and logistically impossible if translated into reality. The natural freedom is, arguably, in a restricted form within the social contract. Each can govern himself as far as the law permits within their civil friendship. On a personal level one is autonomous but one must also adhere completely to the general will. For Rousseau this is no problem as the general will encompasses that of the individual but when it does not the individual must submit to the general will recognising it has a greater good than the individual where in fact it may not. How does one feel free when one is only told one is free and that all there desires cannot occur because they are not true but mere physical urges. <fnote>Rousseau, J. Social Contract 1:6 </fnote><fnote>Neuhouser, F. Freedom, Dependence and the General Will  URL  accessed 04/03/05 </fnote>So too it seems a contradiction that Rousseau justified coercing come people to join the state, "whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be constrained to do so by the entire body, which mean only that he will be forced to be free". Arguably this is the situation occurring daily at Guantanamo Bay and to agree with Rousseau would be to license such activity and to give to some the verdict over whether another is part of the society seems entirely dangerous given Rousseau's previous insistence that all submit to themselves in submitting to the sovereign and the general will. Here instead Rousseau is giving to people (the collective sovereign) the power over others. This not only denies the law breaker their individual free will or freedom but is also encouraging the other individuals within the collective to impose upon another's freedom and, in essence, to violate it which could surely just promote self interest and corruption for them. How can Rousseau maintain the general will encompasses the will of all and that all are free when the collective sovereign could justifiably have thousands locked away and therefore excluded from contributing to the general will and denied their own personal freedom. Neuhouser suggests that, where we do not recognise the general will as our own, it may well be our "truest" will that we do not know, in such a case "my {our} subjection to it dictates freedom". Whether this claim can hold fast under scrutiny, however, is debatable. <fnote>Rousseau, J. Social Contract 1:6 </fnote><fnote>Neuhouser, F Freedom, Dependence and the General Will  URL  accessed 03/03/05. </fnote>Perhaps to understand how Rousseau conceptualised the social contract as the only path to fully realize out freedom we have to understand how bleak he was about our present. He viewed the world as full of people who are imprisoned both from following only physical, empty desires and also from each other due to endless bargains and power struggles. Rousseau relies on the idea that, so long as individuals have contributed to the making of the general will, individuals will accept it and obey it freely. Within his social contract there is an expectation that individuals will act upon the general will, that they will see it as a key contributor to their freedom. If we agree with Rousseau's perception of the world as it is then we can definitively agree that within the social contract man enjoys more, if not absolute, freedom than in his perceived state of nature. However when this is out under scrutiny so too is Rousseau's claim that man has perfect freedom within the contract. So too although the contract may offer more freedom it still entails sacrifice and, for the unfortunate few who break the law, it entails no individual freedom at all but what appears to be a lack of freedom an, indeed, of justice too. 