Today the term feminism carries with it a great deal of stigma. To be a feminist implies an implicit hatred of men and all traditional institutions which have been formed by them. Increasingly western politics removes feminism from its agenda considering female emancipation has been adequately achieved with the right to vote, work and other civil liberties having been awarded to women. However despite this conception the fact remains that women in Britain earn seventy six pence for every pound earned by men and worldwide women earn just fifty per cent of what men earn thus illustrating, to some extent, the challenge posed by feminism for any democracy promoting equality, freedom from oppression and basic human rights for all women. Feminism is an evolving and expanding concept that continues to branch off into sub groups producing differing challenges for contemporary politics therefore to consign it to the historical dustbin with the suffragette movement underestimates it's relevance for today. The themes of feminism, adopted by several different sub movements within the ideology, permeate into everyday processes. Although these themes are not mutually exclusive one can attempt to characterise the central themes emerging from differing perspectives on feminism in order to broadly generalise as to the main insights and suggested modifications that feminism makes in society today. <fnote>Figures taken from Nationmaster.com.  URL  . Acessed 06/03/04. </fnote>Traditionally, as we have noted, feminism was centralised around the right for the female vote and emerged in the 1840s developing greatly amidst the women's movement. The emerging strand of thought considered women as subjected and repressed by men because of their sex in what feminists classified a 'political relationship between the sexes'. It was this exploitation that motivated the early feminists who believed that women could and should be liberated from such oppression. Wollstonecraft in particular, who fought for educational reform and female representation, recognised the limitations forced upon women who "are not allowed to have sufficient strength of mind to acquire what really deserves the name of virtue". However, Wollstonecraft also admitted that, although females should be freed from the boundaries of exaggerated socialisation of their gender and feel equal to men, the lifestyle differences between males and females were likely to remain. It was not only women advocating such ideas; Mill, the prominent thinker, argued that women had talents to bring to the public sphere and felt women should retain property rights after marriage to establish their equality with men. What is clear about the early challenge feminism made to politics is that it advocated reform from within, namely the representation of women in political processes, equal rights to education and a general recognition that male and female are equal. The apparent succinctness and quantifiable nature of the challenges made by traditional feminism gave the movement a united identity and clear targets. However, many assumed feminism would die with the right to vote and after women were given the right to vote, feminism suffered from a distinct lack of a unified ideology and purpose. It was later liberal feminists, such as Pateman, who reintroduced a challenge for politics with her theory of the state as a protector of man's interests only happy to use and abuse women. She prescribed an overhaul of politics as it was known, and the introduction of a basic income as a means to ensure equality and freedom for all. Another liberal feminist Friedan acknowledged that, despite legal reforms, women experienced frustration from being confined to the domestic sphere because of social expectations and stereotypes. This 'second wave' of feminism posed new challenges to politics that extended deep into the social realm, and propelled politics to become involved with social reform enabling women to realise their potential. As Heywood writes it was "not merely political emancipation but 'women's liberation'". Perhaps the greatest challenge of liberal feminism to politics is the idea that 'the personal is political' and the constant deconstruction of the public/private divide which supposedly ensnares women into domestic spheres where they are unable to realise their full potential. Therefore feminism urges politics to take up the cause of women's rights as they stand in social conception and 'behind closed doors' by reforming the identity of women, or rather enabling women to form their own identity, as opposed to one forced upon them by men. <fnote>Wollstonecraft, M. (1792) A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. Bartleby.com. Chapter II. Taken from  URL  Acessed 06/03/04. </fnote><fnote>Heywood, A. (2003) Political Ideologies, Great Britain :Palgrave Macmillan. p.242 </fnote>However liberal feminists has been accused of acting solely in the interests of middle class, white women with some degree of education to recognise their own rights and in this way only touching the surface of discrimination which is wide spread and continue to afflict the poorer, less educated women typically of different origins and living in developing countries. These accusations have been largely levied by socialist feminists, who seek to challenge politics with a more revolutionist outlook. For socialist feminists, the central theme to emancipating and liberating women is found in the abolition of private property, which they see as the fundamental tool used in discriminating against women. It considers, like liberalism, how the exploitation of women permeates into all spheres of life, emphasising the private sphere. It also reiterates that gender is used within society to exploit women and sees gender as a source of a great deal of discrimination. Socialist feminism recognises that gender has arisen because of man made conceptions of the differences between the sexes pertaining to their roles in society, and totally apart from their biological differences. Gender inspires the exploitation of women; however, for socialist feminists, this is the only branch of the exploitative power wielded by the elite over the majority. The exploitation of women is seen as part of the ongoing class conflict and would, seemingly, be solved with the introduction of socialist government. For many, the demands of socialist feminism on politics do not go far enough to recognise how entrenched exploitation against women is within society. Primarily these feminists are radical and their challenge to politics centres around the idea of patriarchy. For radical feminists the term 'patriarchy' describes the 'power relationship' where men dominate over women in a paternalistic and controlling way. They describe what they call 'sexual politics' that are inherent in contemporary politics as the established discrimination within all spheres of life and see patriarchy as the common enemy which is "systematic, institutionalized and pervasive form of male power". Figes considers feminity itself a "socially produced phenomenon" created and sustained by men who seek to control women through making them wives and mothers. The challenge radical feminism has for politics is more than revolutionary. They prescribe many different ways of obliterating the relationship of exploitation between men and women and creating a space not only for equality but for the realisation of women in all spheres of society. This necessitates a "personal transformation" or what de Beauvoir terms an 'existential orientation' for women to redefine themselves. Millet considers that the family, with the locus of men's patriarchal power at it's core, needs to be destroyed for feminists to enjoy equality. The more extreme radical feminist Atkinson has asserted that a woman's physical attraction for man is part of the social conditioning inflicted on women in society which represses women. She considers women should reject men and embrace lesbianism as the best way in which to enact what is feminism in theory and ultimately reverse and reject the established exploitative relationship between male and female. Ultimately these radical feminist views threaten the very core of politics and label it as essentially anti-female and chauvinist. It presents more of a threat to politics than a challenge as it expects women to individually redefine their identities and redefine politics within these new found revelations. <fnote>Heywood, A. (2003) Political Ideologies, Great Britain :Palgrave Macmillan. p. 246 </fnote><fnote>Axford, B et al (2002) Politics: An Introduction. London: Routledge. p.286 </fnote><fnote>Gelb, J. (1989) Feminism and Politics. USA: California Press. p.180 </fnote>Post modernist feminism takes a less ambitious stance on the necessary reform of politics and considers women as positively different from men and poses a threat to feminism as a political movement with set aims. Post modernist feminism calls into question the universalistic assumption that certain values apply, without restriction, to all cultures and societies thus calling into question the very base of feminism with its accepted theory of gender as a method of bias and exploitation. This suggests that the notion that there exists a stereotype for how the term 'woman' is construed and how it objectively should exist is fictional and thus not only de-radicalises feminism but calls it's relevance to politics today into question. Perhaps post feminist thought dismisses the challenge of feminism to politics today as we see oppression and inequality still exist despite conceptions otherwise or steps to remedy the fact. However post modernist feminism allows us to consider the great challenge that awaits an increasingly diversified and fragmented ideology which seeks to continually challenge patriarchal power relations intrinsic to politics, are we heralding the era of a third wave of feminism or will exploitative relations continue to be accepted, even endorsed in society? Whether feminism is still able to make a coherent and unified attack on politics and challenge it to reform is debatable because of the contested, even paradoxical nature of feminism in all its different forms. Feminists seem to only agree on their united persecution but there exist fundamental discrepancies between the varying ways in which people opt to tackle the discrimination of women and whether many still regard it as a central issue to contemporary politics. What is clear is that feminism has effectively placed the idea of gender and gender discrimination onto the map of politics and ensured that women are considered within politics where they have previously been omitted. There is no doubt that feminism has achieved a great deal and yet the challenge in front of it still appears impressively daunting and calls, certainly, for more unity of vision and objectives within feminist thought so that post-feminism does not consign the idea of gender as irrelevant and non existent. One such notable challenge for feminism today is to represent the unrepresented majorities, primarily women, who are typically either working class, black or from the developing world and yet to be fully emancipated and liberated by first and second wave feminism. 