Despite many assumptions that Locke and Hobbes share similar if not identical opinions on the state of nature views what a closer examination unearths are differences that, ultimately, shape both thinkers later views and do much to explain their diverging ideas. Even in their very conception of what reality the state of nature is referring to the thinkers seem to differ. However it is perhaps telling as well as intriguing that both Hobbes and Locke engaged in this thought experiment to imagine how society would exist hypothetically without governance and that both saw such theorising as necessary foundations upon which to build later thought. In Leviathan Hobbes meticulously forms and builds logical arguments progressing, step by step, towards an ultimately logical and therefore for Hobbes immutable conclusion. For Hobbes human nature is the result of varying urges or appetites which ultimately dictate behaviour and, when there exists a scarcity of resources, leads to a man who "naturally endeavours, as far as he dares (which amongst them that have no common power to keep them in quiet, is far enough to make them destroy each other,) to extort a greater value from his contemners," From this savage view of human nature Hobbes deducts how the state of nature would exist; a society consisting of many atomic individuals all concerned with their task of self preservation and all equally unsure and afraid of the intentions of those around them. All are equally vulnerable because, in a David and Goliath mentality, Hobbes depicts all as equally susceptible to being killed by another regardless of strength. Hobbes' picture is bleak; continual war "every man against every man" and constant "fearre" make life for man in the state of nature "solitary poore nasty brutish and short". In this state of nature the conflict between men and the acrimony that exists makes society and its products impossible. That is to say there "is no place for industry" , "no arts;...no society;...". In order to escape this state of nature which is ultimately dangerous and futile individuals transfer their rights, mutually, to the Leviathan. This submitting or transferring of rights is, for Hobbes, the lesser of two evils where the state of nature is a negative reality from which one seeks, naturally, to escape as soon as possible. This process is arrived at using the faculty of reason which seeks peace fearing the consequence of war for their self preservation which is of ultimate importance. <fnote>Hobbes, T. Leviathan. Tuck, R. (ed) Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought (1996) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press p.88 </fnote><fnote>Hobbes, T. Leviathan. Tuck, R. (ed) (1996) Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press p.89 </fnote>Equally Lockes account of the state of nature depends on a reasoned deduction. His starting premise is to dispute Filmer by proposing that the world belongs to all individuals collectively. He does not account for a scarcity of resources of any sort within the state of nature or otherwise which is in sharp comparison to Hobbes who assumes individuals will have to fight each other for goods and, indeed, to survive. Locke finds all humans equal in the state of nature but it takes a different meaning, man is equal so has no power over another resulting in all men being in a "state of perfect freedom" in all their actions. This liberty of man is conducive to a healthy society as well as a thriving individual and the ingredient for good institutions. Natural rights exist within the state of nature suggesting that, for Locke, is it not as Hobbes a depicts a dog eat dog world but a scenario where all hold mutual respect for each other and seek their own preservation in so far as they do not threaten another mans. Locke's state of nature is characterised by reason, tolerance, morality, justice and unalienable natural rights. A lack of moral authority, and no "common Power" leads not to war but equality whereby all equally respect each other which arises, in part, from the authority of God that exists in the state of nature where it does not for Hobbes. The foundation of Locke's faith in man stems from his assumption that all believe in God, that everyone and everything comes under God and as such that men are morally bound by laws of nature, which are from God to protect themselves and others. Men have a duty to survive and to do so without threatening another mans survival. The state of nature and its supposed harmony for Locke then rests on laws of nature, God and ultimately is a state of peace and relative happiness. It is not exited because of a lack of alternatives or a desire to escape but because individuals desire to protect and legitimise natural law through entering a social contract. Indeed, from some interpretations, it is read that Locke considered one to be in the state of nature whilst after signing the social contract "Men may make one with another, and yet still be in the state of nature" So too Simmons writes; <fnote>Locke, J. Two Treatise of Government. Laslett, P. (ed) (2002) Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press p.269 </fnote><fnote>Hobbes, T. Leviathan. Tuck, R. (ed) (1996) Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press p.88 </fnote><fnote>Locke, J. Two Treatise of Government. Laslett, P. (ed) (2002) Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press p.277 </fnote><quote>"Locke mentions several classes of people who can live under legitimate governments whilst remaining in the state of nature-visiting aliens, minors under the age of consent and those of defective reason". </quote><fnote>Simmons, A. "Locke's State of Nature." (1989) Political Theory Vol 17:No. 3 P.449-470 </fnote>Thus here it is obvious that the state of nature is a constant for Locke whether government exists or not, disparate to Hobbes who concludes the state of nature is gone as soon as people have transferred their rights to the leviathan. The existence of natural laws within Locke's state of nature results from his assertion that they are laws created by God to be adhered to by all men as their duty. If a man does not obey another individual within the state of nature holds the executive power to punish the rebel with appropriate and fitting punishment. If we assume it is the individual who decides what constitutes a fitting punishment we begin to see how much of an onus and responsibility Locke entrusts to individuals in his state of nature and the enthroned position he creates for the role of morality. For Locke there is "Mutual Assistance" and a "State of Peace" in the state of nature. In comparison Hobbe's views all men as egoistic, entirely independent agents fighting their own cause with no room for duty or morality but more an intent to firstly survive and secondly to satisfy appetites. Co-operation is for individual gain and protection and not for any greater good as Locke suggests. So perhaps we can conceptualise Locke's state of nature as foundational blocks for a contract which legitimises and protects natural laws already present in the state of nature whereby people co-operate for mutual gain where Hobbes sees that all must be enticed to co-operate out of fear for their own survival. It can be surmised by saying that man, for Hobbes, is negatively forced into opting for legitimate government whereas a Lockean man makes a positive choice to implement such an institution. <fnote>Locke, J. Two Treatise of Government. Laslett, P. (ed) (2002) Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press p.280 </fnote>Locke then, by expecting man to sign a social contract, expects man to agree to a social contract without the all important condition from Hobbes that man should firstly ensure others are deferring rights so as to ensure mutual vulnerability and therefore continue to protect their own life (their one remaining right). For Locke there seems to be an implicit trust whereby man is capable of choosing to sign up to a social contract without it being the intense and calculated bargain as Hobbes depicts. Perhaps this helps explain why Hobbes necessitates a leviathan with absolutist rule where Locke imagines a government legitimising already existing natural laws and guaranteeing ongoing personal liberty. Whilst executive power rests with individuals for Locke it cannot do so for Hobbes without posing a threat to the survival of the individual. Power, for Hobbes, and the desire for it, is what entraps man into the state of nature which is a state of misery. In short power creates misery for Hobbes because all desire it whereas for Locke power can co-exist in society and be owned by individuals simultaneously without conflict. Where Hobbes puts power at the centre stage of the state of nature Locke places liberty, a positive force good for all individually and collectively. This is in direct parallel to the divisive and destructive effect of power according to Hobbes. From a comparison of their differing views of the state of nature we can understand the gulf between the later insights and imperatives suggested by Hobbes and Locke. Whereas Hobbes justifies absolutist, unconstrained and unchecked government Locke promotes liberty which in reality leads to unequal property relations and a probable elite governance. Despite both concluding that individuals would seek to leave the state of nature Hobbes and Locke differ greatly on why and how individuals would seek to do so. So too whilst Locke conceptualises a cooperative community within his state of nature and attributes values and a moral duty to individuals Hobbes focuses on the animal instincts of man and his selfishness finding the one true faculty of man in the state of nature his reason which rescues him and takes him towards the leviathan. 