<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This paper argues that the adoption of exploitative foreign direct investment (FDI) by developing countries is not a wise choice. The economic payoffs are short-lived while the social degradation may be long-lasting. Export processing zones (EPZs), in particular maquiladoras in Mexico, are examples of this form of FDI. We analyse the case of Mexico, pointing out the consequences of substandard wages, poor working conditions and loose environmental regulations that result from such forms of FDI. In light of dependency theory, we argue that the pattern of dependence of developing states on developed countries is reinforced by EPZs, whose capital is wished by the former and owned by the latter. On the one hand, host countries of these zones have become vulnerable to transnational corporations investment decisions. On the other hand, there have been an significant increase of the dependence of this countries on EPZs for their exports earnings. We conclude that exploitative investment is still a reality thanks to vested interests within developing countries. </abstract>It is possible that not even the economist Joan Robinson could envisage the consequences of her words when she said that 'the misery of being exploited by capitalists is nothing compared to the misery of not being exploited at all' (Robinson 1964, 45) . The quip was welcomed by governments and firms that had found an explanation to justify their actions in the competitive global economy. However, a question that arises after the implementation of this idea in several countries is whether the developing countries that followed this path have become better off. In this paper, we focus on the export processing zones (EPZs) as an example of exploitative investment and their impact on development. We argue that the acceptance of this kind of foreign direct investment (FDI) reinforces the patterns of dependence of the peripheral countries on the central ones. Moreover, we present evidence that the economic benefits of EPZs are short-lived. We begin by describing the incentives that governments offer to attract FDI to the EPZs. Next, we review empirical evidence in light of dependency theory and argue that it is still a valid analytical framework. Finally, we analyse the impact of the maquiladoras, the Mexican EPZs, on the country's economy. We believe that this case study can be insightful to our analysis as data from the International Labour Organization (ILO) and other sources shows that maquiladoras personify the exploitation strategy. We conclude that exploitative investment is still a reality thanks to vested interests within developing countries and that possible benefits, as short-term economic relief, do not offset the social degradation. <fnote>Foreign-owned assembly plants in Mexico that import machinery and materials duty free and export finished products around the world. They are also known as twin plants, maquilas and in-bond industries (CorpWatch). </fnote><heading>Economic reasons</heading>Governments usually claim that the main reasons to set up an EPZ is to attract FDI, boost employment, increase exports and generate foreign exchange. According to the ILO (2003), the number of countries hosting EPZs had increased from 25 in 1975 to 116 in 2002. In the same period, the number of EPZs has risen from 79 to 3,000. In developing countries, the most common EPZs are based on textiles and clothing industries and on assembly of electronics. The EPZs can be established in different forms: free trade zones, special economic zones, bonded warehouses, free ports, customs zones and maquiladoras. The definition provided by the ILO classifies EPZs as 'industrial zones with special incentives set up to attract foreign investors, in which imported materials undergo some degree of processing before being re-exported' (2004). These 'special incentives' may include, depending on the country, tax relief, abatiment or minimal tax; trade union discouragement, restriction or prohibition; minimal or no respect to national employment regulations; reduction of foreign exchange control; and free repatriation of profits (ILO 2003). Some countries end up making more concessions than necessary, which open up the possibility of exploitation by foreign companies. The workforce in these zones is characterised by unskilled young female workers, who undergo little training, work long hours and earn low-wages. The perfect scenario for exploitation is set up. Despite short-term positive effects in the macroeconomic performance, with improvement on the balance of payments, countries become too vulnerable to TNCs investment decisions (i.e. they may leave the country at any time) and too dependent on TNCs for their exports. In fact, EPZs account for 80% of the export earnings of countries like China, Czech Republic, Hungary, Kenya, Philippines, Malaysia, Mexico, Senegal, Tunisia and Vietnam (ILO 2003). <heading>The dependency back in</heading>Many theories have emerged to try to explain the new features of globalization and the interactions between states and international capital. Some can be insightful; others, however, appear just to change words to try to explain issues that were already covered by the theory of dependency. Gereffi (1995, 103), for instance, uses the new global commodity chain framework to deny the validity of the dependency theory in the analysis of the state-firm relations. For him, the latter paradigm fails to bring together the activities of corporations into the structure of the world economy. He believes that the GCC is the best resource to indentify several novel features of global capitalism, such as the central roles played by industrial and commercial capital and the new production systems, including technological, organisational and industrial networks . Nevertheless, Frank's (1977, quoted in Hunt 1998, 201) concept of continuity in change, one of the main points of neo-Marxist dependency theory, could be used to shed light on the new structure of global production as well. Dependency theory predicted long ago that dependence in the periphery may change over time in response to changing economic conditions at the centre (Hunt 1998, 201). In earlier interpretations, the relations of dominance were between developing and developed countries. Today those relations have changed: developing countries are still placed in the periphery, but now the industrial and commercial capital of TNCs plays the central role. When Gereffi says that the economic globalization has forged interdependence of nations at all levels of development, he is again unwittingly reassuring dependency theory. As Dos Santos affirms, this interdependence is asymmetrical: while the dominat countries can 'expand through self-impulsion', others, being in a dependent position, can only expand as reflection of the former ones (1969, quoted in Hunt 1998, 200). Gereffi himself does not deny that the majority of developing countries still play a marginal role in the new global chain. EPZs, for instance, are part of the economic network, but they are far from being involved in strategic decision-making at the global level. Indeed, they are a proof that the Fordist model is still alive: EPZs are engaged in mass production and many less developed countries are still struggling to give their population access to mass consumption. Another feature of the new global production chain that can be interpreted in terms of neo-Marxist dependency theory is the role of elites in the support of underdevelopement. As Hunt (1998, 201) points out, the 'condition of dependency is sustained through the voluntary collaboration of the dominant class interests in the periphery'. It is not a case of perpetrators and victims. There is a conscious and willing acceptance of dependence by the elites in the developing countries (Frank 1977, quoted in Hunt 1998, 202). The adoption of EPZs is a current example of this idea: it represents the choice made by states (on behalf of the elites) of the dependent path on exports. Dependency theory, however, cannot explain all subtleties of the new economic order. Stopford and Strange (1992, 19-23), for example, have focussed on the increased competition among states for shares of the world's wealth, what led to a change in the way governments and TNCs negociate as well. There is more interaction between states and firms and among corporations themselves. As a result, the emergence of a privileged transnational business civilisation, in the context of triangular diplomacy (i.e. state-state, state-firm, firm-firm), has limited the independent option for state governments. For Dunning (1997, 12-17, 46), the new global order is requiring the adoption of a new form of capitalism, which he calls 'alliance capitalism'. Firms are making cross-border strategic business alliances to reduce costs, lower capital investment, benefit from research and development, reduce political risks and gain knowledge about markets. He points out that, despite the integration of international production and cross-border markets by TNCs, the developing countries' slice of the cake is not so tasteful; it constitutes the low value-added part of the chain, with labour-intensive activities. The solution for them, he says (1997, 37), is to build their own networks; their firms should establish alliances with corporations from other developing countries in the same region. Although his advice seems sensible, it has not been the rule in the majority of developing countries; the bulk of their alliances is still with corporations from developed countries. In Mexico, for instance, more than 70% of the maquiladoras belong to American, Spanish and Japanese companies. The remaining 30% belong to developing countries, such as China, Korea, Taiwan and Philippines. This shows the current stage of interaction among developing countries: they use EPZs in their own territories and, when expanding abroad, look for EPZs as well. <heading>The advent of maquiladoras </heading>For Mexico, the first idea of establishing EPZs was to foster short-term jobs in periods of economic recession. Three decades (1950-70) of import substitution industrialization had not been proved efficient for the Mexican economy and, in the begining of the 1980s, the country was strongly dependent on petroleum export revenues. The 1982 international oil prices crisis made impossible for Mexico to service its foreign debt. It declared moratorium afterwards. The International Monetary Fund offered conditional help. The terms were deregulation, privatization, and liberalization of trade and investment policies. The solution was found in the Mexican side of the border with the United States; a strategic place to attract American companies seeking low-cost location and workforce. Among the incentives, the country offers exemption of mininum wage or benefits like health care and maternity leave, and restriction on trade union rights. In addition, firms are allowed 'to adjust the size of their workforce or lengh of their workday according to their needs' (Kopinak 1996, 10). Mexican workers also receive wages far lower than those paid to U.S. workers in similar industries, are forced to work longer hours and produce more per hour despite the risks to their health. The turnover is high probably because of the intensive nature of production; the average career is no longer than five years (ILO 2003). The workers lose efficiency as they start to have problems with eyesight, allergies and kidney diseases (Villalva quoted in Korten 2001, 132). The situation is not better in the settlements used by the workers as residence. Many live in shantytowns without running water nor sewage systems (Korten 2001, 132). Since investors are exempted from property taxes on their factories, public infrastructure is also inadequate. To complete the pattern of exploitation, the lack of strict environmental regulation has given room to an increase in environmentally damaging behaviours. The ILO has received many complaints about improper handling of hazardous materials by maquiladoras (2003). Firms are taking advantage of the loose policies and are not careful when discarding industrial waste. The case for economic development brought by maquiladoras is not compelling. Despite the relief given in the past providing employment and foreign exchange for the country, there are signals that these improvements are not long-lasting. The impact on the the balance of payments has not been proved as good as it was predicted, and the country still has a huge debt. Furthermore, Mexico is now dependent on the maquiladoras: in 2000, the sector was responsible for almost 15% of the country's total GDP and in 2002 it represented 80% of the country export earnings. Likewise, the number of jobs reached 1,285 million in 2000, but has been decreasing since then mainly because of competition from China. In 2002, about 200,000 posts had already disappeared (ILO 2003). Taken together, these results indicate that the experience of EPZs in Mexico have, at best, provided short-term foreign exchange relief during times of crises, and, at worst, increased dependency on international capital at the cost of worker's rights with hardly any spillover effect on the economy. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The excuse commonly heard to justify the implementation of the kind of exploitation seen in the maquiladoras in Mexico and in other EPZs around the world is that people accept substandard wages, working conditions and environmental regulations because they would be worse off without them. However, we claim that this situation has been viable just because the local elites in the developing countries have been successful in promoting their interests through subjugation of the impoverished layers of the society. As a result, even in countries where the adoption of EPZs is considered a success, like South Korea, there has been an increase in inequality (Pirie 2006). A recent report from the Asian Development Bank shows a rise in unemployment in the region (The Economist 2006, 60-1). According to The Economist, 'Asia's growth is simply not creating enough jobs... This may seem odd. In countries where labour is cheap, growth should be more labour-intensive than capital-intensive' (2006, 61). What Pirie classifies as a redistribution of income from labour to capital seems to be spreading through the region. The so-called international competitive economy became the rethoric to convince the poorest to take the worst part of the global commodity chain. If the main reason to look for FDI is to raise wages, improve working conditions and restore the environment, why should a country accept the opposite? 