<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This essay claims that the international financial institutions (IFIs), such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, have been replaced by rating agencies (RAs) in the role of establishing conditionality to developing countries in exchange for access to credit. Emerging states are expect to continue the implementation of the structural adjustment programmes based on macroeconomic stability (fiscal deficit reduction and low inflation), trade liberalisation and privatisation if they want to be considered a good investment option. This imposition, however, is informal, not through an agreement as it was the case with the IFIs. Governments, however, are not innocent in this game. States are capitalising from the fact that RAs require the adoption of neoliberal policies: if things go well, they are politically rewarded; if things go wrong, they can blame the rating agencies. The process of depoliticisation of the state's economic policy making fits both governments and market participants. </abstract><heading>1- Introduction</heading>In this essay we argue that rating agencies (RAs) have replaced international financial institutions (IFIs), such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, in the role of establishing conditionality to emerging economies in exchange for access to credit. The IMF has not been called to rescue any country lately. Brazil and Argentina announced publicly and proudly they had paid their debts to the Fund. Other countries, such as Malaysia and South Korea, are increasing their foreign exchange reserves to make sure they will not need the IMF's help in the near future. This rejection of the IMF's assistance by several countries has resulted in questions about its role and future in the politics of international economy, including calls for an institutional reform of the Fund. One may assume that, if developing countries are avoiding the IMF, they are probably looking for shelter somewhere else. That is true: they are going directly to the financial markets and getting credit from private investors. But, even though the current international economic environment is one of great liquidity, the entry to the global financial markets is not unconditional: the sovereign risk ratings published by agencies are crucial in conditioning the cost and availability of capital for lending and investment in developing countries (Vaaler, Schrage and Block 2006, 154). If a government receives bad ratings, it will probably be forced to pay higher interests rates when trading treasury bonds. The country may even be banned from borrowing in certain markets. Therefore, it is understandable that developing countries will do their best to obtain a good rating. In order to achieve high ratings, however, governments have to comply with requirements similar to the ones applied by the IFIs. Agencies expect the continuity of the structural adjustment programmes (SAPs) required by the IMF and the World Bank from emerging economies in the 1990s: macroeconomic stability (fiscal deficit reduction and low inflation), trade liberalisation and privatisation. Furthermore, the conditionalities, which before were applied only to federal governments, are now applied to states and municipalities willing to have access to international credit as well. This is not the first time underdeveloped countries abandoned IFIs. In the 1970s, they were attracted by commercial banks with large amounts of petrodollars to lend. Emerging markets then seized the opportunity to avoid any conditionality. The period of international liquidity, however, was followed by the indebtedness of the developing world in the 1980s, which was directly affected by the growing debt of the United States and the consequent increased pressure on interest rates. As the Third World's loans were based on flexible interest rates, debts skyrocketed. Moreover, most of the developing countries had not adopted structural adjustments and their economic fundamentals were not prepared to deal with the new aspects of the international economy. The first change is related to trade: many developed countries made a move towards protectionism, hindering the conditions of trade with developing economies. The second point is the re-emergence of capital mobility; trade lost its place as the main investment. The internationalisation of capital flows gave rise to other transactions based on currency exchanges and new financial products were placed on the market, such as commodity futures and derivatives. Countries could not freely intervene in the currency markets to influence their currency anymore (Zack-William, Brown and Mohan 2000, 16-17). The debt crisis forced developing countries to go back to the IMF and the World Bank and accept conditionality in the 1990s. In the beginning of this century, the process of fleeing from the IFIs appears to be repeating itself. Nevertheless, countries now cannot avoid conditionality as they did in the past. The rise of other international institutions has reinforced the concepts defended by the IMF and the World Bank in the SAPs. We start this essay by introducing the concept and roles of the IFIs and RAs (specifically Moody's and Standard & Poor's (S&P)). We consider only two agencies because they are the most important ones to emerging national markets. Next, we compare the conditionalities imposed by IFIs with those required by RAs. In the third part, we analyse the reasons behind countries' acceptance of conditionality and its likely consequences. We conclude by asserting that rating agencies have undertaken the IFI's political role of disciplining developing countries under the neoliberal paradigm. This last claim, however, is qualified by political logic. Governments of emerging countries have deliberately promoted neoliberal policies and, at the same time, used rating agencies' conditionality to proclaim their choices as inevitable: if the policies succeed, then government wins; if the policies fail, then rating agencies - not the government - are the ones to blame. <heading>2- The birth and rise of rating agencies</heading>The IMF and the World Bank, the two IFIs considered in this essay, were created during the negotiations of the Bretton Woods regime in 1944, after the Second World War. The IMF was charged to assure stability of exchange rates and orderly adjustment if and when this became necessary. The Fund performed this task until September 1971, when all the world's currencies were virtually floated after the United States went off the gold standard (Walters 1994, 10). Although the IMF claims its purpose never changed, it recognises its operations, which involve surveillance, financial assistance, and technical assistance, 'have developed to meet the changing needs of its members in an evolving world economy' (IMF). The Fund, however, is still regarded as a lender of last resort for its 184 member countries in case they run short of foreign exchange for structural reasons. Governments may receive short-term aid if they accept to undertake conditionalities. The IMF was not conceived to promote development in underdeveloped countries, but rather to help in period of crisis. The development task was given to the World Bank, which was created to provide countries with financial assistance in order to recover from the war. It should also foster economic development in developing states. As the former task was temporary, development became its main function after the 1960s. This period is also marked by the politicisation of the development efforts in the Third World. The Cold War was hotter than ever, and the U.S. intensified its efforts to conquer the new decolonised countries and maintain its hegemony. By that time, the economic philosophy defended by both developed and developing countries was based on state intervention. In the late 1970s, the IFIs were being strongly influenced by the neoliberal paradigm adopted by the American and British 'new right' governments. Any help to developing countries provided by the IMF or the World Bank became conditional on the adoption of policies based on free market ideas (Zach-Williams, Brown and Mohan 2000, 16). The conditionalities requiring the implementation of neoliberal policies are still part of the IMF and the World Bank agreements with developing countries. The history of rating agencies started before the establishment of the IFIs, more than one century ago, when the Poor's American Railroad Journal was launched in the mid-1850s. Afterwards, in 1860, Henry V. Poor published the book 'History of the Railroads and Canals of the United States of America', with a rich amount of information about the economic performance of railroad business. John Moody, another pioneer in the area, published his 'Manual of Industrial Statistics' in 1900 (Sinclair 2005, 23-4). The issue of rates developed between the 1907 financial crises and the Pujo hearings of 1912. The demand for rating services surged after the Depression, in the 1930s, when credit quality declined, causing the U.S. domestic institutions to adopt ratings to regulate banks. Eventually, the regulation was extended to pension funds, insurers, broker dealers and mutual funds. These events, followed by others, resulted in the consolidation of the contemporary rating. The two most important rating agencies, S&P and Moody's, are a direct result of these developments. Over the years, the regulatory role of agencies went beyond the American borders: ratings were also incorporated into regulation in the majority of countries that form the Basel Committee on Banking Regulation. This regulatory role has increased the importance of the RAs in the international financial markets (King and Sinclair 2003, 348, 353). In recent decades, the rating industry has witnessed growth due in great part to an increase in capital mobility and the globalisation of the financial markets after the collapse of the Bretton Woods regime in the late 1970s. The so-called decentralised globalisation (Germain 1997, 146) is also an important aspect to understand the increase in power of the rating agencies. 'Instead of regulating markets, governments have increasingly turned to regulating institutions in terms of certain minimum prudential requirements'. These institutions are then left free to engage in market-determined behaviour, according to the variations of demand and. For Germain, the actions of influential states, such as the U.S., Germany and Japan, have empowered market actors by making them conduits of public authority, which is exercised through, by, and on behalf of markets and market participants (1997, 161). Public authorities have moved away from direct financial intermediation within capital markets; this role was transferred to independent central banks, which are responsible for interest rate controls, open market operations and reserve requirements. Disintermediation is another factor crucial for the consolidation of ratings as investment intelligence. With the financial globalisation, banks have their role shifted as the main intermediaries between lenders and borrowers; they no longer centralise the judgement about who receives credit and who does not (Sinclair 2005, 3). Bonds and notes are negotiated in the capital markets; therefore borrowers are able to obtain money from non-bank sources, and lenders do not have to pay fees to banks anymore. Yet, this change created an information problem in the capital markets: lenders now have to judge the chances of borrowers' default and collecting data about these borrowers is too expensive. The rating agencies provide a solution for this conflict: they gather all information available and centralise the creditworthiness judgement. (King and Sinclair 2003, 347). Even better for lenders, they make the borrowers pay the bill for the credit ratings. The long history of credit rating in the United States has established rating agencies as a source of information for investment decisions. They have accumulated rating results for almost a century, which allows for correlations between ratings and default ratios (Fight 2001, 2). However, these results comprise mainly private companies within the U.S.; data about sovereign rating in the international financial markets is much scarcer. Some argue that RAs are not efficient at collecting information in emerging markets, where problems of asymmetric information and transparency are more severe. As a consequence, RAs may have a pro-cyclical behaviour, upgrading countries in good times and downgrading them in bad times, which may magnify crises even further (Kaminsky and Schmukler 2002, 228). Despite those criticisms, RAs are 'seen by market participants as legitimate rather then imposed entities'. The reputation that they built in the U.S. seems to be accepted by the majority of actors in the international financial market. Investors clearly rely on RAs for investment decision-making: they believe rating agencies have the knowledge to create benchmarks for their actions in the financial markets. Rating agencies' analysts are perceived as professionals with unique expertise to judge creditworthiness. In fact, in the structure of international capital mobility, rating agencies do more than just producing rating judgements; they 'serve an important policing role enforcing the needs for the structure [of international capital mobility] and clarifying its signals to states, corporations, and municipalities' (Sinclair 2005, 15, 60, 63). In this sense, RAs can be taken as political actors able to exercise power. And, in fact, they do exercise power, as defined by Strange, over developing countries once they steer these governments towards following neoliberal policies they may have not otherwise adopted: 'Power is simply the ability of a person or a group of persons so to affect outcomes that their preferences take precedence over the preference of others' (1996, 17). We must emphasize, however, an important difference between institutions, such as the IMF and the World Bank, and rating agencies. While the former were created by states to intervene and regulate the international economy, the latter were born by the market itself; eventually RAs ended up regulating market actors and states alike. Therefore, ironically, the neoliberal paradigm, so strongly defended by the IFIs, became their own curse: they have been replaced by private actors in the role of setting the rules at the global level. <heading>3- Conditionality: more of the same </heading>We advance our argument for the new role of RAs by comparing the implementation of conditionality on developing countries by international financial institutions and rating agencies. The main difference between IFIs' and RAs' conditionality is that the former one is formal, while the latter is informal. An agreement with the IMF, for instance, assumes that the country accepts all the rules and requirements of the Fund. It must be willing to take on a macroeconomic adjustment programme based mainly on trade liberalisation, privatisation, debt control and inflation management policies. An assessment will then take place whenever part of the loan is released to make sure that the borrower is following the contract and implementing the SAPs. In the case of the RAs, on the other hand, the conditionality is not imposed through contract or agreement. RAs frequently mention in their reports what they consider good practice regarding states' administration. Recent studies suggested that sovereign ratings are significantly linked with selected economic fundamentals, such as per capita GDP, inflation and the level of external debt. Indicators of default history and of economic development are also important determinants of these ratings (Lee 1993, Cantor e Parker 1996, quoted in Reinhart 2002, 256). Those indicators closely match the ones tracked by IMF's structural adjustment programmes. Thus, borrowers know what to do to achieve good ratings; they just have to follow the agencies' good practice advices. Without formal conditionality, however, states must act by themselves, without any international institution's support, in order to improve their grades. Furthermore, while in a contract with IFIs countries will have access to some credit even before implementing the required policies, with RAs their creditworthiness depends on the their previous behaviour of conditionality compliance. We must emphasize that this informality is essential to keep RAs in business. Despite the fact that countries will pay to be rated, the real consumer of the results are the investors, who expect impartial ratings. For this purpose, borrowers must not influence the ratings. In fact, as the RAs strongly care about their reputation, which depends on providing objective information on the creditworthiness of borrowers, they distance themselves as much as they can from the countries they rate (Kerwer 2005, 465-8). Sometimes, they distance themselves too much, collecting less information in developing countries than in developed ones. As a result, those countries may receive less investment than they otherwise deserved (Ferri and Liu 2005). Most of the emerging countries have done their homework. Even without formal imposition, they have sought to adjust their internal structures and their economic activities to conform to the 'mental framework of rating orthodoxy', whose norms and policies converges around American ideas of best practice (Sinclair 2005, 17). Another crucial difference between IFIs' and RAs' conditionality lies in the room for manoeuvre accorded to governments. In the beginning of this century, the IMF and the World Bank replaced the SAPs with the poverty reduction strategy papers (PRSPs). This change was a response to criticisms about the effects of the SAPs on developing countries, which sometimes witnessed an increase in the number of the poor after the adoption of these programmes. PRSPs allow countries to invest more in social policies: poverty reduction became an important goal along with inflation control and fiscal deficit reduction. By contrast, RAs do not promote social policies publicly and it is unlikely that they will ever commit to poverty reduction, since they do not have to negotiate terms of agreement with countries - they must keep their distance to make their judgments; if the countries want access to international credit, they should accept the agencies' verdict or else look for another institution, maybe go back to the IFIs. The very fact that there is not a formal imposition of conditionality frees RAs from the need to justify the defence of certain policies or the rejection of others. If a government wants to raise investment in social policies, it will take the risk of being downgraded or it will have to reduce expenditures in other areas to offset the costs. Rating agencies will not send a third institution, as the IMF can send the World Bank, to promote social programmes during periods of economic hardship. A good example of the difference between IFIs' and RAs' attitude towards social policies is given by Brazil's recent agreement with the IMF. In 2002, shortly after the elections, the Brazilian president, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, negotiated with the IMF an increase in investment in social programmes, such as Bolsa Família, his main electoral promise. The project consists in giving a small wage to poor families, who in exchange must send their children to school and take them to the local medical centre to be vaccinated. It benefits over 40 million people with very low income. The programme has not hindered the fiscal deficit reduction - on the contrary, Lula's administration has produced surplus - or the inflation control because the government has cut investment in other areas, such as infrastructure. As Brazil has ended his agreement with the IMF and paid its debts, one would expect that the government would be free to improve its social programmes. According to the agencies, however, the budget cuts were not good enough. The increase in the Bolsa Família's budget from R$ 5.8 billion in 2005 to R$ 8.3 billion this year attracted the attention of the S&P's director for Latin America, Lisa Schineller. She declared that if the next government wants to keep the programme, it would be wise to reduce expenditure in other areas, such as personnel and state pension (BBC Brasil 2006). Although Schineller emphasized that she was just making a comment and not giving an advice or predicting ratings, any Brazilian government elected this year will have this 'comment' in mind when formulating social policies. Moreover, it is clear that, although social programmes can be good for political propaganda, RAs are still interested mostly in macroeconomic stability. The fact that now RAs are the institutions de facto responsible for promoting the neoliberal policies in countries like Brazil allowed (or forced) the IMF and the World Bank to engage in social issues, a less dignified reason for social commitment. <heading>4- The polls' game: stronger politicians and the SAPs</heading>Why do authorities comply with RAs' requirements? One can understand that governments were forced to accept the IMF's conditionality when undergoing a period of crisis and therefore in need of an emergency rescue package. But why do states still accept these conditionalities, imposed now by private actors, even in periods of apparent international stability? One can argue that the reasons are clear: countries have access to cheap credit if they follow the conditionality strictly and the amount of credit available in the financial markets is virtually endless. Unlike the IMF's or the World Bank's agreements, there is not a fixed amount for loans in the financial markets if a country has a good rating, although rating agencies also keep surveillance of the countries rated by them and will alert investors if they believe a government is borrowing more than it should. In fact, developing countries do not have many options if they want to avoid paying high interests rates. They need credit and, most of the time, they have a history of defaults and are still struggling to achieve strong economic fundamentals. Therefore, following RAs' advices can be seen as natural decision to make. All that is fine, but it is not the whole story. An alternative explanation poses that those governments were willing to adopt structural adjustment programmes in the first place and that RAs may help authorities to suppress political opposition, as they can blame rating agencies for the, possibly disastrous, outcomes of these policies. Burnham classifies this process as a depoliticisation of the state's economic policy making. It does not mean states are suffering from a lack of political influence. On the contrary, this is a highly political strategy used by governments to shield themselves from the political consequences of pursuing deflationary policies, reassigning tasks to international institutions or even to national bodies, such as an independent Central Bank (Burnham 1999, 47). Unlike Strange's (1996, 5) claim that the authority of states is in decline, Burnham defends that governments have deliberately transferred to the market all the basic matters, such as security, trade, investment, and even the sufficiency of public goods, like drains, water supplies, infrastructures for transport and communications. For him, this is a consequence of re-regulation of financial markets - increased capital mobility and financial globalisation - , which affected governments' fiscal and monetary choices. During the Bretton Woods regime, currency markets were driven by current account imbalances. Now, the differential is interest rates, and investors also have a clear preference for currencies backed by anti-inflationary policies. Hence, governments are keen to adopt counter-inflationary measures to please the market and have access to credit. Yet, rather than classifying these developments as giving power to markets over states, Burnham sees these events providing states with the 'strongest possible public justification' for maintaining downward pressure on wages to combat inflation and thereby achieve price stability. In fact, there is an enhancement of the state's power over the working class (1999, 46). These developments are also characterised by the implementation of a depoliticised management of the states based on rules since the 1990s. In this process, governments need an external validation of policies and are required to be transparent and accountable to international institutions. Codes - such as fiscal, IMF and good practice codes - provide countries with benchmarks. They must also accept binding rules limiting their room for manoeuvre, such as those from the World Trade Organisation. A third important characteristic of the depoliticisation process is the reassignment of tasks within the government: state's bodies win operational independence as long as they work under the international codes (Burnham 1999, 44). Therefore, as Burnham puts it, the international financial changes in the last decades have been taken by states as part of a broader attempt to restructure and respond to domestic crisis in capitalist societies: <quote>From the viewpoint of state managers, 'politicised' forms of labour management and inflation control involving voluntary restrain, incomes policies and the machinery of tripartism have the moment given way to 'depoliticised' forms of management which marketise aspect of state activity and reassign responsibility publicly for management on the external regimes and independent organisations. In this way, 'depoliticisation' strategies aim to capitalise on recent changes in the global system to the advantage of national governments (Burnham 1999, 51)</quote>The concept of depoliticised management of the state fits Polanyi description of the process of disembedding the economy from social and political relations. For him, in order to achieve a free market society, various social relations must be marketised as well (Best 2003, 365). Polanyi predicted that the economic order that would emerge from the Second World War would mark the end of capitalist internationalism. He believed that governments had learnt the lesson that 'international automaticity stands in fundamental and potentially explosive contradiction to an active state domestically' (Polanyi 1944, 19-21, quoted in Ruggie 1982, 387). The Bretton Woods regime was indeed an attempt of establishing a new balance between market and states, with governments assuming much more direct responsibility for domestic social security and economic stability. For Ruggie, during this period, countries promoted an embedded liberalism: they had financial tools to benefit from global economy, such as control of the movement of capital, and at the same time they were following policies to attend domestic pressures, such as establishing welfare state (Ruggie 1982, 388). After the 1980s, however, the liberalism became transparent - or disimbedded - and the domestic stability became increasingly subordinated to the principle of international economic liberalisation (Best 2003, 363). The IMF was a pioneer in applying these neoliberal ideas in its agreements with developing countries since the 1980s. The conditionalities demanding trading liberalisation, privatisation, control of the level of indebtedness and inflation management policies forced states to prioritise these requirements to the detriment of domestic needs. Now the task to promote these policies was transferred to the rating agencies, which are responsible for the reinforcement of the neoliberal paradigm as the only mode of organising economic life. Developing countries are expected to follow the best practices under this ideology if they want to be considered a good investment option. States, however, are not victims in this game. Instead of fighting against conditionality, governments are using the neoliberal common sense for their own political benefits. The replacement of the IFIs by the rating agencies may even be seen as positive for developing countries. Unlike the IMF or the World Bank, RAs are abstract institutions to the common public in these countries. No big demonstration has been staged yet in front of Moody's or S&P's headquarters in New York. Likewise, newspapers do not publish rating agencies directors' names in their headlines as they usually do when referring to the international financial institutions' representatives. One may be under the impression that the neoliberal paradigm has been so successful in convincing societies about its inevitability, that it became natural to govern under the rule of a market-born institution. In fact, it is surprising that developing countries' populations do not perceive rating agencies as American institutions and, at the same time, recognise the IFIs as highly influenced by the U.S. government. For these countries, the IMF and the World Bank present more of threat to their sovereignty because they are a creation of other states. Perhaps the globalisation process gave rise to a social view of finance, which suggests that 'in situations of increased uncertainty and risk, the institutions that work to facilitate transactions between buyers and sellers have a central role in organising markets and, consequently, in governing the world' (Barros 2002, quoted in Sinclair 2005, 5). Hence, one may conclude that governments and societies truly believe that the rating agencies are the best institutions to deal with the new aspects of a globalised economy, suggesting that they are only playing their role when they impose conditionality to developing countries in exchange for access to international credit. <heading>5 - Conclusion</heading>This essay has provided evidence for the claim that the rating agencies have replaced the international financial institutions in the role of establishing conditionality to developing countries in exchange for access to credit. Developments in the capital markets, the globalisation of finance - marked by the increase of capital mobility, and the adoption of ratings in risk regulations first in the United States and then internationally have bolstered the prominence of RAs as the institutions with the expert knowledge to provide information on creditworthiness of borrowers. However, their role has gone far beyond the provision of ratings. Their influence on developing countries' behaviour has been significant, as governments have to worry about ratings when making policies. The imposition of conditionality is informal: there is not a contract between RAs and countries regarding the adoption of macroeconomic policies as a requirement to have credit, as it was the case of the IMF and the World Bank agreements. The punishment for not making the structural adjustment, however, is not less serious; on the contrary, countries that do not implement inflation control and fiscal deficit reduction policies, for instance, may be totally banned from borrowing in certain capital markets. Intriguingly, it seems that the relationship between rating agencies and emerging states is less controversial than the one that developing countries used to have with the IMF and the World Bank. Governments may use the influence of RAs over their decisions to justify the pursuit of anti-inflation and other recessionary economic policies. They can blame the agencies for the economic hardship and, at the same time, demobilise opposition. Emerging countries seem to have resigned themselves to the apparent inevitability of the adoption of neoliberal policies. Despite the fact that governments may be deliberately submitting themselves to the conditionality imposed by RAs in order to achieve domestic political goals, RAs cannot be excused for overstepping their mark as providers of creditworthiness information and start meddling directly with governmental policies by imposing a framework based on American best practices. Their actions are highly consequential. The downgrade of a sovereign rating may result in economic recession and lower supply of social security and public goods, for instance. Furthermore, their impact in times of economic crisis can be catastrophic. The Asian crisis is a good example of the significance of the RAs' consequential behaviour. First, they did not spot the economic turmoil and kept inflated ratings, contributing to the false sense of security. Then, when the crisis struck, the major RAs rapidly downgraded countries, such as Korea and Thailand, aggravating the massive capital flight. After the crisis, governments were forced, through what we call informal conditionality, to adopt severe austerity programmes in order to regain favourable ratings from the agencies (Kerwer 2005, 465). To conclude, the fact that the conditionality imposed by ratingagencies is not formal absolves them from the consequences of states implementing certain programmes. In this sense, one can not expect thatrating agencies will change their stance or make social concessions, as the IMF and the World Bank were pressured to do, once studies showed that the decades of IFIs' conditionality had resulted in increased poverty and inequality in many developing countries. Therefore, the replacement of the IFIs by RAs as enforcers of conditionalities to emerging economies makes sense from a market point of view: the RAs are more efficient in exercising the task of coercive regulators and staving off pressure for change in their criteria. 