<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This essay argues that the implementation of Structural Adjustment Programmes, such as trade liberalisation, inflation control and fiscal deficit reduction, had a direct influence on the rise of the Brazilian Movement of Landless Rural Workers in the 1990s. These policies did not take into account the country's reality and the result was an increase in poverty and inequality, creating a contingent of rural unemployed people. The peasants could not be incorporated into the urban workforce for two main reasons: lack of formal education and lack of jobs, since the cities were also suffering the consequences of the SAPs. The MST seized the opportunity and recruited almost 70,000 landless families, enlarging by 466.36 percent in a decade. This rise was marked by intensification of land occupations and radicalisation of rural conflicts. Public demonstrations for agrarian reform led the World Bank, who imposed the SAPs in the first place, to release US$ 90 million to fund purchase of land and settlements. </abstract><heading>1- Introduction</heading>In this essay we argue that the Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs) introduced in Brazil by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank had direct influence on the rise of the Brazilian Movement of Landless Rural Workers (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, MST) in the 1990s. Between 1989 and 1999, the government took US$ 8.5 billion in loans from the IMF. In exchange, the country had to adopt neo-liberal policies such as trade liberalisation, privatisation, inflation control and public deficit reduction. Both rural and urban areas were affected by these changes. We will focus on the impact of these policies on the rural areas only; during that decade the landless movement grew by 466.36%. We begin by introducing the concept of SAPs and its implementation by the IMF and the World Bank in developing countries. Next we present the MST in historical perspective, looking into its grassroots' origins. In the third part, we assess of the influence of SAPs on the growth of the MST in the 1990s. We conclude by claiming that the implementation of SAPs without considering the Brazilian realities penalised the rural poor. The increase in poverty and inequality in the countryside and the rise of land concentration provided fertile ground for the development of the MST, whose success is related both to its fight for access to land and to its opposition to the neo-liberal order. <heading>2- Structural Adjustment Programmes</heading>The World Bank introduced Structural Adjustment Programmes as part of the loans package in 1980. The International Monetary Fund adopted the same procedure in 1986. To understand the reasons behind the adoption of conditionality for loans to developing countries, we must look back to the 1970s and understand the roles played by the two institutions within the international economic order. The World Bank and the IMF were created in the end of the Second World War in the context of the Bretton Woods' agreements, in 1944. While the World Bank's objective was to provide financial resources for countries devastated by the war, the IMF's aim was to assure stability of exchange rates and to make the necessary adjustments to keep this order. Countries running short of foreign exchange could get short-term help from the Fund as far as they agreed to implement certain policies. Underdeveloped countries had been trying to obtain more resources from the Fund and the World Bank since the 1950s, but the majority found the condi-tionality to access credit too harsh. In fact, the IMF used these requirements in order to rationalise money: countries could not blame the Fund for lack of support if they were not willing to follow its rules (Zack-Williams, Brown and Mohan 2000, 15). By the late 1970s, underdeveloped countries were attracted by commercial bank's credit. These banks were full of petro-dollars and would not require the Bretton Woods institutions' conditionalities to give loans. In the late 1980s, the developing states' indebtedness was increasing; they had not undertaken the required adjustments. Moreover, these countries were not prepared to deal with the new reality of international economy, which was not based just on trade, but on capital flows as well. New and complex investment products, such as derivatives, were placed in the financial market. Countries were not able to control their currencies through currency market intervention anymore. They should attract investment through economic fundamentals. The inspiration for these fundamentals would come from the neo-classical paradigm, championed by the United States. Underdeveloped economies willing to receive assistance from the IMF and the World Bank would have to adopt the SAPs, which according to Woodward (1992, quoted in Milward 2000, 25), were 'designed to enable the adjusting country to change the structure of its economy in order to meet its long-term needs of efficient utilisation of factors of production to ensure sustained growth'. In the Milward's words, SAP refers 'to the process whereby the economies of the Third World are being reshaped to be more market oriented' (2000, 25). Hence, from 1986 a country that was eligible for the IMF help was required to prepare a three-year adjustment programme set out in a policy framework paper. The SAP would also depend on the amount of the credit in negotiation. In the case of the World Bank, a SAP could involve just a specific sector, such as health. The World Bank had to be part of the agreement if a loan was to be approved to low-income countries. Under the neo-classical paradigm, the structural adjustment policies are mainly based on three points: macroeconomic stabilization, privatisation and liberalisation. As to macroeconomic stability, tight budget is necessary to bring inflation down to a single digit level and further, to a figure of around 3-4 percent. Privatisation also helps inflation reduction as it eliminates subsidies for public sector and improves efficiency; these policies lead to a decrease of the fiscal deficit as well. Finally, the liberalisation policy asserts that the state should free prices, reduce regulation and subsidies, free labour markets, and reduce trade barriers (Milward 2000, 33; Cheru and Gill 1997, 157). The role of the state is to provide an economic environment within which markets can operate, but it should also be concentrated in the promotion of human capital formation through universalisation of literacy, extension of technical education and access to safe drinking water and health facilities by all (Dasgupta 1998, 95). One of the criticisms to the neo-classical model is that the assumptions mentioned above do not consider the realities of the countries in which it is implemented. An example is the idea that free trade is the perfect model to achieve full employment of all actors of production. For Milward (2000, 36), this is unrealistic in less developed economies. States do not have equal influence in their trade with each other. In fact, there is an unequal exchange between the primary products from developing countries and the products of advanced economies. 'The outcome is that free trade produces an increasing gap between the national income of the poor and rich nations.' Another criticism of SAPs refers to the loss of autonomy of countries in the politics of policy formulation. Despite the fact that 'IMF intervention is routinely at request of governmental authorities', therefore it cannot be interpreted as a threat to sovereignty (Held 1989, 196, quoted in Mohan 2000, 80), critics claim that structural adjustment programmes have been applied in a doctrinaire and coercive way which leaves little room for manoeuvre. As these policies are implemented in economies with preceding years of hyperinflation and economic hardship, sometimes even the opposition parties within the country resign themselves to the inevitability of the adjustment. However, this does not mean that there is no internal resistance to the SAPs. Latin American countries, for example, have experienced strong opposition to the political neo-liberal policies imposed by the IMF and the World Bank. As a result, political populism, thought to be dead in the 1980s, has been rearing its ugly head again in the region (Mohan 2000, 84). In the past, 'populism was depicted as the very antithesis of the new neo-liberal order through its association with irresponsible state spending and corrupt state-led economic strategies'. The new populism, by contrast, is referred to as a lower-class backlash against austerity, inequalities and market insecurities attendant on neo-liberalism (Roberts 1995, 83, quoted in Mohan 2000, 85). The analysis of recent electoral results in the region - Bolivia and Venezuela for instance - provide evidence of the re-emergence of this phenomenon. In countries where political opposition has not been strong, resistance may come from social movements and non-governmental organisations (NGOs). In fact, Brown (2000, 171) reported an increase in the number of civil society associations all around the world created to challenge the neo-liberal consensus. That is the case of the movement of landless workers in Brazil. <heading>3- MST in historical perspective</heading>The MST is the first national agrarian movement in Brazil. Its grassroots can be traced to the country's history. When the Portuguese crown claimed the land in 1500, it was decided that the territory would be divided into 12 giant provinces, called capitanias, which were given as gifts to royal friends and relatives. These people were allowed to exploit the areas to their own benefit despite the fact that they did not own the provinces. For over 350 years, slaves brought from Africa were forced to work in sugar fields, goldmines and coffee plantations. During this period, many slaves tried to escape and were killed or recaptured. But some were successful, such as the group that created in 1630 a community called Quilombo dos Palmares in the state of Pernambuco, whose leader, Zumbi, is an MST icon. The slavery was abolished in 1888 and a republican government was established one year later. Landowners, suddenly deprived of workforce, lobbied for state intervention. The government promptly responded, prohibiting land invasion and granting property rights to the capitanias' heirs. The concentration of land had become official and the only alternative to former slaves was to accept low wages. In 1893, an itinerant preacher called Antonio Conselheiro started to attract followers with a discourse against the new Republican government, high taxes and the elites. He founded the village of Canudos in the north of the state of Bahia (northeast), where 20,000 people (mainly former slaves) lived and worked together in a big self-sufficient community. The central government accused the group of defending the return of the monarchy and sent four military expeditions to fight Canudos. In 1897, the army executed all the men in the village. Another important popular rebellion took place in the South of Brazil, in the state of Santa Catarina. Peasant families revolted against the government decision of granting a British railway company the ownership of 100 kilometres of land that was already occupied by them. The so-called war of Contestado raged from 1912 to 1916 and was won by the official forces, resulting in many deaths. The MST claims to be inspired by all these popular rebellions and a few others. In fact, it was in the same Southern region that the movement emerged, during the dictatorship period (1964-1985), with the Catholic Church support through the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT), which was created in 1975 to intervene and prevent violent land conflicts. Helped by priests, who allowed the landless leaders to meet in the church's premises when this kind of association was forbidden, the MST planned its first occupation in Encruzilhada Natalino, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, in 1979 (Martins 2003, 1). The movement was formally created in 1984. In 1985, when Brazil was witnessing many public demonstrations for democratisation, the MST seized the opportunity and organised its first national assembly. During the meeting, the movement decided that the only solution for the agrarian problem was the occupation of unproductive land. The MST also established its 'model of social appropriation'. This model, based on cooperative relations among direct workers and alternative patterns of land appropriation and use, would be applied in settlements of members of the group. With the re-democratisation in 1985, the new government approved the national plan for agrarian reform (PRNA) whose aim was to give land to 1.4 million families. Under landowners' pressures, this plan had to be redrafted twelve times before an agreement was reached. The PRNA was reinforced later by the new Constitution, which established that all land not used for its social function - production - should be expropriated by the state and used for agrarian reform. The document specified that unproductive properties are those classified as not achieving 80% of the use of tillable land whose yields are bellow 100% of the average per hectare productive rates. The expropriation process includes long-term payment of compensation through bonds for the value of the land and cash payment for improvements (Sauer 2003, 1-2). This bill was not peacefully accepted. In the period between 1985 and 1988, when the new Constitution was being drafted in the Parliament, an organisation of strong opposition to the MST was created. The Ruralist Democratic Union (Uniao Democratica Ruralista, UDR) recruited 200,000 farm proprietors with the aim of joining forces and gathering private armies to fight MST invasions. Their defence was also in the Constitution: the private property right (Wright and Wolford 2003, 105). The scenario for conflict was formed. On the one side, the MST was organising occupations of unproductive lands based on the idea that they were supported by the Constitution. On the other side, landowners were defending their private properties, also a constitutional right. The government, caught in the middle, tried to please both sides promising agrarian reform and assuring proprietors they would not be the losers. Wright and Wolford (2003, 105) estimated that, just between 1985 and 1987, 377 rural workers and peasants were murdered in land conflicts. By the end of the 1980s, the state had neither delivered a satisfactory reform nor protected the properties from MST invasions. After five years of administration, the president Jose Sarney had achieved just 6% of the PRNA objectives. The situation in the following decade worsened, as the state took economic measures that had direct influence on the rural population. <heading>4- SAPs and the rise of the MST</heading>The economic outlook in Brazil was bleak in 1989. Hyperinflation was the big monster to be fought. The country was also economically too closed for neo-liberal tastes. Mario Covas, one of the candidates of the first direct presidential election after 21 years of dictatorship, defended change: 'We need a capitalist shock'. He lost the dispute, but the winner, Fernando Collor de Mello, and his successors would promptly act to promote that 'capitalist shock' in the 1990s. The process began with a major programme of trade liberalisation, with the virtual elimination of non-tariff barriers and a sharp reduction of tariffs in 1990. The programme of regional integration within the Mercosur also took place. However, the rise in the imports did not help to tackle inflation, which had been increasing since the 1980s, when it reached 330%, according to the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). The institute started recording inflation indices in the 1930s, when it was only 6%. In the early 1990s, the inflation rate rose to a staggering 764%. The drop was significant after 1994, year of the implementation of the Plano Real: between 1995 and 2000, inflation fell to 8.6%. <fnote>Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatistica </fnote>According to the Brazil's letter of intent to the IMF in 1998, the success of the decline of inflation was also helped by the slowdown in economic activity, which on the other hand resulted in an increase of the unemployment rate from 8.7% in 1992 to 11.2% in 1998 (IBGE). With the adoption of the SAPs by the Brazilian government, the IMF injected into the country almost US$ 8.5 billion in disbursements between 1988 and 1999 (IMF 2006). The SAPs in Brazil were mainly focused on privatisation, liberalisation, inflation control and fiscal deficit reduction. In the privatisation front, the country sold public companies that were responsible for 3% of the GDP, generating US$ 80 billion to the Treasury. This money was used to cover public debts as the government was reluctant to carry out reforms to reduce public expenditure with personnel, for instance. The big budget cuts occurred in infrastructure investments of federal enterprises and in the disbursement of loans of federal banks to states and municipalities. These cuts helped to curb inflation, which was also reined in through high interest rates: the basic lending rate reached 43.5% in 1998 (IMF 1998). The Brazilian agricultural sector was directly affected by these economic transformations. With the liberalisation of trade, the so-called 'green revolution' - initiated in the 1960s under the assumption that underdeveloped countries should increase food production using improved strains of wheat, rice, maize and other cereals - was reduced to basically soyabeans and orange. The government recalled Adam Smith's concept of 'comparative advantage' to defend the cultivation of these two crops: Brazil should produce soyabeans and orange because it could do that at a very low cost, and it should import food produces available from other countries at competitive prices. The result during the first half of the decade was an overall increase of production and a decline of 200,000 hectares in the area under cultivation owing to high yields fostered by technological advances. By 1999, Brazil was spending US$ 7.5 billion on food imports and earning about US$ 5 billion from the soya complex - beans, meal and oil (Branford and Rocha 2002, 173). The abandonment of the production of a variety of crops and the adoption of mono-cultivation proved disastrous to small producers: producing only one crop was risky, since farmers were more vulnerable to adverse conditions such as weather, pests and sharp falls in market prices. But the pressure became really unbearable when many small producers realised that they did not have the technology to improve their yields and that the banks' high interest rates were driving them into huge indebtedness. Some were forced to sell their land to bigger farmers; others lost everything to banks. The inflation control through high interest rates was penalising rural producers. The modernisation of the production was essential to compete globally, but not everybody was able to invest the huge sums necessary for this enterprise. A survey by a government advisor showed that, by the end of the decade, 82% of the rural properties were 'technologically out-dated and economically old-fashioned' (Dias 2000, quoted in Branford and Rocha 2002, 182). Land concentration was on the rise. The share of registered farmland with over 2,000 hectares increased from 39% in 1992 to 43% in 1998. The number of very big properties - over 50,000 - rose from 181 to 262 in the same period. The area of the 10% biggest farms of the country increased from 77.1% to 78.6% of the total area (Neto 2004, 1; Branford and Rocha 2002, 181; IBGE). Twenty percent of the farms were responsible for 60% of Brazil's agricultural income. The Gini coefficient, a measure inequality, rose from 0.831 to 0.843. <fnote>The Gini coefficient is often used to measure income inequality. It is a number between 0 and 1, where 0 corresponds to perfect equality (e.g. everyone has the same income) and 1 corresponds to perfect inequality (e.g. one person has all the income, and everyone else has zero income). </fnote>Moreover, the increase in production was followed by a decrease of the level of rural employment. The rise in agricultural income was bolstered mainly by technological changes, not by the employment of the workforce, which resulted in large lay-offs in rural areas. Between 1985 and 1995, 5.5 million rural jobs disappeared. The trend increased between 1996 and 1999: the three-year period witnessed a reduction of 4.2 million posts (IBGE). The unemployed contingent consisted mainly of small producers who lost or sold their land, and seasonal workers who became redundant with the modernisation of the farms. One can say that the process of modernisation of the agricultural production, and the ensuing unemployment in rural areas, was inevitable, with or without trade liberalisation. This is probably true. What makes the situation particularly dramatic, though, is the combination of policies implemented by the Brazilian government in light of the SAPs. If unemployment was not bad enough, the tightening on the budget resulted in cuts on public expenditure and investments. The latter hit small producers hard, since the government slashed credit. During the 1980s, the state invested large amounts of money to finance agricultural production as showed in the Table 1. The annual credit averaged R$ 35 billion. In the 1990s, this sum dropped to R$ 8.5 billion. Small producers were left unprotected. Only producers big enough to finance the technological changes themselves were successful. Part of the contingent of unemployed people went on to join the mass of poor living in shantytowns in the big cities. For the remaining, the ideas of the Movement of Landless Rural Workers were more attractive. The number of families without land registered with MST rose from 12,805 in 1990 to 69,804 in 1999 - an increase of 466.36% (MST.org). <table/>The MST represented not only a chance to get land, but also a channel of political mobilisation against the neo-liberal order in place. The objectives of the movement went beyond the fight for land: <list>The building of a society without exploitation and where the work has supremacy over capital.The fight for land for all and the its use to benefit the society.The defence of work for all and fair distribution of land, income and wealth.The defence of social justice and equal economic, political, social and cultural rights.The spread of humanitarian and social values within social relations. The fight against all kind of social prejudice and the search for an equal participation of the woman (MST.org).</list>Despite any similarity of some of the group's statements with communist ideas, the MST favours private ownership of the land by individuals and the use of the land for private profit. However, one important aspect of its action was the perception that those people expelled from the rural area needed not only land but also education, otherwise they would make the same mistakes and end up losing their properties again. The reform had to go deeper. Therefore, the movement focused on the rescue of the dignity of the peasants. The first step was to legalise their existence: many did not have birth certificate, for instance, or any kind of documentation. Their national citizenship should come before what the Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto called 'economic citizenship'. The second challenge was to teach them how to read and write: the Brazilian government has neglected the education in rural areas. According to the National Institute of Educational Study and Research (Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais, INEP), 30% of the adults in the countryside are illiterate. In the cities, this rate is 10%. The majority of the children in the rural areas complete only four years of fundamental education and do not receive any kind of technical training. Johnson (1987, 353) argues that this failure to invest in rural education has been a rule in a vast majority of countries, creating a world rural-urban income disparity. As a consequence, rural people leave their farms and try to find higher wages in the cities, where they are not prepared to compete with the urban workforce. In Brazil, the rural uneducated contingent increased the already high urban unemployment rate in the 1990s, as the industry also suffered with the macroeconomic adjustments promoted under the rules of the IMF and the World Bank. The service sector, which was growing with the liberalisation, would not employ illiterates. One possibility was construction work (e.g., schools, roads), but the government cut costs to keep inflation at bay and reduce the fiscal deficit. The third focus of transformation envisaged by the MST was the commercialisation of production. The group defends the idea of cooperatives for small producers. It believes that these farmers cannot obtain good prices on the market if they negotiate alone. Cooperatives, on the other hand, should promote integration in the rural areas, creating room for cultural development in the countryside as well. In order to start this "revolution", however, they have to overcome the biggest challenge of all: the agrarian reform. The conditionality imposed by the IMF reduced the chances of a reform able to accommodate the growing landless movement. Even the minister responsible for the agrarian reform, Raul Jungman, recognised that it was almost impossible to make an agrarian reform under the budget cuts established by the SAPs. In the mid 1990s, the MST intensified its actions to put pressure on the government. The main strategy was the occupation - or invasion as the government and the media call it - of private properties. The group occupied areas they it considered fallow land. Many occupations were supported by official data. In 1996, for instance, the IBGE's Agriculture Census revealed that there were 25 million hectares of fallow land (four or more years unplanted), nearly 60% of all cultivated area (Sauer 2003, 1). The rise in the number of occupations (see Table 2) was followed by an increase in the occurrence of violent land conflicts. The Pastoral Land Commision (CPT) reported an annual average of 367 conflicts involving 214,653 people between 1992 and 1994. In the second half of the decade, this figure grew to an annual average of 667 incidents involving 508,507 people. In fact, these conflicts earned the movement international attention. The most famous were the Corumbiara massacre in 1995, when nine landless workers were killed, and the Eldorado dos Carajas slaughter in 1996, which resulted in 19 MST members dead and hundreds of injured. In both events, landless people clashed with policemen. The involvement of the police force in the massacres was frowned upon by public opinion and opposition. For some, the two episodes proved that the authorities were losing control of the situation and that the democratic institutions were being sabotaged. For others, the state was reacting with repressive violence against a legitimate cause instead of promoting the agrarian reform. In 1997, the tension between landless workers, farmers and local authorities was high. After visiting some of the areas were the conflict was accute, the minister of Justice gave a speech in which he urged a 'harder line' against the MST from state governments and public prosecutors. For him, the land occupation was a 'criminal act'. The landless movement reacted and organised a march with 1,300 workers to the capital, Brasilia. The demonstration was regarded as a success. First, the government had to send a representative to talk to the movement leaders, reinforcing its legitimacy. Second, an opinion poll showed that 94% of the Brazilian population supported the group's campaign for agrarian reform (Branford and Rocha 2003, 199-200). Third, and probably most important, the movement got the attention of the World Bank to the agrarian reform issue. <table/>The World Bank disbursed US$ 90 million between 1997 and 2000 to fund a programme to settle 15,000 families. Yet the institution would not finance the expropriation of areas; the money should be used to buy land from farmers willing to sell their properties. To justify what critics called 'market-assisted agrarian reform', the Brazilian government and the World Bank said that expropriation and redistribution of land take a long time. Critics claimed that Brazil was chosen by the Bank to promote this kind of reform as an experiment, which would be disseminated to other countries if it proved successful. Moreover, it was claimed that the Bank regarded the intensification of land occupations and the radicalisation of the conflicts as a threat to private property and to the structural adjustment programmes (Domingos 2003, 3). The World Bank replied asserting that its support to the agrarian reform was a demonstration of its 'sensitivity to the issue' (World Bank 2000, 5). One way or the other, the Bank's intervention suggests that the international financial institutions were feeling the pressure of the public protests against the consequences of the SAPs in Brazil. The MST was the Brazilian social movement that better harnessed the climate of economic slowdown and political freedom to defend its cause. The economic recession created to comply with the SAPs had unemployed millions in the cities as well as in the countryside. Hence, for many, the affiliation with the MST was perceived as the only option to a life in extreme poverty: it was a chance to obtain land and go back to the countryside. The MST was not alone: other groups, such as the movement of homeless people, were created in the same period. One can say that the development of the MST would have occurred even if Brazil had not adopted the policies required by the IMF, because of the recent democratisation of the country in 1985. In this view, the MST is only one of the groups created in that period, experimenting and testing their freedom of speech and association. We agree that democracy was a crucial factor to the development of the landless movement, but we believe that the influence of the SAPs on the increasing visibility and recruiting power of the MST was more important than democracy itself because of their particularly detrimental effects on the rural population. In the first five years of democratisation (1985-1989), the movement did not recruit as many people as it did after the start of the implementation of the SAPs; it was concentrated only in the South of the country. The group's dissemination to other regions started in the 1990s, when the policies imposed by the IMF increased the number of rural poor, who were the main target of the MST: between 1990 and 1997 the proportion of poor people living in the rural areas jumped from 39.2% to 58.3% of the population. Likewise, the Gini coeficient of income inequality in the rural areas rose from 0.58% in 1991 to 0.62% in 2001, according to a survey of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the World Bank. This rise was caused by a decrease of between 24% and 96% in the monthly income of the 20% poorest peasants in the period (BBC Brasil 2005). The very fact that in 2002 a candidate of the the Worker's Party, a historical ally of the MST, won the presidential elections after 12 years of failed attempts suggests that it was SAPs, not democracy, the reason for the enlargement and natiowide dissemination of the movement. Put another way, the movement grew and then gained political influence through the election of a historical ally, not the other way around. <heading>5- Conclusion</heading>The influence of the SAPs on the rise of the MST is evident in the analysis of the consequences of these policies on the rural population: increase in poverty and inequality and bankrupty of small producers. At least three of the policies adopted by the Brazilian government on request of the IMF were directly responsible for the increase in the number of landless people who would eventually join the movement. First, the sudden trade liberalisation exposed many uncompetitive producers to the aggressive international market. The option of mono-cultivation proved not profitable for small producers, as most of them were not technologically prepared. Second, the reduction of fiscal deficit led the state to cut drastically credit to farmers. The budgetary cuts had an impact on infrastructure investments as well, leaving no room for the creation of new jobs to acommodate the rural unemployed. Third, high interest rates, set by the government to curb inflation, rendered commercial banks' loans unaffordable; many proprietors lost their land. Economic recession proved to be a fertile ground for the rise and natiowide spread of the landless movement, which comprised almost 70,000 families in 1999. The reaction of the World Bank - setting up a fund for agrarian reform - is consistent with our view that the SAPs underlie the fast growth of the landless movement in the 1990s. 