<heading>1.Introduction </heading>Economic stability is the absence of the inefficient aggregate fluctuation in the inflation rate, economic growth, level of employment rate and the balance of payment. If we believe a market economy is itself unstable, then stabilisation policy is introduced as a set of monetary and fiscal policy, designed to attenuate the fluctuations. In this assay, I am going to make a thorough discussion on how the policy should be used to stabilise the economy with examples from the UK. <heading>2. Approaches of stabilisation </heading>I will discuss the policies in 4 areas. <heading>2.1 Economic growth</heading>The economic growth is the percentage increased in real national output in a given time period. Given the importance of the economic growth in reducing poverty and improving living standard, ensuring a sustained growth is a key priority for every country. In the classical model, the total output is supply determined. The strong assumption of price and wage perfect flexibility implies the total output always equals to the potential output. Classical economists believe "free markets are inherently self-stabilising", thus any attempts of intervention will only "mess things up". In contrast another more realistic "fixed price model" suggests that the output is demand determined and can deviate from the potential output. When the economy is in recession, an expansion in fiscal policy can shift aggregate demand curve to the right(AD1) by increasing government spending(see dig.1), and the multiplier effect will generate higher output in the short term by△y=△G/1-b(1-t) where b =marginal propensity to consume, c=current tax rate. In December, the chancellor announced the PBR, forecasting GDP growth of 3.25% this year (see dig2) and said in his pre-budget speech: "Britain will extend the longest period of uninterrupted growth in the industrial history of our country". However, the 2004 annual economic summary from national statistics points out "UK economic growth has continued to be primarily driven by government expenditure and household consumer spending" .UK budget deficit has increased from 1.53% of GDP (2002) to 2.94%(2004), and it may exceed the limit set by the euro zone of 3% by 2005. In the fixed price model, the increased output might be less than the full multiplier effect in the long run due to the crowing out effects. Governments often borrow money (by issuing bonds) to fund the additional spending. Therefore in dia.1, the MD shifts to right and forces the interest rate increasing, which "crowds out" the private investments because of the higher costs for the borrowing. Correspondingly the AD1 curve shifts back to AD2 and responds to a lower output. An alternative way to stimulate the depressed economy is loose monetary policy. In the money market, if the central bank lowered its lending interest rate to R1 by raising the money supply (dig3), the borrowing for private investment is more attractive and result in shifting LM1 curve to the rightLM2. In the goods market, the AD1 curve will correspondingly shift to AD2 thus the total output increases. In the long term, the expanding aggregate demand may lead to the higher demand for the money by shifting the MD1 curve to the right MD2, and the interest rate will rise to R2 which is still lower than R1. The UK current interest rate is 4.75%, and it is considered to be quite high and uncompetitive for the UK manufacturing industry and the retailers compared to the other countries with lower interest rate. <heading>2.2 Employment </heading>From the Keynesian perspective, the demand for labour is derived from the aggregate demand in good market. (AD=I+G+C+NX). In dig.4, it shows the increase in demand for output will require more labour demand. The wage stickiness and price rigidity imply there are exists the possibility of "involuntary" unemployment. In the year to September 2004, the UK unemployment fell by 105,000 to 1.39m people. The number unemployed and claiming Jobseeker's Allowance fell by 95,000 to 834,000 in the same period. Both these figures are the lowest since 1975 Common approaches of fiscal policy: ·Government purchases of good and service: It has a direct effect on AD.A program of public work, for example, building more roads, parks and camps etc will hire more workers. ·Tax reforms: Taking Corporation tax for instance, a reduction of the tax rate may encourages more private investment as a result of greater profitability. So the aggregate demand raises, hence employment. ·Transfer payment adjustment: An increase in unemployment benefit, social security benefits, and welfare payment will boost the aggregate demand. However, an inappropriate adjustment might have the risk of obtaining a higher voluntary unemployment rather than employment. ·Improving the productivity and flexibility of the labours: In 2004, Gordon Brown promised giving employers the opportunity to access free and flexibly delivered training for their low-skilled employees through a National Employer Training Programme in his annual pre-Budget report. On the monetary policy side, the same analysis is applied as in 2.1. The lowering interest rates, expanding the money supply, and making it easier to obtain credit is the way to stimulate aggregate demand. As a result of higher domestic investment will offer more jobs in labour market. In the 2004 pre-budget report, the chancellor announced the implementation of the changes recommended by the Graham Review of the Small Firms' Loan Guarantee by end 2005 to encourage more private investments. Meanwhile, a competitive interest rate also promotes foreign investment into the economy from foreign multinational companies <heading>2.3 Inflation</heading>Inflation refers to the tendency for prices level over a certain period. It is expressed as two forms in Kenysian model. · Demand-pull inflation: It is generated by the pressures of excess demand as an economy approaches and exceeds the full employment level . Once workers adjust their expectations, according to the wage setting formula: W=PeF (v, z), they will bargain for the higher wage and wage-price spiral may occur. · Cost-push inflation: Presuppose the firm chooses prices to maximize profit  FORMULA  where Y=N (production function)=ΦP^(-β)(demand function), therefore  FORMULA  The rising cost will result in a higher mark up μ, consequently it will pass on to the consumers. In 2004, the UK inflation producer input prices grew considerably from the spring of 2004, due to the effects of rising oil prices. In order to alleviate the inflation, the Phillips curve with adaptive expectation  FORMULA , Un= nature rate of unemployment argues there is a short term trade-off between inflation and unemployment. So when the inflation pressure arises, the government tends to adopt contractionary fiscal policy by cutting-back government spending and raising the direct /indirect tax payment. An early example was the Medium-Term Financial Strategy implemented by Mrs. Thatcher, which involved planned reduction in public spending in 4 to 5 years. The lower government spending will shift the AD (dig5) downward, so the exceeding demand can be eliminated. However, the contractionary fiscal policy is unpopular from the political consideration since the shift back of AD curve may cause the economic recession. In May 1997, Labour government decided to move decisively to establish the independence of the Bank of England. One of the Bank of England's key responsibilities is to conduct monetary policy. The Bank's role is to deliver price stability by setting short-term interest rates. The inflation target is set each year by the Chancellor of the Exchequer (new target: 2%) and the Monetary Policy Committee will try to meet the target as close as possible. The independency has improved the credibility and transparency of the monetary policy. If the people have rational expectations and they believe the government inflation target, the deflation policy will have less cost by the Phillips curve. September 9, the MPC revealed its target policy rate of 4.75 %. After having hiked three times in four months in an aggressive attempt to stave off inflation, the MPC decided to hold rates constant due to the concerns of the UK's rising Produce Price Index. In the IS-LM mode (see dig7), the higher interest rate will cause additional demand for the money, which will shift LM curve upward hence lower price in good market. The statistical evidence suggests the UK inflation rate has been among the lowest in the EU since the start of 2000 and enjoying the longest period of sustained low inflation since the 1960s <heading>2.4 Balance of payment</heading>Balance of payment is an accounting record of all transactions made by a country. The most frequently used component is the merchandise trade balance, which is defined as the difference between a nation's exports and imports. Based on the data provided by the national statistics, The UK's deficit on trade in goods and services worsened in October 2004 to stand at £3.8 billion -compared with the deficit for September of £2.9 billion. In an open economy, the government can affects trade balance and exchange rate. In the case of fiscal expansion, such as growing public investment and the government subsidies, the corresponding upward shifting IS curve (dig7) will engender a increasing aggregate demand at a higher interest rate R1. In the short-term, the current account maybe worse off. This is because, firstly the demand for imports is proportional to aggregate demand, where the extend depends on the marginal propensity to import, and secondly, the raising interest rate pushes down the exchange rate, leading to the more expensive exports. This effect of fiscal policy was central to discussions of the "twin deficits" (budget and trade) theory. Nevertheless, if the competitiveness of the UK exports can be enhanced as a result of the developing technology and labour productivity in the long term, it should give a boost to the export demand due to the cheaper cost and the better quality. Besides, the government can also raise tariff barriers against foreign good. But sometimes it might not be feasible, e.g. against WTO regulation For the monetary policy, the central bank may consider depreciate the domestic currency by lowering interest rate. As the LM curve shifts downward (dig 8), the higher exchange rate indicates the dearer importer and cheaper exports. But it doesn't necessarily reduce the trade deficit because the expanding aggregate demand also implies more demand for the imports. So the effectiveness of the policy is ambiguous. It depends on the marginal propensity to imports and price elasticity of the exports. <heading>3. Evaluations </heading><heading>3.1 Opposition of the policies</heading>· Long and variable time legs: It takes time for the policy-makers to recognise and implement the policies. In comparison to the monetary policy, the time required to approve and deliver discretionary fiscal policy make it less effective as a tool for stabilisation. If the conditions change before policy's impact is felt, then it may end up destabilising the economy. · Inaccurate forecasting: Forecasting Macroeconomy is difficult, because policies out with legs, policy makers have to predict future condition. Obviously, the wrong policy will obtain the wrong result. · Reliability of the data: Sometimes the policy makers might distort the figures to cover up the facts. Hypothesis is that reduction in volatility was due to "better" data "not" better policy. ·Effectivness: In the IS-LM model, the fiscal policy will be more effective if LM curve is flat. This is the case if money demand is sensitive to the interest rate. Similarly, the monetary policy would be more effective when the investment is sensitive to the interest rate. <heading> 3.2 The other destabilising factors</heading>In pace with the development of the economic globalisation, UK is now even more dependent than before on the rest of capitalism succeeding. The UK capitalist prefer to invest in financial services or send their profits abroad. Now the prosperity and the financing of UK trade deficit depend on nearly 3.5% of GDP coming from investment by foreign manufacturers (over half of which are American). Therefore, the volatility of the inward investment could cause the UK economy fluctuation. Furthermore, there is a strong relation between social stability and economic stability. The economic consequences of UK's war in Iraq in 2003, for example, might put additional pressure on the government budget deficit <heading>3.3 Coordination of the policies </heading>The coordination of the monetary and fiscal policy is beneficial to ensure a smooth business cycle - that is, to minimise the cost of stability. The four approaches listed in this assay are closely interlinked, for instance, an increasing employment may have the downward pressure on the steady inflation. In diagram.9, it indicates the two instruments can be used simultaneously to target two stabilisation objectives - say, price stability at the same time as balance of payments equilibrium. In this view, the "mix" of the policies an coordinate with each other well for short term and long-term management. . In 1999 Mais lecture, the Chancellor stated: "...a credible framework means working within clearly defined long-term policy objectives, maximum openness and transparency, and clear and accountable divisions of responsibility." The credibleness can improve the information exchange between the Bank of England and the UK Treasury to reach the mutual acknowledgement of the probe behavior, therefore to ensure consistency compatibility of the stabilisation policies 