In terms of the current situation, the organisation seems to be adopting very much a Taylorist (Taylor, 1911) approach to it's culture and management and employing the methods of scientific management in running operations. This is an early school of job design and focuses on work simplification, limited social interaction and repetitive work processes. The symptoms of low morale, absenteeism and low trust and the autocratic management style are typified by organisations run in this fashion and do suggest a number of underlying issues. It is likely that the root of the problems centre around the culture of the organisation, more specifically how employees are motivated and rewarded. There are a number of different schools of thought in this area and the organisation does have a number of options, each with different technical, social and financial implications and these are considered in turn below. <heading>Adopting a new culture</heading>The overall issue can be described as a problem with the culture of the organisation. Firstly, it is helpful to consider what sort of culture the organisation may want to foster. Handy (1999) identifies seven different approaches which include scientific management at one end of the scale and also, for example, the Human Relations school (Barnard, 1938) the Technology school (Woodward, 1965) and most recently the Institutional school which combines all of the approaches. Perhaps the most applicable to this organisation is the Socio-Technical school proposed by Rosenfeld and Wilson (1999) who have simplified and combined the seven schools into three - Scientific Management, Human Relations and Socio-Technical. The latter suggests that the Scientific Management school fails to manage the social interactions in the organisation, leading to issues such as that faced by the firm concerned here, and advocates managing the interactions between the people in the firm and the technology as the key to successful management. It is probable, given that the organisation is likely to use significant technology in it's manufacturing and given the problems that this particular organisation has, that a socio-technical approach would work for this firm. This would rely on a number of changes being made to the ways of motivating the staff and the design of the jobs in the organisation. <heading>Motivation and Job Design</heading>In terms of culture change, the organisation needs to consider three elements (Kerr, 1975). Firstly, the rewards system needs to be altered. Secondly, selection needs to be discussed and finally training is important. The most complex of these areas is altering the rewards system, as this links to theories of motivation and job design, of which there are many, often conflicting, views. There are two main theories of motivation - Extrinsic and Intrinsic. Extrinsic motivation focusses firmly upon the tangible aspects of rewards - pay, conditions and rewards that stem directly from task performance. Intrinsic motivation is much more complex and relies more on motivation through true job satisfaction, and being motivated by the job itself. Each has merit and the choice of how to motivate employees has significant impacts on the organisation in terms of solving the issues that have surfaced. <heading>Extrinsic Motivation</heading>Extrinsic motivation is less concerned with the design of the jobs themselves than how to reward employees for doing the job. It has very strong links with the early motivation theories, such as satisfaction theories, which suggest that a satisfied worker is a productive worker. This has been largely disproven (Lawler, 1973) although there does seem to be a link between increased satisfaction and lower absence, so increasing workers satisfaction may alleviate the firm's absence problems, but is unlikely to solve the issue of autocratic management and low trust. Other early extrinsic motivation theories centre on incentives and reinforcement, through rewarding desired behaviours. This has a strong link with behaviour modification (BM) and operant conditioning, as Skinner found (Skinner, 1961) - by waiting for a desired behaviour and rewarding it, the behaviour is reinforced. Studies by behavioural psychologists in this area have suggested that this links to management by objectives and is a powerful method of motivation. By identifying the desired behaviours, setting objectives based on these and rewarding success through applying both positive and negative reinforcements, Hamner (1976) and Luthans (1974) argue, people learn the required behaviours, exhibit them to gain the rewards, and performance improves. There are a number of implications of the extrinsic motivation approach on this firm. From a technical point of view this approach sounds attractive. It advocates little change from the current operational working practices other than introducing management by objectives and reinforcement methods. However, from a social point of view this is precisely the problem. There is no change to the repetitive nature of the work or the autocratic supervision and it is unlikely to lead to the introduction of the socio-technical organisational culture. Trust is unlikely to increase as a result of employing extrinsic motivation techniques, and so therefore from a social point of view extrinsic motivation is unlikely to address the root of the issues. Furthermore, critics of behaviour modification and reinforcement techniques have suggested the approach itself is flawed. Cognitive psychologists argue that people are not machines - they think before they act and therefore BM is fundamentally about pure motivation rather than reinforcement. More general criticisms are that it is often difficult to identify which extrinsic rewards are the motivators, and that rewards cannot always be controlled by line managers (as in defined benefits structures such as local authorities). Further, demands of the social group at work may conflict and limit the use of BM. Finally, there are financial implications of implementing extrinsic motivation. Broadly, it will increase costs. From the organisations perspective, firms that manage by extrinsic motivation, such as the Caudwell Group and the Cobra Group, operate on the basis of a calculative psychological contract - the firm must pay for any increases in effort/performance by the employees. Therefore, adopting an extrinsic approach is likely to increase costs for the organisation, whether it ends up solving the problems or not. It should be noted that some theorists have suggested that increasing pay and extrinsic rewards is far cheaper in the long run than investing in intrinsic motivation techniques. In terms of the employees' finances, there may be more rewards on offer but whether this will increase motivation is a moot point. Studies (Richardson and Nejad 1986, Poole and Jenkins 1991) have shown that there is little link between money and performance and Hertzberg (1959) suggests that it is a hygiene factor rather than a motivator and is therefore unlikely to increase motivation or performance. Evidence from firms that employ this approach and accept the high costs suggest that employee commitment is low and tenure is short - the average being 9 months at the Caudwell Group - and so applying extrinsic rewards is again unlikely to get to the root of the issues in this firm around trust, absenteeism and autocracy. However, theories do differ on this matter and indeed the theorists that advocate more intrinsic motivation such as McClelland (1961) and Vroom (1964) have suggested that money is important as a motivator and is often the basis for comparison - however these theories link pay to intrinsic rather than extrinsic motivation. It is a widely discussed point but it seems clear that pay is important - but as a motivator is not simply the preserve of extrinsic theories of motivation. <heading>Intrinsic Motivation</heading>Given the issues outlined above with extrinsic motivation and the fact that it's role in solving this organisations issues could be limited, it is important for the firm to give consideration to employing some intrinsic motivation techniques to solve the problems being experienced. In terms of intrinsic motivation theory, there are two main approaches - the content theorists and the process theorists. <heading>Content Theorists</heading>Content theories centre on individuals thinking before taking action, and that motivation is essentially part of the individual and separate to the environment that the individual is in. Perhaps the best known of the content theorists is Maslow (1943) with his hierarchy of needs, ranging from physiological, safety and social needs, up through esteem to self-actualisation needs. Maslow argues that needs are only motivators when they are not satisfied. Hertzberg (1959) simplifies Maslow's work into the fact that the first three needs are hygiene factors, and only the last two (esteem and self actualisation) are really motivators. This links to intrinsic motivation techniques as the theorists suggest that needs such as esteem and self actualisation cannot be met by extrinsic means - although the lower needs may be, they are not really "motivators" as such. McClelland (1961) takes an alternative approach to suggest that people have three needs, of which one is dominant at any one time - the need for achievement, need for affiliation and need for power. McClelland's theory is interesting as it advocates intrinsic motivation and job design techniques, however is more interactionist than the other content theories as it suggests that needs may be acquired over time, through things such as education and experience. In terms of the firm, the current method of management and job design is unlikely to be satisfying the "higher order" needs as per Maslow/Hertzberg through the current design of the jobs and therefore a redesign, incorporating some intrinsic methods of job design and motivation should be considered in order to solve the issues that are being experienced. <heading>Process Theorists</heading>Process theorists also advocate intrinsic motivation, but from a different standpoint. Rather than suggesting that motivation is part of the individual's self concept, they suggest that motivation varies dependent on the situation or environment that the person is in at that moment. Equity theory (Adams, 1963), suggests that people are motivated by a sense of equity or inequity with others. If there is negative inequity, performance decreases. Positive inequity leads to an increase in performance. According to Adams, the role of managers is to anticipate perceptions of inequity and as far as possible ensure perceived equity in order to maximise motivation and performance. A second theory is Expectancy theory, as advocate by Victor Vroom (1964), who suggested that performance is a function of ability and motivation and that people are motivated to work when their needs are met. In terms of the firm in question, it appears that people's needs are not being met and that there may well be a sense of inequity through autocratic management and a lack of trust. Process theories do therefore seem to have some application in this situation. Both content and process theories do have limitations. Content theories are context free and assume the situation has little impact, whereas process theories assume that personalities have little impact and that people are able to make a logical assessment of likely outcome probabilities when making decisions. The likelihood is that the reality is a combination. However, whichever approach is taken the actions in terms of implementing intrinsic motivation, the job design techniques are similar. <heading>Intrinsic methods of Job Design</heading>There are a number of potential ways of designing the jobs of the workers in the firm, outlined below, which could reduce the repetition of the work, increase the responsibility of the employees and increase the trust of the workers in the organisation. Broadly, the aim is to change the psychological contract to a co-operative one, where the goals of the individual and the organisation fit broadly together, and there is increased choice and variety which in turn motivates employees to perform. Job enlargement - increases task variety through job rotation and has been commonly used in repetitive jobs at a junior level. This would decrease the monotony of one job, but in the words of Hertzberg (1968), has a danger of "adding one meaningless job to another" and so is unlikely in the longer term to relieve the symptoms suffered by the firm. Job enrichment - is a different concept and is multi-faceted. The essence of job enrichment is to add responsibility, remove some of the controls, introduce new and more difficult tasks, foster "experts" in certain tasks and/or to give employees responsibility for making a whole unit rather than simply a part of it. This approach has had excellent results at companies such as Shell, Volvo and IBM and considering the symptoms of this firm could also have a significant impact here. In order to assess jobs and redesign them the company should look at five characteristics: The identity of the task - make whole units of work rather than repetitive pieces of a unit The skill variety in the task. The workers in the firm are already semi-skilled so upskilling them should be considered The significance of the work - increase vertical loading i)-iii) together known as "meaningfulness" The autonomy of the worker The feedback mechanism to the worker If the company were to increase the meaningfulness of the work, the autonomy of the worker and the feedback to the worker it is likely that this would help increase motivation and performance. In terms of enrichment, the firm should also consider increasing employee participation and delegation, and involving them in organisation-wide decision making and self management. This could be considered as part of the worker's autonomy. An extreme form of this is the forming of autonomous working groups (AWG's), which at Saab increased efficiency at one plant from 80% to 100%, and in coal mining in Durham increased productivity from 78-95% (Trist and Bamforth, 1951). The key to these arrangements is trust, and as low trust currently pervades the firm, this would be a significant commitment, but one that must be made if intrinsic motivation is to be a success. The scope of the trust must be defined, for instance in terms of setting objectives, but the employees must be trusted to put together an action plan to achieve the objectives and allowed to do so with only minimal controls. If the firm were to take this approach it is likely that the symptoms of low trust and autocratic management would begin to be alleviated, and the forming of AWG's would decrease repetition and increase task motivation. It should be noted however that when measuring increases in performance of these arrangements, the Hawthorne studies suggested that simply focussing on employees increase their performance, as they know they are being measured, rather than the improvement in performance coming from the new working arrangements (Mayo 1949) Finally, a popular way of designing jobs to increase motivation is through flexible working, such as alternative work schedules, job sharing, flexitime and the compressed working week. This is becoming more and more important as the demographics of workers change towards more part time workers and post-children females re-enter the workforce and the company, whilst bearing in mind operational needs, should seriously consider introducing flexible working arrangements where appropriate. There are a number of implications around introducing intrinsic motivation through job design. From a technical perspective, large changes to the operation may be required, for instance the moving of machinery and layout to allow for the formation of AWG's and task identity and skill variety rather than the current repetitive work. There will also be changes required to the management structure and if flexible working is introduced, potentially the hours of operation. This, although difficult, is necessary in order to realise the benefits of intrinsic motivation and work towards solving the organisation's issues. From a social point of view there will also be large changes. There will be much more interaction between the workers and team rather than individual working. Management will devolve control into the teams and this will require trust and acceptance of occasional mistakes. This will take time and require a change in mindset of both employees and management from a production line style of management to a more collaborative approach. Again, however, this change is absolutely necessary in order to address the problems of low motivation, absenteeism and low trust. Issues with this could include the employees' capability or wish to do an enlarged job, or the fact that some people like repetitive work and their motivation comes from outside their immediate work environment - some people do not want an enriched job. Research also shows that as a general point, older staff or those with lower educational attainment are less likely to want to do an enriched job. The change will need to be carefully managed from a social perspective so that all employees' views are taken into account. Finally, from a financial point of view there will be costs to the organisation. They may not be as immediately visible as the costs of extrinsic motivation, and may be expensive in the short term, however in the long term the payback could be very significant in terms of employee commitment and motivation leading through to decreased attrition and absence, greater productivity and increased profitability. As discussed above, money should also not be discounted as a motivator in the intrinsic sense as mentioned above - McClelland sees it as demonstrating the personal success of the individual in terms of achievement, affiliation or power and Maslow suggests it can be the medium through which the higher needs are addressed. In conclusion, the recommendation is that the organisation pursues culture change from a scientific management culture to a socio-technical cultural model. This should be achieved through intrinsic methods of motivation and job design, focussing on job enrichment in terms of increasing task identity and skill variety, practicing participative and flexible working arrangements and using delegation and empowerment through team working to create more autonomy and responsibility for work. In this way the organisation should achieve more rewarding work, increased trust less autocracy and more variety, leading to staff feeling more motivated. This should then feed through to performance (although noting dissenters such as Kelly (1970) who suggests that only extrinsic rewards can increase performance). The change will need to be carefully managed to ensure it is successful. As well as making the changes proposed to the design of jobs and the reward system, above it was mentioned that the other two parts to culture change are selection and training and managing these can help ensure a smooth transition. Selection relates to employing workers who either fit with the culture or can work well within it, and applies to existing as well as new employees. For this firm, it will be important to get buy in to the new culture from both new and existing employees. As well as strong and consistent cultural communications, what this may mean is offering existing employees that do not want to be part of the change a clear way out. Training relates more to management development than formal task training, and means that managers and staff are developed to be more capable of working in an enriched environment. It should also enable them to communicate the new culture effectively throughout the organisation, both explicitly and also implicitly through their actions. What is clear is that the culture change for the firm in question is a sea change to the current management style and is likely to be difficult to effect, even on an incremental basis and will take time, but that the potential rewards are significant. 