Thrasymachus, Glaucon and Adiemantus challenge Socrates to show that it is more beneficial for an individual to be just than unjust. They have already argued that it is better to appear just while committing unjust acts than it is to actually be just because unjust actions are beneficial to individuals. In responding to this claim, Socrates outlines his theory of the ideal state and portrays it as a reflection of the tri-partite human psyche. He believes that what creates justice in the state will create justice in the individual. Justice in the state lies in rule by Philosophers who know what is truly good, whilst in the individual it lies in a balanced psyche dominated by reason; something which leads to happiness and is therefore beneficial. Plato has switched the word justice from act-centred to agent-centred and in doing so may have committed the fallacy of equivocation; he is not answering the question that was asked of him. Thrasymachus wants to know why justice is beneficial in the traditional sense of the word, not in Plato's purely mental conception of psychic harmony. Unless Plato can show that Platonic justice both benefits the practitioner and also leads to action that fits with Thrasymachus' traditional conception of the just man then it appears his argument will fail. Socrates starts by claiming that it is easy to identify things on a larger scale than a small scale, and so to identify what justice is he begins by explaining the ideal state. His theory is that the form of the state and the human psyche are directly related, and so by identifying what makes a state just we will discover what is just for an individual. Plato's ideal state is split into three classes, at the bottom are the producers, in the middle are the auxiliaries, and in charge are the philosopher rulers. Plato believes that justice will follow if each class fulfils its duty and only its own duty. Because the Philosopher's duty is to rule, power should rest solely in the hands of philosophers. There are of course many criticisms of such a state, for example how it could ever be brought about in reality, but for the purposes of this essay it is seen only as an analogy in order to show how an individual can be just, and nothing more. Plato cannot, for example, attempt to show that the just individual benefits in the ideal state because the question he has been asked relates to the individual in the world as it is, not in a utopia. From his lengthy description of the state Plato moves to the human psyche and deduces that in order for an individual to be just their reason must be dominant over their passions. In the same way that a Philosopher should rule in the state because he knows what is good, so reason should rule in the mind because it knows what is truly good for that individual. But Thrasymachus wanted a defence of justice as he knew it in the traditional sense, not as a purely mental state. Glaucon started with the actions of the just and unjust man and it was up to Plato to turn the focus to their inner lives. For Thrasymachus, Glaucon and Adiemantus, and indeed almost all traditional thought at the time, action is primary, whereas for Plato it is only the agent that matters. The just person is one who is morally healthy; there is no appeal to his acts, just or otherwise, at all. Because of this radical difference between two views of justice (Platonic justice is about Psychic harmony and the state of the soul, whereas ordinary justice is about behaviour towards other people) we see the problem of equivocation mentioned earlier. It seems Plato is defending a different kind of justice from the one he was asked to defend. Although he does mention that a truly just man will never steal or commit other traditionally unjust actions there is little to no argument for this claim. It seems to simply be the case that a truly just man would never be unjust in the traditional sense because he has no interest in power, money, or any of the other motivations for unjust action. But would it not be possible that reason itself could motivate unjust action? Plato conceives of reason as having its own desires, not as a contrast to independent desires as in the traditional view. This means it is at least theoretically possible that reason could motivate an action that is traditionally viewed as unjust. This is not strictly a problem to Plato's theory however. He defines justice as the dominance of reason, so any conflict with traditional views is simply a result of a former mistake about what justice is. This conflict only becomes a problem when Plato attempts to claim that Platonic justice entails traditional justice, something which he must do in order to answer the original question he is confronted with. Plato simply cannot answer the questions as they were asked because his interlocutors are only interested in justice in relation to acts. Plato's picture of the just agent is built on his account of character education and moral psychology. Because of this there is no simple answer to the question of whether he has committed the fallacy of equivocation or not, it is more of a balancing act. Plato tries to provide a revisionary account of justice as psychic harmony which can then be checked against ordinary intuitions about justice. Because of this his theory is intentionally un-technical, and intended to be accessible to all. Plato is not claiming expertise, but trying to point out facts that he thinks everyone can see for themselves. He is attempting to answer traditional questions about justice by improving our account of what justice really is. For Plato ordinary justice seems to serve only as a negative boundary on action, not a positive guide. It is only useful for telling us which actions we should never commit, and this is only clear in obvious cases. This view is in contrast to the Stoics, who claimed that a just action is always what the just person does, no matter what it might be. Plato is not prepared to be this revolutionary, and as a consequence there are some things that the truly just person will never do. This use of empirical constraints on his theory of justice is very surprising. How does Plato know that the constraints are the right ones? In fact at other points he rejects appeal to experience completely; we are lead to believe that the true philosopher will attain truth about moral matters without relying on experience at all. It seems to be another attempt to keep his theory of justice closely related to his interlocutors' traditional views, in order to be able to answer their question. After explaining how justice can be achieved, Plato must now attempt to show that his conception of justice provides the beneficial consequences that his interlocutors are asking for. If he can show that this is the case then his argument will be successful, if not he will have provided a coherent theory of justice but without showing that it is preferable in a traditional sense. He returns to his idea of the ideal state and outlines two arguments. Firstly he shows how the injustice evident in the other types of state is bad. Secondly he shows how the Philosopher King's pleasure is better than the pleasure of the other two classes in the ideal state. The first argument is open to criticism. When Plato discussed earlier the relation between the ideal state and the ideal balance of the human psyche the parallel relied on the fact that both were harmonised and unified by the right relation of their parts. But why should this relation extend to the other kind of states that are unjust? In fact it would seem that disunity in a state corresponds better to disharmony between many individuals rather than disunity within a single person. Plato places great emphasis on the parallel between state and individual, but there is little actual argument for such a view. Additionally, the arguments about tyranny are unconvincing. All we really learn is that the tyrant is inwardly insecure, and may have his power snatched from him at any time. But what is wrong with being a tyrant when under no threat? Thrasymachus is still able to claim that the tyrant is happy in the common sense of the term because he is able to fulfil his desires: psychic harmony is not relevant in this case. It seems the only useful part of this argument is seeing the destructive result of a psyche that is not ruled by reason. Plato's second argument attempts to prove that Platonic justice leads to the most pleasurable life by showing that the Philosopher King's pleasure is better than any other. If this is the case then justice will fall into Glaucon's second class of Goods; it is good in itself and also leads to beneficial consequences. This sudden introduction of a relation between the classes within the state and a corresponding dominance of an aspect of the psyche is unexpected. While it makes sense to relate the Philosopher Ruler with a dominance of reason, as shown earlier, in what way does the life of the producer class relate to a psyche dominated by irrational desire? Nevertheless the argument is that although all three classes believe their own pleasure to be greatest, only the philosopher has experienced all three kinds and is able to judge correctly. But again this argument is by no means free from criticism. If we accept that judgements of pleasure are subjective then it seems the Philosopher is claiming that others do not enjoy their lives as much as they think they do, which surely is absurd. But Plato is viewing pleasantness in the context of a whole life, and in this case it is not clearly subjective. The move from pleasure in the ideal state to the human psyche is also open to question. The argument is that the Philosopher King has experienced all three kinds of pleasure and so is able to judge, but how does this relate to the psyche? Either we simply accept the parallel completely and take the philosopher's knowledge in the ideal state as also knowledge of human reason, or there must be some way for the psyche to judge between the three kinds of pleasure. Human reason is not able to experience all three pleasures in the same way as the philosopher, so how is it known that it is best? All Plato's attempts to prove the happiness of the philosopher rely, like justice, on the state of the soul not on the way the world is. He has attempted to show how Platonic justice provides happiness, but has ignored the issues of wealth, power or any of the other things that his interlocutors no doubt place great focus on. Perhaps Thrasymachus will agree with Plato and accept that true happiness is enough, but he could well claim that it is still preferable to be unjust and attain worldly success, even at the expense of true happiness. Plato has shown how justice leads to good consequences, particularly happiness. But we saw that the ideal state is not presented as something good to have because it produces good consequences, rather as simply something good to have in itself, in the same way as health is good to have regardless of consequences. Similarly, the value of justice to the agent does not come from the consequent happiness, but from the justice itself. An analogy can be drawn to spiritual pursuits, where the focus lies not on the objective but on the pursuit itself. Plato ends the Republic by stating that it doesn't matter if the ideal state is confined to a form and can never be realised. What matters is its role in allowing us to recognise and bring about justice in the individual, and so we end with the initial issue of why an individual should be just. And yet the more justice is presented as a state of the agent, an achievement of the individual, the less it seems to have to do with the rights of others and constraints on our behaviour towards them; issues which traditional justice takes as its priority and in which his interlocutors are most interested. Plato has tried to show that justice is not a matter of external demands but a case of recognising our needs as human beings. He claims that justice is the fulfilment of our human nature, and while we may agree that this is the best way to recommend justice, or at least Plato's definition of justice, we may still disagree with the insistence that general claims of reason are always of more worth in a human life than the satisfaction of particular desires and attachments. Plato provides a coherent account of his view of justice, but it is weakened by his attempt to show that it produces the kind of benefits that Thrasymachus, Adiemantus and Glaucon are looking for. In fact it is surprising that he even attempts to do so, and in my view he would be much better off ignoring the issue of worldly benefits and instead limiting justice to nothing more than a philosophical pursuit worthy in and of itself. 