Jackson first presented the knowledge argument as a response to Physicalism in his 1982 work "Epiphenomenal Qualia". Physicalism is the doctrine that knowledge of the physical world is the only knowledge possible, and that the only true facts are those expressible in the language of the physical sciences. Jackson's claim is that this view denies or fails to adequately define the subjective features of experience. His apparently simple explanation for this is that one may know everything there is to know about human consciousness and experience, and yet fail to know facts about what these experiences are like subjectively. He uses the famous example of Mary to illustrate this. <fnote>Jackson, F. (1982), "Epiphenomenal Qualia", Philosophical Quarterly 32, pp. 127-36 </fnote>Mary is a super-scientist who knows all the physical facts about colour experience, including all the activities of the human brain. Physicalism would maintain that she knows all the facts there are to know about colour experience. However, Mary lives in a black and white room and has never experienced actual colour herself. When she ventures out into the real world, it is intuitive to say that she has learnt something new. From this Jackson concludes that there must be facts about colour and our experience of it that are non-physical, and as a consequence Physicalism is wrong. In a second example Jackson introduces Fred, who is somehow able to identify a colour that we can't. Where we see two red objects Fred will see two objects of different colour. Jackson believes that we may know everything there is to know about Fred's mind and body, but we still won't know what it is like to see the colour that he sees. There are facts about Fred's experience that we simply can't know unless we are Fred. Jackson's Fred example is similar to the views presented by Nagel in his essay What is it Like to be a Bat? . Nagel argues that even with complete physical knowledge we would not know what it is like to use sonar to detect objects. The fact that we can only know what it is like by actually being a bat suggests that there are subjective facts, something which apparently contradicts the physicalist view that all facts are objective and can be understood from any point of view. However Nagel draws a weaker conclusion about Physicalism than that of Jackson: He restricts himself to saying that at present we cannot understand how Physicalism might be true. He compares the current state of Physicalism to "that which the hypothesis that matter is energy would have had if uttered by a pre-Socratic philosopher". <fnote>Nagel, T. (1974), "What is it Like to be a Bat?" Philosophical Review 83, pp. 435-50. Rpt. in his Mortal Questions. Cambridge University Press, 193-214. </fnote>Jackson calls these apparent non-physical facts that we experience "Qualia". Qualia are the purely subjective qualitative contents of experience, such as the 'hurtfulness' of pain. Upon leaving the room, Mary doesn't come to know the facts of colour in a different way, but she does come to know new facts about Qualia. The idea of Qualia raises many questions. As Mackie discussed, the nature of any non-physical objective facts must be very strange indeed (the queerness argument). Jackson expresses a pessimistic view of our potential for knowing about Qualia. In a strange argument he writes that we are the products of evolution but that there is no survival value in knowing how Qualia are caused or the laws governing them, and as a consequence we simply can't. Epiphenomenalism is the view that Qualia are causal by-products of physical processes within our body, rather than the cause of any of these processes. A possible objection to this it the fact that we scream due to pain, or jump back due to the pain caused by a fire. Jackson answers this by saying that both events (the pain and the jump back) could be by-products of a single underlying cause. There is no doubt that Mary has some kind of new experience when she leaves the black and white room, but different conclusions can be drawn from this. The strong version, which Jackson adopts, is that there must be facts that are not physical. A weaker interpretation is that there may be non-physical knowledge, but not non-physical facts. Mary is gaining new knowledge, but not learning new facts. It is this second, weaker version that is most often used as an objection to Jackson's view. This second interpretation can again be separated into various views about the kind of knowledge it is she gains. Jackson assumes that 'knowing what it is like' is a kind of propositional knowledge, but others disagree and suggest it is simply the gaining of a new ability. She acquires no new facts or information, simply the ability to identify objects as red and remember what red objects look like. Another alternative is that Mary is gaining 'Acquaintance' or 'Indexical' knowledge. She comes to know colour experience in the same way that she might know a person or a city. Whichever view we take on the kind of knowledge gained, even if we accept that Mary's new knowledge is propositional, the objection to the Knowledge Argument remains. When seeing colour for the first time, Mary isn't exposed to any new facts, she simply perceives the facts in a new way. She acquires new knowledge of the physical facts under a phenomenal concept. This can be expressed in the following way: Mary knows the fact that x is red because she knows that x is F, where F is the physical property of colour and the physical response of the eyes and brain. But Mary can also know that x is red because she knows that x is G, where G is the phenomenal concept for redness. F and G are simply two ways of knowing a single fact: that x is red. These two types of knowledge are cognitively independent. It is possible to know that x satisfies the physical concept (as Mary knew before leaving the room) without knowing that x satisfies the phenomenal concept and vice versa. In most cases we rely on our phenomenal concept to tell us that x is red with little regard for the physical properties of the object. Dennett developed an additional criticism of the idea of Qualia. He imagined a machine that allowed two people to swap each others Qualia, so each was experiencing those of the other. It may well be the case that they would see the world in a radically different way through the other person's experiences. But Dennett points out that we have no way of knowing whether the machine is working properly (whether the plug is in the right way) because each person only has their own Qualia as a reference point. In such a scenario all talk of Qualia essentially drops out of significance. This view is similar to that expressed by Wittgenstein in his private language argument. He suggests that a purely private language is impossible because the meaning of words requires them to follow some kind of independent rule. We can say that words are used correctly or incorrectly only because there is a set of external rules that their meaning is governed by. In the same way it is possible to argue that purely subjective facts, such as Qualia, are impossible without a relationship with the objective physical world. <fnote>Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations, Oxford: Blackwell. </fnote>Jackson undoubtedly establishes an interesting thought experiment that raises interesting questions. However, his conclusion that Mary's new knowledge of the experience of colour necessitates non-physical facts is flawed. As has been shown, it is perfectly coherent to say that Mary is simply experiencing the same physical facts in a new way, namely through a phenomenal concept. It is interesting to note that Jackson himself later rejected the knowledge argument, and turned to Physicalism. He does not accept that Mary gains any new knowledge upon leaving the room, and instead believes we should focus on why we intuitively tend to think that she does. Despite the apparent lack of modern support for the knowledge argument it remains important as a counter-weight to the dominance of Physicalism in Twentieth Century analytic philosophy of mind. <fnote>Jackson, F. (1998a), "Postscript on Qualia" in his Mind, Method and Conditionals. London: Routledge. </fnote>