<heading>Introduction</heading>A few years ago,  university accommodation decided to split its service in 3 parts: residences, Staff and Family, Outside Campus. Since then, this process improvement has not been independently assessed to see how far it satisfies customers. In this paper, we will describe, analyse and evaluate the service quality of  Staff and Family accommodation services. This will show us areas of investigation or improvement for the service. For this purpose, we will use the original SERVQUAL tool, developed by Parasuraman and al (1988), to assess its "validity" in such environment. <heading>Background</heading>In the search for competitive advantage, universities not only build on their education but also on the extra services like accommodation. We were interested to study the Staff and Family Accommodation Service as visiting lecturers and mature students are a strategic segment for the universities. The SFAS (Staff and Family Accommodation Service) service concept can be clearly defined with the following statement from managers (other excerpts in Appendix): <quote>"Provide our customers with an economical, secure and enjoyable environment in which to live by providing excellent customer service, whilst maintaining and improving the quality of our product.  Facilitate a smooth move to the university from [all] applicants Minimise time spent to look for accommodation in the private sector"</quote>The SFAS includes 133 properties: 112 one/two bedrooms, 19 three bedrooms and 2 four bedrooms ignored in this study. Demand outstrips supply: 3 applications per house. Current tenants are from 33 nationalities. The average length of stay is one academic year (9 months) and tenants are spread with 33% single, 29% couples and 38% families. Staff and students represent 80% of tenants and the rest are visiting academics who stay less than 6 months. <heading>Methodology</heading>The questionnaire consists of 16 questions, five points Likert scale, grouped into the 5 dimensions: tangibles (7 questions), reliability (3), responsiveness (2), assurance (2), empathy (2). It was developed from discussions with 3 current tenants to insure the questions were clear enough and covered main housing issues. The questions were worded positively to suit with findings and suggestions from the literature (Parasuraman et al, 1991). The questionnaire can be seen in appendix 1. 40 tenants were given the questionnaire by hand, with guidance about the way to fill it: e.g. difference between expectations and perceptions, scale spread. They were chosen to represent the diverse demographic profile: 3 diverse locations, staff or students, families with or without children, singles or couples, length of stay between 3 years and 3 months. Two forms were given to any couple because only one was linked to the university with studies or lectures. We assumed that needs might be different. Within 2 days, 20 completed questionnaires were returned representing all the subgroups listed above. 3 questionnaires were rejected for suspicion about the quality of filling: questions skipped; same marks for all. The models proposed by Parasuraman and al are the most widely verified and applicable instruments used to analyse the data. However, we simplified it and did not consider using the weighted dimensions or the alpha coefficients. Yet, we emphasized the tangible aspects with more questions in the questionnaire to follow comments from customers about the relative importance of this dimension for the accommodation service. Data from questionnaires were entered onto a spreadsheet. Quality scores were obtained as Q=P-E, i.e. subtracting expectations from performance ratings. Expectation or perception scores were simply the arithmetic mean of all respondents. Despite having 2 questionnaire forms, managers decided to share their views and handed over one filled questionnaire. To collect management views, we arranged an hour interview with the two very helpful managers, who provided a wealth of information (see Appendix 2). Similarly, tenants were invited to comment on the questionnaire, about their experience during their stay. <heading>Findings</heading>' <heading> Gap analysis</heading>Tentatively, we have separated the customers into two groups: one which is the main customer and is linked to the university with studies or lectures and the other which accompany the partner. Except for one couple, masculine persons were those who were linked to the university. To simplify, we call those groups male and female. <heading>Gap 1: Customers' expectations versus managers' perceptions (of their expectations)</heading>Generally, SFAS managers were unable to assess customers' expectations. For the tangibles dimension, a gap of .9 separates the two expectations (see table 1) and shows that customers expect much more than managers pointed. This gap is mostly due to the difference in the "house shape", "telecommunications" and "internal security" variables where both segments (male/female) have expectations of 1.3 to 1.6 points higher than managers' (see appendix 3). This might denote the high need to feel secure, rather inside than outside, while keeping in touch with the outside world. The high expectation for the house is probably not surprising, given that people move from abroad and expect to live in the best condition to offset the stress of change. <table/>Conversely, the managers overestimated the customers' expectations about the empathy (see table 1). For example, the "personal attention" factor is 1.4 points higher than customers actually ticked (see appendix 3). Managers probably assume that most foreigners would need that personal care from SFAS due to temporary change situation, having to relocate twice within a year in general. As previously for the tangibles, the two groups do not differ for the empathy (less than .1 of difference). <heading>Gap 5: Customers' expectations versus customers' perceptions</heading>The customers' expectations were slightly higher than perceptions in 3 dimensions: tangibles (0.63), reliability (0.41) and responsiveness (0.32) - see table 2. For the tangibles, all variables are unfavourable but tenants show that they expect more for the "telecommunications" and their "security" (see Appendix 4). The female group shows a significant gap for the telecommunications. That might be because they stay inside the house more than their partner, who goes to the University for studying or lecturing. As stated for gap 1, managers did not expect the "telecommunications" and "security" factors to have high priority and probably did not invest or communicate on them. The gap is less strong for reliability and responsiveness where customers show they expect more dependability and promptness, although this is not a high priority in their list (see Appendix 4). <table/>Conversely, slightly lower expectations than perceptions for empathy and assurance can be explained by the overestimated empathy expected by SFAS managers. They might tend to put more efforts to satisfy the tenants who are not really expecting such personal attention. That increases their high perceptions of the service for these dimensions. <heading> Gap 4: (Managers' perceptions of the) service delivery versus external communications (that influenced customers' expectations)</heading>This gap shows the difference between the customers' expectations and managers' service delivery. The gap is wider for reliability and tangibles than for other dimensions (see table 3). <table/>Once again, the "telecommunications" factor has a huge impact on the tangibles while the reliability gap is highly based on the "neighbourhood" and "promised services" elements (see Appendix 5). However, the groups do not show any discrepancy between their expectations for these factors. <heading> Managers' expectations versus managers' perceptions</heading>This gap is not supported in the literature but, as an auto-assessment of managers, can be interesting to investigate and can show how far managers are aware of the gap 4, of the quality they are delivering. <table/>Clearly, managers are aware of the reliability dimension (perhaps for other reasons than tenants') but do not spot the gap in the tangibles, where they believe they are delivering slightly more than expected (see table 4). Given that the SFAS managers are conducting a survey every academic year, they could have been directed to the reliability gap by the tenants' answers. In summary, the gap analysis shows the following areas of improvements: -The telecommunications factor seems to be the utmost point to focus. It is unclear however which item of the factor is causing the gap: internet, intercom, TV, telephone or another unlisted variable. - The security perception of the houses is second in priority. Yet, looking at customers' comments (see Appendix 6), none identified any item of the telecommunications as a bad experience. However, the security was mentioned pointing at "aggressive swans, geese and ducks in the spring for the children". Regarding the security, only one comment addressed the "alarm which is spread in all blocks of the area even though it only concerns one building". That shows that gap analysis solely is not enough to uncover the cause of customer dissatisfaction and need to be adjoined to the Service Transaction Analysis for example. <heading>Evaluation of methods and findings </heading><heading>Methodology limitations</heading>As for any methodology, the one used to assess customer satisfaction of the SFAS is biased by some factors: -We have chosen not to use the reliability coefficients (alpha) and assess the correctness of the test structure as suggested by Cronbach (1951). Instead, we assessed the questions qualitatively to insure they were easy to understand and covered the 5 dimensions of SERVQUAL. -The dimensions were not weighted to understand their relative importance. That was deliberate to decrease the burden of filling the forms and have an acceptable number of respondents (17 out of 40 questionnaires). The measurement of service quality would probably be more accurate with weighted importance of dimensions, with areas of improvement being factors of high importance and low performance. -The sample is not large enough to create more segments than we have used in this study. It would have been interesting to consider segments such as staff, visiting academics or students. Another segmentation could have been single/couple/family or 1/2/3/4 bedrooms property. -All gaps have been aggregated by using means of answers or groups. However, the answers are rather homogeneous within any item: either 90% of answers (or more) are one point from the mean or differ by 2 points maximum between the higher and the lower value. -We noted that there was 2 very similar questions in the perceptions list which were (differences shown in bold): <quote>a/ Are you pleased with the location, number and quality of services around the flat/house (university facilities, parking, schools, shops, hospital etc)?  b/ Are you pleased with the number and quality of services around the flat/house (parking, school, retail, hospital etc)? </quote>Systematically, respondents rated the second question 1 point lower than the first question, except 3 persons who spotted the error. A quick look at the literature did not help to understand this phenomenon but that shows how small the difference between consecutive scales is. The second question was cancelled. - Being tenants ourselves, we clearly cannot identify the impact of that status on the trend of answers. -Finally, most of the tenants are from three areas out of 13 existing locations managed by the SFAS. A quick check shows that the spread of property sizes, in the 3 locations chosen, belongs to the higher set of 1/2 bedrooms (112 properties out of 133). Thus, these areas are representative of the entire property population. <heading>Findings limitations</heading>-The SFAS team has no direct management control on all aspects of the service whatsoever (maintenance, internet, post, external security etc). -On a five-points Likert scale, we did not find sufficient literature telling what is or is not the "acceptable" gap. Therefore, we consider all gaps during the discussion of findings. Yet, drawing from Modelling literature on the normal distribution, we do know that there exist an interval around calculated means which includes the mean of the entire population. In an ideal study, we should have ignored any gap which does not go beyond that interval. -The questionnaire could not be used to assess all gaps from the gap model (Zeithaml et al, 1990). However, we could still conclude on the main gap between customers' expectations and perceptions. <heading>SERVQUAL limitations</heading>From the outset, there has been no thorough evaluation as to which tool is better for this piece of work. The idea was to use SERVQUAL, one of the most renowned tools for service quality assessment and analyse how it fits to this study. SERVQUAL has undoubtedly had a major impact on the business and academic communities. However, it has got many limitations listed by scholars among which we experienced the following: -It allows to measure service quality trends rather than an absolute level of quality. -It is based on the quality of questions that cannot help to pinpoint an improvement area precisely -Given the number of nationalities (33), following questions should be considered seriously: How do cultural factors influence customer evaluation of service quality? How can service quality measurement questionnaires be designed and adapted in order that they suit and provide accurate reflections of a local environment? (Xiande et al, 2002) <heading>Conclusion</heading>This paper assessed the usefulness of SERVQUAL for this context. The gap and segmentation analysis directed us to unexpected findings, neither from the management survey, nor from the customers' comments. Further research is required to disaggregate the telecommunication variable and assess the core reason of customer dissatisfaction. Yet, service quality assessment is an ongoing process which needs to be done regularly to spot the trends in customer satisfaction. 