<heading>Introduction</heading>Analysing Toyota's operations strategy would require entire books and summarising it would make this essay too superficial. Therefore, we have chosen to focus on two key areas, mainly in the US: the capacity dynamics and the supply network. We will examine how these resources are contributing to Toyota's incredible sales growth in ten years, in the biggest market in the world: North America (see Operations matrix in Annex A6). Thirty years ago, Toyota was operating from Japan and exporting its cars worldwide, limited by the quota of imports in the US. Eventually, when Toyota started to build production facilities in the US in 1986, few experts would bet on their capability to compete with the then-called Big-Three (GM, Ford, DaimlerChrysler). Now, while Toyota is gaining market share, raking in profits, building new plants, maintaining harmonious supplier relations, GM and Ford continue on a downward financial spiral despite their use of some of Toyota's techniques like TPS (Toyota Production System) at many plants. Between 1995 and 2005, Toyota's market share has increased by 82% whereas GM or Ford lost more than 20% in the same period (see annex A1). <heading>Capacity dynamics</heading>In the capital intensive automotive industry, all carmakers share the dilemma of meeting the uncertain demand. Considering inventories costs, cars price elasticity, we understand even more that building and managing appropriate capacity to meet market requirements is a critical and difficult task. Below, we will analyse some key elements in the capacity dynamics that improve Toyota's performance objectives to fit with market requirements (fig. 1). In the US, Toyota's overall corporate goal is to serve the North American market with product designed, made and sold by North Americans (industryweek.com, Feb. 2006). So far, Toyota has invested $16.8 billion in North America operations (toyota.com). Yet, Toyota's expansion is still ongoing. <figure/><heading>Build local: as close as possible to the customers</heading>One of the key aims of Toyota is to reduce costs at the optimum level. Building locally instead of importing cars can reduce costs in the long run, considering the growing demand of Toyota cars in the US. To date, 62.5% of Toyota cars sold in US are built locally. That is still less than other Japanese carmakers (+75% for Nissan or Honda) and Toyota is striving to increase this figure. However, up to 80% of cars' components are produced in US. This local production not only reduces costs but also impacts the speed and dependability to better satisfy customers. Toyota is always trying to be as close as possible to customers, both physically and in terms of relationship. In 2003, it chose to locate in San Antonio, Texas for three reasons: first, that place had a great available workforce; second, it was easy to access to the NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) corridor; third, Texas was the largest market segment for the pickup truck product and Toyota wanted to "see those trucks built by Texans" (expansion management magazine, June 2003). <heading>Capacity flexibility</heading>To comply with customer requirements without hearting the operations profit, Toyota uses widely its production flexibility potential. Spare capacity from all plants is exploited wisely to increase successful models products. While the Big-Three are rightsizing to cope with loss of market share, Toyota is also rightsizing the other way, although lagging behind increasing demand in the US. To limit the gap, Toyota either uses spare capacity of other plants or increases the output of its own local plants. In October 2005, it bought GM's shares of Subaru maker Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd (Automotive News, 00051551, 1/16/2006). More strategically, in 2004, Toyota introduced a "global body line", a standardized metalworking system in which all Toyota worldwide plants build vehicle bodies using the same equipment and whatever mix of labour and robots makes sense on location. For example, in a low-wage country like Vietnam, Toyota uses more humans on the line, while in high-wage nations like the US, it uses more robots. Coupled with a program known as the global midsize platform, under which Toyota is greatly increasing the number of different vehicles that can be built on the same assembly lines, the global body line gives the company an unmatched flexibility to respond to the "changing whims of automotive fashion" (Fortune Europe, 07385587, 2/9/2004). The focus of Toyota is rather product capacity than plant capacity. That strategy allows Toyota to wisely choose the mix-flexibility for spare capacity, the plants to expand. <heading>Short term versus long term capacity strategy</heading>Being best seller in many categories (Prius, Camry in US), Toyota is reinvesting an important part of its cash flow to invest in capacities. It is selecting carefully decisions to make at all scale levels (see Table 1). Increasing capacity in the US is based from short to long term demand. Toyota is catching up steadily with new plants, more shifts in existing plants. As goes Toyota's chairman in 2002, "the U.S. population is expected to reach 400 million within 50 years. It is now about 281 million" (Automotive News, 00051551, 9/30/2002). Similarly, Toyota has built enough capacity and started an hybrid car mass production to cope with increasing concerns about the environment. Toyota does not wait for regulations to enforce cars emissions limits. Instead, it starts to widen the capacity and reach economies of scale before these regulations are enforced and before the competitors start operating in this market segment. Being ahead, Toyota can learn from the market and raise awareness among it customers. Thus, once regulations are voted, Toyota will have a considerable competitive advantage. Along this long term strategy, Toyota has built Joint-Ventures (JV) with GM in America (1984) and Peugeot in Czech. Indeed, the partners are gaining with TPS. Analysts report that GM's quality and manufacturing efficiency has risen since GM JV started. How about Toyota? Among other reasons, Toyota intent was on sampling the U.S. plant operating environment - how the American workers interfaced with TPS ("Learning from Toyota", Industryweek.com, 2006). Being the fastest growing carmaker in the US, Toyota is certainly also trying to temper current American concerns about Japanese competition. <table/><heading>Diversifying plant locations to reduce macro-economics impact</heading>Since starting to produce outside Japan, Toyota is deliberately spreading its plants over several countries working with various currencies, not to depend on a sole currency. Indeed, the exchange rate management is also part of the capacity strategy. A strong Yen will be unfavourable for Japan car exports. Producing cars outside Japan and under several currencies will help Toyota diversify and lower the risks of exchange rate. For example, the "French plant is a key part of Toyota's effort to source more volume in Europe to reverse an unfavourable currency exchange. The strong yen and weak Euro contributed to a Toyota operating loss of €219.5 million in Europe for the year ending March 31, 2000" (Automotive News Europe, 06/18/2001). <heading>Capacity and continuous improvement (Kaizen)</heading>While building or expanding plants, Toyota learns from past inefficiencies. Embedded in its Kaizen culture, Toyota improves continuously the processes, tools and technologies. The JV plant with Peugeot exceeds the high standards the Japanese carmaker has set at other plants (Automotive News, 00051551, 7/11/2005). Also, with its experience in the US, Toyota discovered that a plant with 500,000 capacity is too big to manage efficiently (diseconomies of scale). The usual limit is now around 300,000. As part of Kaizen culture, the knowledge sharing is also improved constantly by Toyota to increase output rate. For example, a new e-kanban system using the Internet that was developed at Toyota assembly plants in Burnaston, England, and Valenciennes, France, in 2000 spread to Toyota plants globally. (Automotive News, 00051551, 10/7/2002). This system is simpler and quicker and avoids the possibility of lost kanban cards. After having moved the manufacturing out of Japan, the design followed and now the training centres are spreading out of Japan. Using its 16.3 million production training centre in Burnaston, Toyota is investing in training for at least 1000 workers from Europe plants. (Automotive News Europe, 4/18/2005). This training is especially important for new models launch. While in Japan, the productivity is back to normal within 1 or 2 weeks of launching a new model, it can require up to a year for other plants outside Japan. By sharing the TPS culture or knowledge, Toyota intends to improve the productivity for new models especially. With a far better utilisation and efficiency using TPS (see Table 2), Toyota is satisfying more customers with similar optimum capacity than competitors (see annex A3). <table/>These are typical examples where the dependability and speed can be improved by simple methods without modifying the capacity. Observing the expansion of Toyota, we conclude it is mainly focused on US where it strives to build the biggest market share. Its operations in fast growing China are much less developed compared to competitors like VW. Toyota is certainly playing safe with a known environment and lower political risks terms. Also, Toyota is unwilling to stretch itself too much in the capacity expansion. Even in North America, Toyota prefers US to Canada -low cost but logistical problems- or Mexico -limited market knowledge- (Automotive News, 00051551, 1/17/2005). <heading>Supply networks</heading>Supply network management is embedded in the know-how or capabilities of Toyota. While operating only in Japan, Toyota understood, from the outset, that its own success depended on its suppliers' operations strategies. Despite increasing capacity, Toyota would not keep up with demand without the support of its suppliers. Although this principle is shared by all carmakers, we will analyse how Toyota is remaining the best in supply network relationship. <heading>Linking capacity to supply network</heading>Thus, Toyota is helping suppliers to increase their capacity. For example, the capacity of European plants was limited by the suppliers output and Toyota decided to help them increase their capacity (Automotive News, 00051551, 5/17/2004). <heading>Cost reduction rather than price reduction</heading>For suppliers, Toyota is a role model, example of how to use cost and quality. With those objectives in the TPS process, Toyota concentrates more on customer value whereas competitors will only harass suppliers with price-cutting demands. Where Toyota cut costs of suppliers, competitors cut their prices. A research (journal of Management Development, 02621711, 1996) shows that "in the case of Toyota, frequent visits by its personnel involve close scrutiny of the production process, management training programmes and in some cases financial assistance. Toyota, for its part, counsels against over-dependence by the supplier, encouraging instead a broad mix of contracts with other purchasers". Not only Toyota assists its suppliers but Toyota also recommends them not to rely solely on it. This is another example where Toyota culture differs. For more buyer power, competitors would rather fight to get exclusivity from suppliers. One way to cut suppliers costs is to get them close to Toyota's plants. Moreover, Toyota is urging Japanese suppliers operating in the US to use fewer components from Japan imports. <heading>"I promise to be true to you in the good times and in bad" (Bible)</heading>Being properly managed, suppliers like to work with Toyota. To illustrate that, one quote : "You have to look for companies who are going to give you a double payback in growing content per vehicle and the number of cars they build, Toyota  gives you that" (Jim Gillette, director of supplier analysis for CSM Worldwide). With its increasing scale and car parts, Toyota is THE carmaker to get married with long term contracts. Obviously, Toyota expects faster responses than some companies are used to and takes a longer time than U.S. automakers to measure and consider a new supplier. "In return, Toyota offers a long-term, collaborative relationship." (Automotive News, 00051551, 2/7/2005). Even when serious problems occur, Toyota does not blame entirely the suppliers. A supplier quality problem is often related to "something [Toyota] is doing wrong: an unclear specification or requirement" (Toyota engineer in Automotive News, 00051551, 2/21/2005). In fact, Toyota is very demanding but the suppliers find out that it is worth the hassle given the long return on investment. Unsurprisingly, Toyota scores high on nearly every supplier survey. <heading>Mutual Learning</heading>By training suppliers, Toyota not only transfers the knowledge to its suppliers but also learns a lot from their processes, products and costs structure. Thus, the supplier service or product is no longer a black box for Toyota and the relationship can be a partnership rather than a supplier-buyer with underlying power on either side. Similarly, the supplier can improve and adapt considerably its operations strategy to close the gap of mismatches in the supply chain and meet Toyota expectations. For the Texan plant, Toyota nominated half of the suppliers within the existing partners. Saving on existing supplier trainings, Toyota can concentrate on new suppliers. Those suppliers are trained by teams with people from purchasing, logistics, quality, and technical support areas. (Automotive News Europe, 06/18/2001,). Research suggests that: - Within Toyota suppliers, a culture exists of continuous improvement or a process occurs of continuous reassessment of the company's objectives. - Suppliers share sensitive information with Toyota. This suggests a high level of trust between the supplier and Toyota, where firms feel secure within their long-term contractual arrangements, to openly discuss sensitive commercial issues. Toyota suppliers are moving away from competitive contractual relationships towards more collaborative and open contractual relationships (Employee Relations, 01425455, 1997). <heading>TPS virus spread to the supply network</heading>To comply with Toyota requirements, suppliers find that they can only adapt their processes if their own suppliers' operations performances are matching those processes. First Tier suppliers, once they learn from Toyota are keen to reproduce the TPS to Toyota 2 nd Tier suppliers, enhancing the total value-added of the supply networks. For example, Delphi decided to convert its worldwide suppliers to manufacturing procedures modelled after Toyota (Automotive News Europe, 6/3/2002). <heading>Total collaboration</heading>The collaboration between suppliers and Toyota does not stop solely at the training level. Toyota is involved with suppliers at every level of the process: design, manufacturing, services after sales. That allows Toyota and the supplier to find cost savings before production begins. Empirical observation shows that innovation is hindered when suppliers are pressurised on price only. With Toyota, the suppliers know that innovation to add value is highly regarded by the Japanese carmaker. For example, they strive to facilitate the packaging of their offer with Toyota's assembly line. Indeed, there is more value to be gained by collaborating with a supplier than by merely harassing them on price. The focus for Toyota is to improve the low defect rate for delivered parts. Some suppliers were able to reduce the internal scrap rate from 20% to less than 2% (industryweek.com, 2006). The supply network strategy works both ways: from suppliers to Toyota and from Toyota to dealers. Toyota will help dealers to improve their profits with a faster turnover of cars carefully selected from the catalogue and preferred by customers from that area. The dealers' scarce space is then highly utilised with faster orders processing responding to the market requirements. Overall, Toyota is constantly seeking for win-win situations (see fig. 2). <figure/><heading>Re-establishing forces equilibrium</heading>When a supplier's business is a black box for Toyota and that supplier denies close collaboration, Toyota strives to understand the cost structure by investing into that business. Understanding that business means Toyota can see ways to lower costs or negotiate the prices better with powerful suppliers like Michelin or Bridgestone. Not only Toyota regains its bargaining power, but this also increases mechanically the productivity in those parts. For example, in 2002, Toyota entered the tire business with Yokohama Rubber. Toyota found ways to cut costs by 20% while using one fifth of the manufacturing space (Automotive News, 00051551, 5/27/2002). <heading>Charity begins at home</heading>Numerous manufacturers tend to build themselves what they cannot have cheaper elsewhere. Instead, Toyota will only build itself what it cannot find elsewhere with a suitable quality. Strategic components are made by Toyota while other parts are outsourced to key suppliers which premises are nearby. For example, "Toyota makes its own plastic bumpers and dashboards, parts other automakers often outsource" (Bellanger, Toyota VP in charge of industrial affairs). Toyota believes its plastics technology is better than many specialist suppliers and therefore builds them for the Yaris. The supply chain management of Toyota limits its supply chain instability that would occur with an uncertain demand. More broadly, Toyota changed the relationship from supplier-customer to partner-partner in North America. Ensuring suppliers and buyers (car dealers) commitment, Toyota can perform much better and improve its speed to market, dependability and reduce its costs. <heading>Threats on Toyota Future</heading>We have analysed 2 key aspects of Toyota's operations strategy. They explain how and why Toyota is and will remain ahead of competition for years to come. However, no matter how Toyota is efficient and prudent in its strategy, it faces three main threats in the future: - Toyota is likely to overcome GM as the 1 st carmaker in the next 2 years. How will US government react? Also, how will Toyota handle the trade-off between quality and volumes required (dependability)? How about customers' perception of the Japanese carmaker? There may be strong reactions to Toyota leadership in the US market. Toyota will only overcome the impacts of those reactions by cooperating with all stakeholders and adding value to them, directly or indirectly. By doing so, we believe Toyota would be less criticised due to its involvement in the entire community. This is a strategy Toyota has already started to follow. - Toyota, unlike counterparts, is not aggressively present in China, one of the biggest markets. This seems truly to be a strategic mistake but Toyota certainly assessed it during a long time. Deliberately focusing more on North America and Europe against the BRIC zone (Brazil, Russia, India and China) will have its costs. Would the benefit of North America outweigh the costs of not being present in these areas? We do not believe so and we share the view of many automobile industry analysts. - Increasing the capacity and managing the supply chain as Toyota does it, is costly. As long as the market is requiring Toyota's products, there will be little risk. However, when Toyota will have high fixed costs (plants, wages) and face a lower demand, it might struggle to find enough cash to maintain the supply network relationship, the labour, the plants. The challenge will be to avoid the negative spiral that GM and Ford are facing now. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The threats are strong but Toyota does its best when confronted by challenges. The oil price spikes in the 1970s and the expensive yen of the late 1980s slowed its growth only temporarily. In their never-ending efforts to do things better, "Toyota  executives seem almost infinitely adaptable" (Donald N. Smith, a manufacturing expert at the University of Michigan's engineering school). The worst mistake global automakers can make is to not assume that Toyota will be markedly better five years from now, as it has shown in its recent history. 