A fiscal policy rule is defined by the International Monetary Fund as a permanent constraint on a fiscal policy, typically defined in terms of an indicator of overall fiscal performance. There are three major types of fiscal policy rules, balanced-budget or deficit rules, debt or reserves rules and borrowing rules. Balanced-budget or deficit rules require a balance between overall revenue and expenditure or limit on government deficit as a proportion of GDP. Borrowing rules prohibit government borrowing from domestic sources or the central bank. Debt or reserves rules limit the stock of gross (or net) government liabilities as a proportion of GDP. This essay will elaborate on the rationale for implementing these fiscal policy rules and then illustrate some of their shortcomings. In an environment of capital mobility, fixed exchange rates and a system-wide monetary policy, a foreign expansionary fiscal policy has a potential negative spillover effect on home country's income <table/>The IS-equation links domestic output, Y, to the interest rate, i, foreign demand, Y*, and fiscal policy, f. The exchange rate also affects demand, but it is omitted here because it is fixed. The parameters β and β* are the marginal propensities to import from the partner country. Assuming full capital mobility, interest rates in the home country must equal the interest rates in the partner country continuously (i=i*). LM Equation  FORMULA  The LM-equation links money demand m to the interest rate, i, the output, y. δ stands for the inverse of the interest elasticity of money demand and φ and (1-φ) are the weights of the two countries in the overall system-wide money demand. There is only one interest rate, i, and one monetary policy, m. Making interest rates the subject of the LM-Equation and substituting this into the two IS-equations yields the following:  FORMULA   FORMULA  Substituting out foreign income and solving yields the following:  FORMULA  This implies that the impact of an expansionary fiscal policy abroad on income at home could be either negative or positive depending on the sign of the expression that multiplies fiscal policy, f*. Assuming that the denominator of this expression is positive, the spill over effect is positive if β, the direct demand effect, is larger than αδ(1-φ), the interest-rate effect. Note however that a expansionary fiscal policy abroad still retains a positive effect on foreign income since αδ(1-φ) is positive and the denominator is assumed to be positive. Therefore, there is a case for legislating fiscal rules because if the foreign country's fiscal policy were a 'beggar-thy-neighbour' policy, this would not be taken into account by that country's authorities when setting their policy. Based on the simulation of the macroeconomic model adopted by the European Commission (See Table 1), the spillover effects of the national fiscal policy should be very small and negative under EMU. <table/>However, this simulation indicating small spillovers cannot constitute a reliable guide because they are based on models that were estimated mostly with data from the 1970s and 1980s. The common currency and other constrains on national policy implicit in EMU will radically alter some fundamental macroeconomic relationships, such as the wage-price link and the elasticity of the demand for exports. Therefore, it will remain very difficult to estimate reliably the extent and sign of the spillover effects. Fiscal policy rules have also been prompted by the need to achieve long-run fiscal sustainability. The objective of this is to consolidate gains from earlier discretionary adjustment and to prevent a potential increase in public indebtedness associated, for instance, with the prospective aging of the population in developed nations. This will contribute to a fair distribution of fiscal benefits and burdens across generations. More immediately, such rules should help lower the risk premium and moderate real interest rates in financial markets. This will avoid public debt crowding out private capital, and reduce income redistribution from wage earners to interest earners. Conversely, a running budget deficit in the present leads to an increase in government debt, which will have to be serviced in the future. If the interest rate on the government debt exceeds the growth rate of the economy, a debt dynamic is set in motion that leads to an ever-increasing government debt relative to GDP. When this becomes unsustainable, painful corrective action is required.  FORMULA  Where G is the level of government spending T is the tax revenue, r is the interest rate on the government debts B, M is the level of high-powered money The left hand side of the equation is the government budget deficit, consisting of the primary budget deficit and the interest payment on the government debt. The right hand side of the equation is the financing side. The budget deficit can be financed by issuing debt or by issuing high-powered money. Monetary financing can be disregarded since it is surrendered to the confederation's central bank. In the following, the changes per unit of time is represented by putting a dot above a variable.  FORMULA  Where Y is GDP, so that b is the debt GDP ration  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Where  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  (the growth rate of GDP) This equation defines the dynamics of debt. The necessary condition for solvency:  FORMULA   FORMULA  This says that in a world where the nominal interest rate, r, exceed the nominal growth rate of the economy, x, the government must make sure that the primary budget (g-t) has a surplus or that money creation is sufficiently high to stabilise the debt-GDP ratio. If not, the debt-GDP ratio will increase without limit and surely lead to a default on the government debt. This places pressure on the central bank to print money for that government, which in turn have the dire consequence of increasing the risk of inflation throughout the common currency area. This is one of the reasons that European Union members at the Stage 2 of EMU are prohibited from borrowing from the European Central Bank (ECB). Although Ricardian Equivalence argues that given an intertemporal setting in which consumers have perfect foresight, debt might be irrelevant, these line of reasoning rest on the assumption that generations care about the future. Assuming that most elected governments have no incentive to consider future fiscal sustainability, policy rules are the solution to reduce or remove the influence of short-run political expediency that leads to a default bias. Countries such as Italy, Netherlands and Belgium that accumulated sizeable deficits in the early part of the 1980s, had to run corresponding large primary budget surplus in order to prevent the debt-GDP ratio from increasing automatically. The experience of these countries show that large government budget deficits quickly lead to an unsustainable debt dynamics from which countries find it very difficult to extricate themselves. This illustrates the limits to the use of fiscal policies to offset negative economic shocks. It maybe argued that financial markets would act as a discerning disciplining mechanism by raising borrowing cost and downgrading credit rating in the face of an excessively lax aggregate fiscal stance. However an upgrading or downgrading by international credit-rating agencies tend to take place with a considerable lag, following only very substantial deterioration in performance indicators. Instead, financial markets are more prone to interpret membership in a common-currency area as an upgrading of the creditworthiness of weak members. Hence, a fiscal criterion is necessary to correct for free riding. The above ties in with the fear that if the deficit becomes so large, it might develop into a funding crisis for a particular member, where there will be inevitably pressures for a bailout. The supranational monetary authority may find this option difficult to resist. It will have to weigh the cost of loosening its policy against the costs that arise for the monetary union if a member country experiences a public debt crisis, which could easily trigger a banking crisis union-wide. Therefore, a fiscal rule is a necessary preventive measure against such a dilemma from ever arising. Alternatively, central authorities such as the US Federal Reserve have avoided imposing limits on members by pledging not to bail out member states as a credible deterrence against fiscal laxity. The concern with a strict balanced-budget fiscal rule is that it impairs the short-run stabilisation and tax-smoothing role of fiscal policy. This role is crucial since joining a monetary union surrenders monetary policy instruments leaving fiscal policy as the only tool to demand manage the economy in the face of recessions. The prominence of fiscal policy is further highlighted in the initial stages of formulating a common currency area, when the economic shocks are asymmetrical across the region, rendering a supranational monetary policy ineffective. Hence, it maybe argued that a judicious discretionary fiscal policy guided by targets for macroeconomic performance such as low inflation and external balance, is conceptually superior to fiscal rules. In practice, politicians behave opportunistically, finding it easy to spend during recessions and hard to tone down a boom. Therefore governments often lack the adequate fiscal discipline, rendering fiscal policy procyclical instead. This is often the case in countries with a track record characterised by wide swings: periods of poor fiscal performance alternating with market-imposed adjustments, followed again by unsustainable deficit spending and so forth. To gain the lasting confidence of financial markets, households and enterprises, governments may need to subject themselves to permanent constraints on deficits, borrowing, or debt. Constrains should play an accommodating role by being flexible enough to accommodate exogenous shocks beyond the control of the authorities. Under the 1997 provisions of the Stability Growth Pact (SGP), if a member's annual fall in GDP lies between 0.75 and 2%, the 3% deficit rule may be waived at the discretion of the Council of Ministers. This tie in with the need for fiscal policy rules to ensure the credibility of government policy over time. Rules-based policies have a major advantage over a discretionary approach in terms of time consistency. As shown in Kydland and Prescott (1977), in a dynamic two period context, rules-based policies are time-consistent and optimal, leading to a higher level of welfare than discretionary policies, given the likely reactions of private agents with rational expectations to the incentive of government to deviate from previously announced policies under discretion. Government debt maybe justified if used to finance infrastructure investments that have positive present values, and fiscal rules may instead serve to hold-up essential projects and create bottlenecks in the economy. However, this is not a valid argument against fiscal rules since it maybe amended to require a balance between current revenue and current expenditure. That is, borrowing is permitted only to finance capital expenditure, such as in Japan, and the United Kingdom which applies the 'Golden Rule' ("on average, over the economic cycle, the government will borrow only to invest and not find current spending"). While it is easy to find overwhelming evidence in support of a fiscal rule in a common currency area, it is often more difficult to deciding on the 'right' guidelines and how to enforce them. In practice, the selection of a target or ceiling is often entirely arbitrarily selected by the General or Central Government, possibly based on a 'bliss point' which may not have any economic reasoning. For a fiscal policy rule to be credible, it must involve commitment over a reasonable long period of time. This may take the form of constitutional or legal statues, appointing an independent authority for enforcement, accompanied by penalties for noncompliance such as reputational, financial or judicial sanctions. Under the SGP, the penalty for violation is "non-interest bearing deposit of 0.2% of GDP and 0.1 of the excess deficit, to a maximum of 0.5% of GDP. These are converted to a fine if the deficit is not corrected in 2 years". Notably, these fines have never been imposed despite budget deficits in excess of 3% of GDP. Avoidance of negative spill-over effects, fiscal sustainability and macroeconomic sustainability are strong arguments for implementing fiscal rules in a given currency area. In contras, the counter-arguments can be overcome with fiscal rules that are adequate, flexible, and well-defined. The key difficulty is ensuring that the rule is not politically motivated, enforceable and binding. 