In this essay we shall first look at interpretations of Protagoras' Relativism before turning our attention to contemporary relativist views, such as subjectivism, descriptive moral relativism and normative moral relativism. We shall then consider the equivalence of Protagoras' views and indeed its relevance to modern ethical relativism. <heading>Protagoras' Moral Relativism</heading><quote>'Of all things the measure is man, of the things that are, that they are, and of things that are not, that they are not' DK80b1</quote>This fragment of Protagoras' philosophy is often referred to as his homo-mensura, or man-measure, doctrine. It is perhaps one of the earliest explications of moral relativism. This fragment can be interpreted in more ways than one. Plato interprets the homo-mensura as a subjectivism of sorts. In a discussion between Socrates and Theodorus Socrates claims: <quote>'He [Protagoras] says, does he not? "that which appears to each person really is to him to whom it appears".' Plato, Theaetetus, 170a</quote>Socrates is equating appearance with truth for Protagoras, insofar as if something appears a certain way then it really is that way. Plato equates appearance with perception, so that things are true as they are perceived to be. Socrates claims that, in the context of Protagoras' beliefs: <quote>'Perception [...] is always of something that is, and it is infallible, which suggests that is knowledge.' Plato, Theaetetus, 152c</quote>Plato believes that the homo-mensura is self-contradictory. In sections 170d to 171c Socrates goes through a series of steps with an ever-agreeing Theodorus, the basic gist of which is as follows: The homo-mensura can appear true to Protagoras yet false to everyone else (170d) The homo-mensura is more false than true as it appears false to more people (171a) According to the homo-mensura all the other people are in fact correct in asserting the falsehood of the homo-mensura (171b) Therefore <quote>Protagoras is conceding that he is false if other people believe that the homo-mensura is false (171b)</quote>Thus <quote>'Then since the "truth" of Protagoras is disputed by all, it would be true to nobody, neither to anyone else nor to him' Plato, Theaetetus, 171c</quote>Socrates idea of 'more false' is a drawing upon of an earlier idea in the dialogue where he claims that Protagoras does not 'advance any cogent proof' but instead bases his statements on probability (162d). Plato here is trying to claim that Protagoras' claims an objective truth; that truth is subjective. This is essentially the tension that Plato draws upon to create a contradiction. Plato is claiming that the homo-mensura is false as people disagree, especially if the majority of people believe that the homo-mensura is false. This is based on the assumption that there cannot be both P and not P. At this juncture scholars may point out that Protagoras appears to advocate a dialetheistic view of truth, in that we can have both P and not P simultaneously. In the case of a wind appearing warm or cold to different people, Protagoras, similar to Heraclitus, would claim that the wind is both warm and cold. If this interpretation of Protagoras is taken then he would appear to be advocating dialetheism. This is indeed one way out for maintaining the validity of the homo-mensura; it can be both true and not true. In terms of morality, wanton cruelty is both morally right and not morally right. Plato's argument in the Theaetetus, if we assume it to be correct, thus serves to show that Protagoras is forced to advocate dialetheism. However, it is also possible to maintain the homo-mensura without resorting to dialetheism, which is clearly of little help in creating a consistent philosophical system of thought. Protagoras' apparent interest in orthoepeia; the correct use of words, and his alleged writing on syntax suggest that he is not implicitly flouting the Law of Non-Contradiction in the homo-mensura. The homo-mensura can deny falsehood without denying the Law of Non-Contradiction. The Law of Non-Contradiction states that one cannot say that 'a is F' and 'a is not F', formally thus: Fa & -Fa The homo-mensura is in fact saying that 'a is F for person X' and ' a is not F for person Y', which is clearly not contradictory: Fax & -Fay <fnote>'X stands in a relationship, F, with a' and 'Y does not stand in a relationship, F, with a' </fnote>This would be akin to saying that the wind (a) is in a cold relationship (F) to x and it is not the case that the wind (a) is in a cold relationship (F) to y. The wind, then, is neither cold nor warm; in contrast to the aforementioned Hericlitean-esque interpretation of Protagoras where the wind is both cold and warm. Let us now make a distinction between the physis of the wind; the nature of the wind, or the wind in itself, and the nomos of the wind; the convention of the wind, or how it appears. If it is a part of the physis of the wind that it is both cold and warm then the homo-mensura can thus be interpreted as a road to nihilism and the denial of truth; if we also view it as flouting the Law of Non-Contradiction and follow Platonic reasoning and conclude that everything is false. Alternatively it can be argued that Protagoras is denying that temperature is a part of the physis of the wind and is, instead claiming that it is only a matter of nomos. Protagoras is therefore a sceptic and denies the possibility of knowledge; he is not the contradictory nihilist Plato seems to be suggestive of. <fnote>For a clear distinction between the denial of truth and the denial of knowledge see David Miller; 2000; Sokal and Bricmont: Back to the Frying Pan; Pli 9, 156-173, esp. p156 </fnote>This, Platonic, interpretation of the homo-mensura as truth or knowledge as based upon the individual man is then commonly projected on to societies or wider cultures. It is implied within this reading of the homo-mensura that if certain groups of people all believe that x and that certain groups of other people all believe that not x then the same consequences hold at the group level as at the individual; both groups are equally correct in asserting x and not x. This is now leading to the contemporary moral relativism we are familiar with and shall picked up later in this essay. For now we shall turn our attention to another possible reading of the homo-mensura. Plato's interpretation of the homo-mensura is based upon viewing the 'man' within it as a singular referring term, i.e. referring to each individual man and then claiming that what is true for each individual man is indeed true for each individual man. It can, however, be interpreted as an all-encompassing, collective term, similar to 'mankind' or 'humanity'. This interpretation leaves us with an anthropocentric view of truth, not in that only humans can grasp it, but rather, that it is a limitation of our faculties of understanding that we can only grasp truth in a certain human-like way. In this way, the pig and the baboon Socrates so disparagingly refers to in his introduction of the homo-mensura in the Theaetetus (161c-161e) can also have a grasp of truth; in a distinctly pig-like and baboon-like way. This interpretation of Protagoras is consistent with his sceptical view of knowledge, rather than a nihilistic view of truth. It is not that the physis of things does not exist; it is that is a part of the perceiver's nomos that determines how it is seen. As x perceived the wind as cold and y the wind as warm, so the pig may perceive the wind as green and the baboon the wind as smelling slightly of apples. As absurd as it may be for humans to think of the wind as being green or smelling of apples so the pig and baboon may consider it absurd for it to be cold or warm. This reading of the homo-mensura is thus showing how knowledge is a dependent variable; dependent upon the independent variable of 'being human'. Knowledge may well be dependent upon other independent variables, such as culture, social class or language, as perhaps implied by the reading of 'man' as a singular referring term, but ultimately it is dependent upon 'being human' when the homo-mensura is read as using a collective term. Let us now turn our attention to contemporary views of moral relativism and see how they relate back to various interpretations of Protagoras. <heading>Contemporary Moral Relativism and of its Relevance and Equivalence</heading>In this section of this essay we turn our attention to various forms of Moral Relativism and see how they are related, if indeed they are, to Protagoras' homo-mensura. Firstly, let us consider subjectivism. Although not always thought of as relativism, the truth or falsity of propositions is relative to the individual. This is how Plato interpreted the homo-mensura when he considered 'man' to be a singular referring term. Subjectivism is often refuted, similar to the Socratic refutation in the Theaetetus, by claiming that it is asserting an objective truth; that truth is subjective. This tension is often shown to lead to a contradiction in much the same way that Socrates demonstrates to Theodorus. Although Socrates relies upon the majority of people believing the homo-mensura to be false in order to assert that everyone must agree it is false, it in fact only takes one person. If just one person believes that the subjectivist reading of the homo-mensura is false then those who believe that it is true must concede that this single 'anti-subjectivist' is correct in virtue of the subjectivist doctrine. If one grants the truth of the anti-subjectivist, then one cannot consistently assert the truth of his or her own, subjectivist, view. One is then left as a proponent of dialetheism; a clutching at the straws of 'logical' consistency, or as a nihilist and denying the existence of truth outright. The trouble with less-extreme forms of relativism is that it is often seen as a slippery slope leading to subjectivism and then nihilism. What is to guarantee that the truth/falsity of moral claims is valid at the societal or cultural level when it can be validly reduced to the individual/subjective level? The reason that relativism can be reduced to subjectivism is that it is doctrine based upon disagreement. The most basic observation of this disagreement is found in Descriptive Moral Relativism (DMR). DMR consists in empirical claims about the disagreement in language, beliefs and moral practices between different societies. It is not evaluative; it does not claim that any of the different groups are right or wrong; it just states that there are differences. It is this appeal to disagreement that leads to subjectivism. If we can see that there are differences of moral opinion between cultures then surely we can observe similar disagreements within cultures between individuals. The homo-mensura is not a form of DMR, if we take a subjective reading of it and project the view on to different cultures, rather than just the individual, it is not a merely descriptive doctrine. The use of 'measure' suggests some degree of evaluation. If we measure between two points we expect that measurement to be accurate; expect it to be correct. By stating that man is the measure of all things it is implying a certain degree of correctness. Of course we can measure things incorrectly but the point here is that 'measure' is not a non-evaluative term, it requires a degree of accuracy or a belief that it is accurate. That degree of accuracy can be wrong and the belief in it misguided but there exists an evaluative or normative connotation to the noun 'measure'. It can thus be claimed that the homo-mensura is a form of Normative Moral Relativism (NMR). The evaluative element of 'measure' is suggestive of a modern NMR that would claim that modes of thought, reasoning, moral claims etc. are only true or false within a cultural framework, there is no absolute, objective truth; moral assessments can only be made from within a particular framework. The homo-mensura does indeed capture the normative element of NMR, however, it would be fallacious to suggest that contemporary NMR is synonymous to the homo-mensura. There are essentially two readings of the homo-mensura; a subjective one and an anthropocentric one. The only way we reach a cultural relativist reading is to project the subjective reading onto societies at large. This is the action of the reader though and not of the author. There is nothing implicit in the homo-mensura that suggests that it applies to differences between cultures. 'Man is the measure of all things' is either 'man' as a singular referring term or as a collective noun of similar breed to 'mankind' or 'humanity'. It is not 'groups of man are the measure of all things. Cultural relativism is the halfway house between the subjective reading and the anthropocentric reading and as a result it has the most problems staying there. Before outlining a few of the issues of cultural relativism it should be understood that cultural relativism has little do with the homo-mensura, other than being a bastardisation of the two distinct readings. Cultural relativism often emphasises the differences between cultures rather than highlighting the agreements or similarities. It assumes that there are fixed cultures, whether they are geographically or temporally situated, cultural relativists have a habit of comparing culture x with culture y. In reality there are not these clear-cut distinctions between cultures. This becomes apparent when we try and think of what a British culture is, or a European or African one for that matter. We find that when we try to find a unifying set of ideals within a culture we find more disagreements than agreements. This quickly leads to a subjectivist position, which has already been shown to be implicated by the homo-mensura. Cultural relativism looks an attractive position at first, but it has trouble defining what a culture is, which is a fairly large hurdle considering the view the cultural relativist is advocating. If the cultural relativist starts finding links between people in order to ascertain what a culture is then over-arching links can be found. If, for example, we define culture by language we can start looking at a wider picture. If we start with various languages such as English, German and Dutch we can see the similarities between them and we find ourselves grouping them under the Germanic family of languages. This can then go on and we can view these, and more, as members of the Indo-European languages group. We, sooner or later, find ourselves with all of humanity in the bracket of a 'human culture' and we find ourselves at the anthropocentric reading of the homo-mensura. Indeed it is the similarities between so-called cultures that allow us to appreciate that there is a common humanity. If there was not then we would be unable to comment on the cultures of the past or of different location because there would be nothing we could relate to. This is shown in the very fact that this essay is considering a moral doctrine that is over 2500 years old and is comparing it with contemporary moral views. If we start with a position of cultural relativism we can find ourselves slipping into, either, subjectivism or an anthropocentric view of morality. If we emphasise the disagreements between societies we end up with relativism based upon the individual, namely, subjectivism. In contrast, if we emphasise the similarities in order to actually group people together into rigid 'cultures' then we can always appeal to an over-arching uniting factor so that we are left with just with the idea of our common humanity. Moral Relativism seems an untenable position because it rapidly slips into one of two extremes and it appears difficult to define cultures widely enough without slipping into an all-encompassing humanity; it cannot hold its own ground. In Morality and Cultural Differences, Cook envisages a situation where there are precisely two different cultures in the world: X and Y. Culture X holds principle P and culture Y holds not P. After a while culture X comes to dominate culture Y and so everyone in the world holds moral principle P. Cook argues that this is not an objective absolute principle, it is restricted by the cultures it applies to; even in this case it is only one culture involved (1999; p16). Similarly, the anthropocentric reading of the homo-mensura can be taken as being a relativist doctrine even if everyone in the world believes the same things. The moral values held are still relative to mankind (if 'man' is read as the collective noun phrase) and this is an important point. This is perhaps the most irrefutable reading of Protagoras' relativism and also the most commonsensical. Contemporary talk of human rights that are universal and apply to everyone appear irreconcilably at odds with views of cultural relativism. An anthropocentric view of ethics means that mankind can transcend national and temporal boundaries and live together under a common moral code. As dubious, and as ethnocentric, as current talk may seem, the idea seems to have some philosophical merit. We are able to communicate with those that speak a different language to us; we can find a common ground. Pidgin languages develop where two societies need to establish a code of conduct in order to trade, what is a code of conduct if not related to morality? For all the differences between cultures there is indeed a common ground that appears to be being appealed to when cultures need to interact. This common ground is probably mankind, or the collective 'man' in the homo-mensura. Objective, or absolutist, accounts of morality will hold that there is an objective moral code for us all to aspire to, perhaps using God or the Platonic forms as justification. The moral relativist reels off numerous differences between cultures in order to show the objectivist wrong. The anthropocentric reading of the homo-mensura seems a healthy compromise. It allows us to discuss with other cultures the possibility of an all-encompassing moral code, which moral relativism seems to cut off immediately, especially NMR; as it holds that all cultures are right within themselves. At the same time it acknowledges the limits of our understanding and sets the limit as only being able to know what is knowable to humans, which seems a fair limit to set. Whether we can appeal to animals under a wider bracket of 'sentient beings', or to plants under 'living beings', or to rocks under 'existing things' remains to be seen, for the immediate future understanding the world in terms of man is challenge enough. The subjective reading of the homo-mensura is equivalent to modern subjectivism and is probably the latter's clearest articulation. The homo-mensura is not equivalent to any form of cultural relativism other than through idle speculation. It is most certainly not equivalent to DMR as 'measure' is an evaluative, normative noun and is not purely descriptive. It is only equivalent to NMR if we amplify the subjective reading onto larger groups; it is not implicit within the homo-mensura itself. It is relevant to contemporary cultural relativist debate because it shows the two extremes that cultural relativism finds itself between; subjectivism and anthropocentrism. The anthropocentric reading of the homo-mensura is perhaps the strongest and most applicable to modern moral debate. It reinforces talk of human rights and universal, human truths but does not succumb to the intellectualism or theism that objective doctrines tend to fall prey to. It is also not guilty of the alleged ethnocentrism of objectivism. For those who are not in a frame of mind to think of morality as objectively, universally true then the anthropocentric view of morality, as presented by one reading of the homo-mensura is a worthy substitute. If we can demonstrably transcend humanity and relate to sentient beings, living beings and existing beings then perhaps we can start talking of the objectivity of values again. Until then the homo-mensura should stand strong for another 2500 years. 