The problem for the Way of Truth is that it seems incomprehensible to most people. If the Way of Truth is true then there is no movement or change and everything is just one: being. Parmenides writes the Way of Seeming as a way of explaining the sensible world to us. The Way of Truth, whether plausible or not, does not offer an explanation of the world as it appears to us and so, it may be argued, is fairly redundant; what is the point in a theory of the world that does not allow us to engage with the world as we see it? The Way of Seeming provides us with an explanation of the sensible data available to us, even if it is not the truth and fallible. If Parmenides just wrote the Way of Truth he would be left with little else to explain as the Way of Truth leads us to rejecting our senses in favour of a reasoning that is far detached from the world. Many of the thoughts that arise as a result of the Way of Truth lead to the divisibility of the universe as a whole, which is incompatible with the Way of Truth in itself and so the Way of Seeming helps explain this. The main trouble with the Way of Truth is that it appears to reject the use of 'is not' in the predicative sense unknowingly. For example, in conceiving hot we conceive of cold, which is surely synonymous with 'x is not hot' or 'x is not cold'. If the basic idea of the Way of Truth is that we cannot conceive of 'ouk esti' or 'is not', then it appears, as Parmenides does not further clarify the distinction between the predicative and the existential sense of 'is', that the concept of opposites must be rejected. The acceptance, or at least recognition, of certain qualities needing their opposites in order to exist means a requirement for the Way of Seeming. Although the Way of Truth maybe taken to be true it does not allow for the opposite qualities, which clearly exist in our perception of the world through the senses. Parmenides' reputation as a mystic, or at least as more knowing than the rest of civilisation at the time, through his experiences with the Divine, gives him license to create a credible view of the world as it is seen by the majority. In this case the Way of Seeming may give Parmenides the opportunity to force his views upon the world. The Way of Truth, and its acquaintance through the proem may just be an excuse to enhance Parmenides' reputation; to give his views on the Way of Seeming some credibility. To the audience, Parmenides has shown that he knows the real truth (the Way of Truth) but as it is too complicated and uncomprehending for the average person to understand he has also been shown by Divine Intervention how to comprehend the universe as it appears to this average person. In this way, the Way of Seeming can be seen to give credibility to the Way of Truth as well as the Way of Truth giving credibility to the Way of Seeming; in a mutually supporting manner the two theories give rank to each other. The Way of Truth credits the Way of Seeming because it shows the audience that although Parmenides knows the truth he has also seen the appearance of truth that the average person knows (the Way of Seeming). The Way of Seeming gives credit to the Way of Truth because it shows to the dismissive person that Parmenides is not just making these theories up; that they do have some foundations in knowledge. The dismissive person, in this sense, may see Parmenides as fabricating the Way of Truth in order to pull the wool over the eyes of the average person. However, in showing the Way of Seeming to the dismissive person, Parmenides is showing that he understands the world as most people see it; and can explain it coherently (in the Way of Seeming). This then perhaps leads the dismissive person on to considering the Way of Truth as plausible, as they can see that Parmenides is not simply leading them down the path of the sceptic, or the path of a philosopher full of self-inflated worth, who has no real sense of the world as it sensibly appears. The two ways can thus be seen as mutually supportive and each necessarily leads to the other. The Way of Truth leads to the Way of Seeming as the former begs questions about the sensible world that it cannot answer. The Way of Seeming supports the Way of Truth as it perhaps provides an entrance to the way of Truth for the average person who may not be open to radical ideas; such as the world is as one and there is no distinguishing between different figures as we perceive them. The Way of Truth gives a view of the bigger picture of the universe, whereas the Way of Seeming gives a view of the details of the universe. Each view necessarily leads to the other as each view begs questions that only the other can answer. Perhaps Parmenides as an author intended the two views to complement each other, rather than the view that Parmenides as the character in the proem intends the views as opposites, perhaps even contradictory. In another way of interpreting the question; perhaps Parmenides is showing the possibility of multiple knowledges or truths. Although Parmenides gives priority to the Way of Truth; as it is the Divine that has provided this knowledge, perhaps Parmenides is suggesting that the Way of Seeming is equally valuable as an option for knowledge. In this way Parmenides is showing his audience that the truth, or knowledge, is an elastic concept, and that there can be more than one version of knowledge. Indeed, upon closer inspection, the Way of Seeming appears to provide a more complete view of the sensible world as compared to the Way of Truth. Although the Way of Truth may provide a knowledge for the philosopher, it is of little use in everyday life. In providing his audience with a possibility of two knowledges, Parmenides is illustrating that although a knowledge based upon pure reasoning (the Way of Truth) is perhaps a more desirable knowledge, one based upon empirical evidence and the utility of the senses is a more practical knowledge (Way of Seeming). In this sense, Parmenides maybe pre-empting the debate in later centuries as to whether empiricism is to be favoured over reason or vice versa. This could be seen in two ways; Parmenides maybe advocating multiple knowledges in the sense that both are equal, or he maybe suggesting that there are different levels of knowledge. Perhaps, for Parmenides, the Way of Seeming is a lower level of knowledge; one that those of a lower intellect can understand, compared to a Way of Truth; that the intellectually elite of society only can fully comprehend. Following this point of view, the Way of Seeming may well be an accessible option for these lower intellects; by at first understanding the Way of Seeming they can then move up, or progress, to understanding the Way of Truth. The Way of Seeming may thus be seen to provide Parmenides with an audience. If only the elite few people subscribed to his view of the Way of Truth then his reputation may well be short lived, by appealing to a greater number he is securing an interest in his ways of thinking. If the Way of Seeming is seen then as a mere popularity device then there may well not be any philosophical merit to its position as Parmenides is using it merely to gain the attention of a wider audience in order to filter down to the elite few who will understand his Way of Truth. However, it seems that the Way of Seeming is necessary to the understanding of the Way of Truth. The construction of the Way of Truth by the goddess contains negations, or the concept of 'ouk esti' itself. This would seem to suggest that if the Way of Truth is true, then it is false because it is based on premises that cannot exist within the Way of Truth. In this way, the Way of Seeming is needed to show how the Way of Truth can be true. Parmenides may well see the Way of Truth as the 'real knowledge' but as he only has experience of the sensible world he may not be able to express the Way of Truth without using terms such as 'not'. If his divine experience is taken to be true, rather than a mere device to attract attention, then perhaps the goddess needed to use the language of the Way of Seeming (ie: negation, divisibility and opposites etc) in order to make Parmenides understand the Way of Truth. If Parmenides is being shown a knowledge that is radically different from anything anyone has ever known or thought then an already existing language is needed; the language of the Way of Seeming, as language necessarily corresponds to knowledge of the world Parmenides cannot be expected to understand a whole new language in order to not only know the Way of Truth, but also to express it to others. The Way of Seeming is thus fundamental to saving the Way of Truth from self-refutation, if it is to be taken that Parmenides needs the Way of Seeming in order to express the Way of Truth. It would be very hard for Parmenides to tell people not to use the concept of 'not' without using 'not' himself. It could be argued that the limitations of the Way of Truth lie in the use of the Way of Seeming in explaining it. Perhaps then, Parmenides is using this conflict with the Way of Truth and the Way of Seeming to show the world that the existing view of the world is flawed and is by no means complete, and that there are concepts that we simply cannot understand because of the limitations of the language provided by this view. Parmenides looks as if he may be offering his audience a linguistic side to his philosophy, perhaps he is illustrating that the limits of language are the limits of understanding rather than being the communicative device needed to bring knowledge to civilisations as would be thought. This conflict between the Way of Seeming and Way of Truth may be a representation of the conflict between the senses and reasoning. Parmenides clearly shows, however, that the two compliment each other as well as oppose each other. In equating the Way of Seeming to the senses Parmenides is showing that they are necessary in understanding reason, even if they are fallible and limiting they are the only tools we have to interact with the world. Also, although reason and rationality may provide some higher level of knowledge, or at least a more desirable knowledge, there comes a point when these ideas become too detached from the real world and the senses are needed to anchor the individual back in reality. Although it can be seen that the Way of Seeming perhaps restricts Parmenides' communication of the Way of Truth, Parmenides is also showing that it may well be a good thing. What's the practical use of ideas so far removed from the world as we interact with it? An idea is nothing if not practical and so Parmenides is showing that practical knowledge is much better than the abstract knowledge offered by the Way of Truth. Although the Way of Seeming appears to be irrelevant if the Way of Truth is true, it is of great importance to Parmenides as without it his philosophical career is rather short-lived if everything is otherwise explained. The Way of Seeming is perhaps used to show different types, or levels of knowledge, and as it is necessary in order to understand the Way of Truth then it would suggest that they are equal to each other in status, even if Parmenides claims the Way of Truth to be superior. The Way of Seeming is therefore indicative of more than one type of knowledge and illustrates the split between sense experience and reason. Although the two Ways appear to be in conflict with each other, they are also dependent upon each other and complement each other; giving a more complete view of the world. Parmenides writes the Way of Seeming in order to show not only the incompatibility of a theory of knowledge based entirely on reason and interaction with the real world but also the incompleteness of it. Parmenides shows the audience the importance of the senses and of language, and that even in theories of reason, sense data and language are needed in order to make sense of reason. Rather than promoting a view based entirely upon reason as Parmenides explicitly does, he is also implying the need for a worldview based upon the senses, which is where he started, and where he returned. 