Talk of human rights, and violations of such rights, is the recent currency of politics. Infringements of human rights, and the uniting of nations under the guise of human rights, dominate newspapers and political discourse. The Luton schoolgirl who feels that her human rights have been violated because her school would not allow her to wear the traditional jilbab Muslim dress, and the talk of arresting people without charge or evidence leaves a sour taste in the mouth of the human rights supporter, but is any of it well founded? In deciding what constitutes a human right we must first decide what a human right is and whether or not it even exists. The United Nations Declaration of Human Rights is perhaps the most obvious place to look for a justification for the existence of human rights. The declaration states: <quote>'they [human beings] are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights'</quote>The apparent religious overtones of 'Creator' suggest that God grants us these rights. However, it is not so apparent that this is the case. Even if we accept that God, as creator of all, created us, then there is no explicit or even implicit creation of human rights in the creation of humans. In creating a robot, the scientist does not imply or explicate the existence of rights for said robot. Perhaps the theist would justify the existence of human rights in the context of a duty of society to God; that life is God's gift and with it there are certain rights for the individual such as the right to life, right not to be subjected to torture and other such negative rights (positive rights in the Declaration of Human Rights shall be dismissed here as too problematic to warrant consideration at this point). Life as a gift can be viewed in a wider context as well, in order to accommodate atheists; parents or nature are perhaps the bearer of such a gift. An important consideration to raise here is that in viewing human rights as a duty of society to a God, in order to look after His subjects, individuals must first and foremost acknowledge this duty to themselves; for example, the right to life is also a duty to not commit suicide. We shall later see that society has responsibilities to the individual but the individual has no such duty to its creator. In viewing life as a gift, let us see if this entails rights for the individual out of respect to an omniscient God, loving parents or an indifferent mother nature. In a slightly different context, let us consider receiving a car as a birthday present from a well-meaning friend or relative. Now there are several possibilities for the use of the car here: Perhaps the recipient is entirely happy with the gift and takes good care of it; waxing and polishing it each day and not driving it to excess and the car enjoys a long existence and a lot of love. Or perhaps the recipient appreciates the gift but wants to use it in a slightly different way to (A); they drive the car too fast, never wash it and end up wrapped round a lamppost in some downtown area. A third possibility is that the recipient just does not want the car and so trades it in for a new one, or takes out their frustration on it, for such an inappropriate gift, before torching it and ending the car's existence in a glorious pyrotechnic explosion. Would the understanding giver of the aforementioned car have any objection to any of the three possibilities? Or, rather, should they? In (A) the giver clearly appreciates the care given to the gift by the recipient and feels that they have chosen the perfect present for them. In (B) the giver possibly feels that the car is a little unloved and perhaps they feel that the unfortunate end of the recipient was their own fault for giving them the car. They may feel that they did not really know the person and in hindsight maybe they should have bought them a different model of car, or socks. Perhaps a more liberal giver of such a gift in such a situation would maybe think that it was an unfortunate series of events but at least the recipient had fun with the gift and was just limited by a lack education or upbringing on how to care for the car. In situation (C) bearer of the gift will inevitably feel bad, but in the back of their minds they would know that there were other reasons and motives unknown to them. In applying this rather elaborate example to the concept of life as a gift and to the three different possible bearers of such a gift the conclusion that even the basic human right of 'the right to life' is non-existent becomes apparent. In considering the following, the car in the above example equates to life and the recipient is the person involved. Mother-nature, as the bearer of the gift of life, does not care for how the person treats their gift; if they indulge in self-harm and explode in a blaze of glory as in (C) mother-nature will not feel hard done by. She is indifferent and most likely devoid of empathetic qualities and personification of any kind; if we take her to be the laws of nature (be it gravity, neo-Darwinism, or any other current popular theory). If parents are seen as the gift bearers and life is bestowed upon the person in a well planned and thought out manner then perhaps there is a duty for (C), and to some extent (B), to respect that gift and live the alternative, exemplary life as (A). However, it is close to the example of the car in the original example. The parents should not feel disrespected or betrayed if their offspring ends up wrapped round a lamppost. In giving life to the individual, free will is also given and it must be expected that there will always be extraneous factors not taken into account at the conception of the life. In a theistic context the individual is also absolved of responsibility for ending their life and subjecting themselves to torture. God, as omniscient, knows all the reasons, which the parents as bearers did not, as to why what happened did. God will not punish (B) simply because he did not know what he was doing and was never shown how to look after himself and (C) will similarly escape consequences as God will understand why they did what they did. This is not to say that there exists no morality and that one can do as one pleases and expect no punishment for one's actions. If life is a gift then other people, or society, should respect that gift. The individual is not morally required to justify actions aimed entirely at themselves, but actions that affect others must be morally justified. <fnote>In saying that the individual is absolved of responsibility of actions toward him or herself I am in no way advocating self-harm or suicide, either of these actions can have effects on other people and so can still be viewed as immoral or wrong. Suicide, excess and self-harm are morally neutral actions in themselves; morality is always in relation to the people around oneself. </fnote>In giving the car to the person in the example above, the bearer of such a gift would feel that both she, as bearer, and he, as receiver of the gift were both hard done by if a third party were to damage the car or to destroy it. And so parents, or God, as a possible bearer of life, would feel that anyone who tortured or killed their creation is morally accountable for their actions. In this people have a responsibility to other people, but not to themselves in the same way. The individual is entitled to take their own life with no moral consequences, but not the life of another. May it be concluded that the view of life 'as a gift entailing inherent rights' as found in the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, is wrong. If life is to be viewed as a gift, in any sense, be it theistic or atheistic, then Human Responsibilities entail, not rights. 'The Right to life' and 'The Right to be free from torture' are worded wrongly. They should, in fact, be 'the Responsibility towards other lives' and 'the Responsibility not to torture others'. Talk of human rights undermines the individuals responsibility to others as it, effectively, makes morality passive. 'Everyone should be moral to me', and 'I have no need to act morally' seem to follow far too easily from a view of human rights. Human Responsibilities, however, give rise to an active morality in which all individuals are accountable for everyone else. The negative rights outlined in the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights can all easily enough be translated into Responsibilities that provide a fairly good way to live life; perhaps a more formal version of 'do to others as you would want done to you'. The positive rights outlined in the Declaration are nothing more than superficial western ideals that no one can, or will, take responsibility for. The right to education and the right to clean, running water may be nice but unless someone is to take responsibility they are meaningless. The pragmatic view of human rights is often applauded in that it offers little in the way of metaphysical justification for its ideas and instead focuses on agreement between nations on morality. A view of morality that encourages passivity and is filled with meaningless ideals is far from pragmatic. Once people realise that positive rights are, by and large, unrealisable and that there is no need to acknowledge them as real rights, then there is the eminent danger that a similar view will be held for the negative human rights. In an attempt to end this seeming digression; the answer to the question: 'How can it be decided what a human right is?' is that there simply is not any such thing as human rights. What constitutes a human right is the political worth of the idea it entails. Talk of human rights is worth its figurative weight in gold to those in, and who want, power and is an appalling depiction of the human psyche that we expect society to deal us with the right cards and accept no responsibility ourselves. Morality should be an active matter, not a case of passively waiting for others to wait on us hand and foot. In a document that outlines the right to be free from slavery, the Declaration of Human Rights enslaves society in relation to the individual. It is clear from cases prominent in the media that once an alleged injustice is dressed up as a breach of human rights all hell breaks loose as the law, politicians, employers, schools and wider society all cower under the menace of this passive, non-existent morality. Once a code of Human Responsibilities is drawn up then, and only then, can justice prevail. If someone does not live up to their responsibilities then they can be demonstrated to be in the wrong. At present, if someone claims a breach of his or her rights society starts a witch-hunt amidst a blind panic, in order to blame this so-called crime on anything. Human Rights are the 5-year-old child in the sandpit crying because someone stole his toy tractor and threw sand in his face. Human Responsibilities are the adult who calms the child down, wipes the tears from his eyes and shows him how to play with what he's got. 