Let us first of all define religion as 'practices seen to be governed by God, or some divine spirit'. Although not uncontroversial, this definition gives us a starting point with which to discuss the question. In order to answer the question 'does morality need religion?' we must, perhaps, consider a split in views of morality. Moral Relativism would hold that there are many differing moral codes; all of them equally correct or valid. Moral Objectivism, on the other hand, would hold that there is just one moral code, or one moral truth, one morality that is correct. It is perhaps important to consider whether a relativist view of morality requires religion in order to justify it and then to, similarly, consider whether or not an objectivist view requires religious justification. <heading>The Religious Requirement of Moral Relativism</heading>Does the moral relativist need her practices to be seen to be governed by God or some divine spirit? Moral relativism often claims that the disagreement between different cultures is testimony to the fact that morality is not one all-encompassing code of conduct true in all places at all times. For the moral relativist, morality is valid in terms of where and when it takes place. If murder is wrong in culture X then it is wrong in culture X, if it is right in culture Y then it is right in culture Y. This can, at first, appear contradictory in that we have both Fa and - Fa; we have murder (a) being both right (F) and not right, or wrong (-F). The relativist does not necessarily have to be dialetheistic; she is not committed to holding contradictory views of morality as both being true. If we say that cultures stand in a relationship to moral acts then we can formulate the two positions of X and Y thus: <quote>Fax & -Fay</quote>Where 'X stands in a relationship, F, with a' and 'Y does not stand in a relationship, F, with a'. In terms of the murder example: culture X stands in a relationship of 'being morally right' with murder and culture Y stands in a relationship of 'not being morally right' with murder. It should be apparent that a contradiction does not exist. For the moral relativist to hold that murder is both right and wrong is to commit a fallacy that would undermine any logical consistency that philosophy would wish to maintain. Although some practices, Buddhism, Jainism and others, often hold dialetheistic views of truth it is hardly constructive in producing a consistent philosophical system of thought. Here we can be seen as being charitable to the moral relativist by providing them with a logical analysis of their position that does not reduce their position to absurdity. By evaluating the relativist's views of truth as a relationship between culture and act we can avoid the necessary embarrassing contradictions, should the relativist wish to maintain that murder is both actually right and wrong simultaneously then let the onus be upon them to illustrate the validity of their position. If we now take morality as a relationship between the culture and the act then we can see if religion is necessary to justify moral actions. The trouble with moral relativism is that it quickly slips into subjectivism; that actions are, ultimately, true or false to the individual as opposed to the society or culture. Once embarked upon this slippery slope the moral relativist can find herself slipping into the realms of nihilism and the denial of truth altogether. It is difficult for the relativist to maintain a position in which groups of people are correct in their judgements whilst simultaneously holding that individuals can be wrong. The relativist systematically fails to adequately account for why the relationship between the moral act and the culture must exist yet a similar relationship cannot hold between the act and the individual. An appeal to the greater good of the culture over the individual is to bark up the wrong tree. To suggest that the similarities between individuals that bond them to a culture should hold stronger than the bond between the individual and individual interests is to undermine the relativist's own position. Remember that relativist doctrines occur when the differences between cultures are highlighted, the relativist cannot then emphasise the similarities between individuals and sub-cultures in order to promote a sense of community that can instantiate moral guidelines to be adhered to within a wider culture. If similarities between individuals and sub-cultures are highlighted then we can emphasise similarities between cultures and appeal to human nature as grounding for a universal, albeit anthropocentric, morality. We can then arguably appeal to an underlying 'sentient-being' nature in order to incorporate animals into a wider morality still and then to an 'existent-being' nature in order to incorporate rocks, trees and all manner of beings. If we then have a morality that includes everything, is the once relativist position any different to an objectivist view of morality? In order for the moral relativist keep hold of her position she must hold that differences exist at the level of cultures but that more microscopic differences in moral outlook within an individual culture must be regarded as deviant. We shall excuse the relativist of the problem of trying to define rigid cultures, let us just suppose that these rigid cultures exist. It is now perhaps ideal for the moral relativist to appeal to religion to enforce her outlook of morality. If a culture can be shown to be following the practices as seen to be governed by a God, or divine spirit, then it can be said to be justified in its actions. This means that deviant groups within a culture can be easily dismissed as deviant as they are not following these aforementioned practices. The moral relativist can, thus, define cultures in terms of the religion it follows. Culture X may follow a Buddhist way of life and culture Y a Christian doctrine. Culture X can be right in itself and culture Y within itself, but neither objectively so. Note here that an element of objectivity can be introduced; a culture can be judged as being better than another if more of its elements obey its religious practices than the other. Culture X can be deemed as a better culture if 90% of its members follow the Buddhist way of life successfully and only 50% of culture Y's members follow the Christian way of life. Christian culture is not thus being judged in terms of Buddhism, nor are Buddhist values being judged in light of Christian ones, rather cultures are deemed as better or worse purely mathematically. Surely the relativist will admit that Culture X is a better culture, if morality is judged in terms of a culture and more of X's constituents are performing moral actions within their culture than the constituents of Y's. Observe the implications for relativism here, from the existence of different cultures we can clearly compare them independently from our own cultural values; we can compare them mathematically. We can thus introduce moral terms; better, worse etc, without using them in relation to our own professed moral code. The relativist moral system can thus be shown to be evaluated independently, objectively and in a moral way. This, quite explicitly, suggests an objectivity to morality. Let us now consider another implication of moral relativism requiring religion as justification. If we take a culture as defined by its religion and we agree that a religion cannot be judged by the standards of another religion we can see that the relativist is in a strong position to advocate a tolerance of other cultures and other religions. It also allows for the existence of other religions without begging the question as to which one is supremely correct, if any. If we view each culture as a self-contained system we can almost picture an image whereby there are all of the different Gods and deities, there is the Judeo-Christian God, Allah and all manner of other religious possibilities actualised. Does this picture compromise the omnipotence of the Judeo-Christian God? Arguably, yes. An omnipotent God is no longer all-powerful if He has no influence or bearing over cultures that do not believe in Him. He is similarly lacking in power if there are other existent gods and deities over whom he has no influence. The moral relativist must now also explain how we can keep the traditional qualities of God whilst simultaneously maintaining the qualities of other figures of worship. Moral relativism is a (possibly) logically defensible doctrine, but it is as methodologically defensible as a chocolate teapot at the gates of hell (and about as useful too). Every time we grant the relativist the benefit of doubt and allow her to move on she runs into more obstacles. Moral relativism, when applied to morality and religion, renders everything false. It does not suspend judgement on the truth/falsity of matters as it claims; it must conclude that everything is false if it is to say anything substantial at all. Religion looked like a solid option for explaining and, indeed, justifying moral disagreements between cultures without reducing the disagreement to the individual level and hence subjectivist and nihilist ideals. When examined in more detail, however, it becomes clear that there are serious implications for religion if we hold that all are equally valid. To say that all religions are equally valid is to imply that they are all equal in truth-value. It cannot be consistently demonstrated that every religion is true, and that is before we even begin to contemplate 'alternative' religions, such as Satanism, which are clearly at odds with benevolence based religions. We can therefore only conclude that all religions are false if we are to maintain logical consistency. The moral relativist is single-handedly capable of slaying God. <heading>The Religious Requirement of Moral Objectivism</heading>Having turned our attention away from the chocolate teapot of moral relativism we can attend to a more worthy enterprise. Moral objectivism assumes there to be one moral code that applies to everyone in all places at all times. It does not assume that any one culture knows of this code. It is not claiming that the West is justified in asserting itself over the rest of the world, although those asserting westerners will often appeal to objective notions of morality in order to justify themselves. Let us not confuse the sword and the swordsman; the sword may be a worthy tool but is the fault of the swordsman if he beheads innocent children, not the sword. Objectivist doctrines must not be blamed for the zealous misuse of its principles. Assuming there is one moral code then, we can see religion as attempting to find that code, or we can see religion as claiming that it has been found. Liberal religious people can perhaps be seen as the former and fundamentalists as the latter. Liberalists that encourage change within their religion can be seen as trying to adapt their beliefs to bring them in line with what they perceive as the correct moral code that their religion is aiming for. Admittedly there is a fine line between adapting in pursuit of an objective good and changing in line with fads and trends of a wider social context. Fundamentalists, on the other hand, will maintain that holy scripture is correct and is the objective moral code. This can often lead to tension between the fundamentalist sect and wider society, as wider society may not necessarily believe in what the fundamentalist is advocating. This distinction can be seen within the Catholic Church at the moment. Issues concerning gay marriage and unprotected sex have brought rise to a hard-line, fundamentalist and liberal split within the Church. The difficulty being that we simply do not know who is right. Similarly Islamic fundamentalist extremists are illustrating how hard-line views do not exist in harmony with the wider views of society. When upheld, moral objectivism can lead to intense conflict between different groups who both think that they have got it right. A pragmatic approach to objectivism must be taken. Even if one thinks they are right one must demonstrate reasonably to another that this is the case. Blowing people up for their own good is not the right way to go about things. If we cannot reasonably show that our view is correct then chances are we are probably wrong. This is not to advocate liberalism. Liberalism fast falls into a wishy-washy anything goes sort of affair. The key to moral issues is to debate them; not fight about them or 'let people get on with it'. People should not smoke just because they want to, people should or should not smoke dependent upon its demonstrable good or bad effects. This discussion is so far concerned with objective morality being determined by reason and dialect. This is a fairly intellectualist, Platonic notion of objective morality and there is of course, the sceptic may point out, the possibility that we all get it wrong, all agree that smoking is a good thing for us and smoke ourselves into cancerous oblivion. There needs to be some sort of justification for our moral belief and this is where many may turn to religion for the answer. By using God as justification for our actions we can be assured that we are correct in our actions if we follow the practices governed by Him. As to how we can know what His practices are is another matter entirely, revelation is perhaps the answer here and this is possibly also an inlet for the aforementioned reason and dialectic to enter into the debate. We now seem to be in a worse position than the moral relativist who was left with a whole bundle of religions, none of which were true. The objectivist is left with a picture in which we have a plethora of religions, each claiming themselves to be the one true one. This is clearly a more potentially violent environment than one in which we have a plethora of religions relatively disinterested in one another. This potentiality does not have to be actualised however. It is possible for discussion to take place amongst the different religions in order for the truth to be found, again notice here the importance placed upon dialectic and reasoning as a means to truth. There is a lot more at stake here than with the philosophical mess of moral relativism; for it is truth that is being discussed, not the mere utility that relativism (at best) can aim for. Religion is not necessary for objective morality, at least there is no semantic necessity; it makes sense to talk of moral matters without discussing God or some other religious justification. It perhaps makes things a little easier to discuss if we can see that good actions are those actions approved of by God but ease of discussion has never warranted philosophical merit so far and so there is little reason to include it as merit-worthy here. <heading>In Conclusion</heading>In answer to the question 'Does morality need religion?' we can answer fairly resolutely 'no'. In terms of moral relativism, introducing religion only complicates matters. Although relativism is quite clearly flawed it is nonetheless currently popular amongst contemporaries (Wong, Mackie and Williams etc) and so merits attention, insofar as a three-year old baby whinging and crying to attract your notice warrants attention. In terms of moral objectivism needing religious justification it does not. There is no logical or semantic necessity involved as we can sensibly talk of morality without reference to religion. Perhaps there is a psychological necessity; that humans need some sort of otherworldly justification to their moral enterprise and will not accept that morality can be discovered through pure reason and intellect alone. 