An argument consists of a list of sentences that form the premises and a final sentence that is the conclusion, such as: <table/>This is valid form of syllogism. There are 24 valid forms, out of a possible 256. The pivotal factor in determining whether an argument is valid or not is that a valid argument is truth preserving. A valid argument with true premises will always lead to a true conclusion. A bad argument can lead to a false conclusion even if the premises are all true, such as: <table/>True premises and a false conclusion mean that the argument is bad; it is not a valid argument as the truth was not preserved. This is a case where the truth of the argument's conclusion is false. Although you must have a true conclusion coming from true premises for a valid argument, you can also encounter true conclusions from false premises: <table/>This is still a valid form of syllogism, even with the false premises. An argument is valid if and only if its premises logically imply its conclusion. In a valid argument it is impossible to have true premises and the conclusion to be false. It is clear that the truth in the conclusion of an argument is independent of the validity of an argument and yet connected through the premises. It is possible to have true or false conclusions from valid or invalid arguments. However, the only way a false conclusion can be reached from a valid argument is if the premises themselves are false. If you have true premises and a valid argument then you have a sound argument, which guarantees you truth in the conclusion. Each sentence making up the syllogism can be labelled with the attribute of being either TRUE or FALSE; however, the validity of the argument is a property of the complete group of sentences. This is the distinction between the validity of an argument and the truth of an argument's conclusions. What makes this distinction important in mathematics and experimental science is that unless there is a sound argument you cannot be sure of the truth in the conclusion. Again, due to this distinction, it is possible to arrive at false conclusions with true premises because of an invalid argument. For example, mathematical proofs may result in the conclusion 1 = 2, say, whereby each step is true and yet the argument structuring the syllogism is invalid. To be sure of a truthful conclusion it is not enough that every premise holds truth, but that the argument is constructed soundly. Conversely, even if a valid argument leads to a true conclusion with fantastical premises it is unwise to rejoice in the findings until every premise is examined and shown to be true. It may turn out that all cotton shirts are not really made of paper. The validity of an argument is only truth preserving if the premises are true. Mathematicians and experimental scientists have to be aware of this veracity in drawing their conclusions. Failure to do could lead to false conclusions or incorrect beliefs about premises, both of which hinders the cause of finding out the truth about reality, and so must be avoided. 