<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>In this study, we intend to address whether globalisation cost job in Britain by examining whether the increase in cross-border flows of goods, capital, and labour had caused adverse impacts on the employment statistics of British labour market. We take international trade relative to domestic production, foreign direct investment (FDI) relative to GDP, and international migration flow relative to population as key indicators. Exploiting the time- series data drawn from several archival sources, we apply multiple-regression to see whether the changes of these factors are associated with the changes of employment statistics, and if so, how. Analyses at two levels are performed: national analysis investigates whether the change of the three indicators are associated with the change of the employment rate of British labour force (and that of each age group) at national level, while industry analysis utilize the industry-specific data on trade and employment to test the association between the annual changes of the two. </abstract><heading>Introduction </heading>Does globalisation, as asserted by its opponents, cost job in Britain? To address this issue, we first need to clarify what processes should be considered as globalisation here. Globalisation has in the past decade become a popular concept widely used in explaining many different phenomena. Central to this notion is the increased interdependency between national societies due to the improvement of communication and transportation technology, but the manifestations of this trend vary widely, and cause the formulation of a definition applicable in all discussions extremely difficult. Current discussion of globalisation includes three dimensions: economic, cultural, and political (see table A). Such a wide scope and complexity of the processes discussed as part of globalisation make any claim of its general effect on any subject over-simplistic, and calls for more sophisticated analyses that 'unpack' the notion of globalisation and give different factors individual assessment. <table/>Source: Entry 'globalisation,' The Penguin Dictionary of Sociology, 2000, p 153, table compiled by author. Among the various aspects of globalisation, we first focus on the "increase of cross- border flows of market factors, e.g., goods, capital and labour" in this study, and use the national statistics on trade, capital flow (specially the amount of foreign direct investment) and migration flow to measure it. The three factors are chosen because they are most often mentioned in public discussions of labour market outcomes, and thus have greatest relevance to the current debate. In the past few decades, the shares of the three factors in either GDP or population have all been increased considerably (see Figure 1-3, next page). <fnote>See p. 4 for further discussion. </fnote>Conventional discussions found in media and political debates usually focus on the direct effects of the components of the three factors that are more visible from the domestic perspective, such as the number of jobs created by inward FDI, the number of jobs lost in the layoffs accompanying corporate 'downsizing' and 'outsourcing,' and the competition with the imports from low-wage counties and foreign immigrant. Such an approach has two major shortcomings. First, it does not count in the contribution of outward components, namely export, emigrants, and some outward FDI (see Table B). Second, analyses in this current, while based on the number of job created and cost directly, tend to overlook other indirect influence on the whole labour market. <table/>To avoid the two faults, we take a different approach in this study. First, to obtain a better-balanced assessment of the increase of cross-border flows of market factors, we draw the key indicators of each factor from the statistics of both inward and outward components in our major analysis. Second, to include the indirect effect into our assessment of employment condition, we rely on the aggregate indicators of labour market instead of the counts of job loss or job gain associated with individual events. In summary, we intend to address whether globalisation cost job in Britain by investigating whether the increase in cross-border flows of goods, capital, and labour had had caused adverse impacts on the employment statistics of British labour market. <figure/>Sources: Data of trade, investment and GDP from UK National Account, ONS. Figure compiled by author. <figure/>Sources: Data of investment and GDP from UK National Account, ONS site. Figure compiled by author. <figure/>Sources: Data of population from Population Trends 110, ONS site. Data of migration from Dabson, J.al. (2001) International Migration and United Kingdom: Recent Patterns and Trends. Home Office RDS Occasional Paper No. 75, p.64. Figure compiled by author. <heading>Method of Research </heading>Two levels of analyses are performed in this study. National analysis is aimed to address the main thesis by investigating how the changes in the quantities of international trade, FDI, and migration flow are associated with the change in gross employment rate (and that of each age group) at national level. This approach constitutes the main part of this research, but is at the risk to be restricted by the limited sample size of annual national data (available since 1959, N = 42). Therefore, we incorporate industry analysis as a supplementary analysis, which utilizes the industry-specific data on trade and employment to test the association between the changes of the two. Despite the shifted scopes and focuses of the two approaches, the logics behind their design are basically the same. Therefore I will only focus on national analysis to be discussed in detail in the following sections, and leave the industry analysis to be addressed shortly in the end with emphasis on its difference from the national analysis. <heading>National Analysis</heading><list>Analysis Unit: NationTime-Span: 1959- (trade and FDI), 1964- (migration)</list><heading>Independent Variable</heading><list>TR, gross trade (import plus export) as % of GDPFI, gross FDI (inward plus outward) as % of GDP </list>Source: UK National Account, 1946-, ONS. MI, gross migration flow (immigration plus emigration) as % of population Source: Migration data from International Passenger Survey (IPS) 1964-, ONS. Data after 1984 adjusted as specified in p.4, footnote 2. Population data after 1971 projected from the mid year-estimates on 1971,1976, 1981, 1986 and every single year since 1991, population data before 1971 estimated using method specified in "Appendix Part I: Population Estimates and Projections," Social Trends 32, 2002, ONS. The indicators chosen as measures of the "cross-border flows of goods, capital, and labour" are quite straightforward except FDI. We specially focus on FDI for the capital part because, as illustrated by Albowd and Freeman (1992), "we want to distinguish a foreign capital investment that is a long-term job creating from a short-run financial flow" and "direct foreign investment is job creating while currency transaction are likely to be short run." These indicators are expressed as ratios to GDP and population to represent the contribution of these factors relative to the magnitude of British economy. Aside from the gross cross-border flow, the net flow (trade balance, investment balance and net migration) and the stock (immigrant stock and stock FDI) are two other aspects of the international movement of market factors that are often discussed in globalisation debates, and hence need to be addressed here for their exclusion from our conceptualization of globalisation. First, we regard the net values of certain factors as source for measures of other concepts, perhaps, indicators of how attractive one nation is regarding the respective factor. Although the growth of those net values are certainly enabled by the process of globalisation, they still can not be appropriate measures of globalisation since the net flow of certain factor of one country could be zero even when the economy of this country is highly internationally connected. Second, we do not consider the stock of immigrants as an index of globalisation because there have long been societies constituted primarily of immigrants, most of whom would eventually be granted citizenship and considered a legitimate part of this society. In other words, we don't consider migration itself as a process of globalisation, but the increase of migration flow is. In contrast, the stock of FDI may have its significant meaning in the discussion of globalisation, but that should be left for other researches to explore. <heading>Dependent Variable</heading><list>ER, employment rate. ERa, employment rate of age group a</list>Source: Data for the period 1959 to 1991 from the estimates produced by the Department for Education and Employment. Data from 1992 onward from Labour Force Survey (LFS). In the labour market outcome, we chose national employment rate of labour force, out of claimant counts, unemployment rate and job centre vacancies, as our key indicator. Claimant counts is dismissed for its potential vulnerability to other factors such as welfare policy change. Unemployment rate is considered a better indicator, but lacks the capability to reflect the existence of discouraged workers and therefore abandoned. The aggregate number of job center vacancies seems to be an informative indicator of the job-supply, but it was later dismissed too for its potentially biased representativeness and restricted availability in terms of time period. In order to obtain a more detailed understanding of how the change in these independent variables associated the change of labour market structure in terms of age, we also plan to perform similar analyses to the different age groups, in which the dependent variable will be the employment rate of each respective group. <heading>Control Variable</heading>GR, GDP growth rate <list>NT, net trade balance (export minus import) as % of gross tradeNF, net FDI (inward minus outward) as % of gross FDI</list>Source: UK National Account 1946-, ONS. NM, net migration (immigration minus emigration) as % of gross migration flow Source: IPS, 1964-, ONS. Two control variables are considered in our model: annual GDP growth rate and the net flow of each factor as a share of gross flow. The GDP growth rate, as a crucial indicator of the economic performance, may account for a certain degree of the change in employment rate and hence should be included in the regression model. The net flow of the three factors, though excluded from our conceptualisation, may still play important role in determining the condition of the domestic labour market. The inclusion of these variables can further help us differentiate the influences of net flow from gross flow, which are often confused in public discussions. By dividing the net flow with the gross flow, we can obtain an indicator (net flow relative to gross flow) mathematically independent from the indicator we adapt as independent variable (gross flow relative to GDP or population). <heading>Hypothesis</heading>The null hypothesis to be tested is stated as follow: "The annual changes of either international gross trade relative to GDP, gross FDI flow relative to GDP, and gross migration flow relative to population, do not provide any information in help us predict the change in employment rate of labour force or of any age group, while the possible effects of GDP growth rate, net trade relative to gross trade, net FDI relative to gross FDI and net migration relative to gross migration being controlled." <heading>Study Design & Data Analysis</heading>This study is conducted by applying multiple-regression on existing archival data. So the availability of the relevant data became the greatest concern. Ideally, we would like to build a comprehensive regression model to test the effects of all the independent variables and control variables at one time. However, the feasibility of this approach is totally ruled out by the more restricted time-period of available population data (1964-) compared with data on trade and FDI (1946-) and employment (1959-). Therefore we plan to build two models: one using data since 1959 to examine the effect of trade and FDI (called "T model"), the other using data since 1971 to test the contribution of migration flow (called "M model"). The regression equations for the two models are listed as follow, where ∆X y means the annual change of variable X from the year y-1 to year y, cT X means the regression coefficient in T model for variable X, and eM ay means the error term in Model for age group a in year y. <list><heading>T Model: 1959-</heading> FORMULA  FORMULA </list><list><heading>M Model: 1964- </heading> FORMULA  FORMULA </list>Once the data analysis is completed, we will test the F value for each regression equation to determine whether the null hypothesis is rejected. We will further perform t-test on the regression coefficient of each variable to see whether its annual change is significantly associated with the change of employment rate. Attention must be drawn to the strategy that we use the annual change rather than value regarding most variables (except GDP growth rate, which itself is an indicator for change) in the regression model. By focusing on the association between the annual changes of variables, we intended to reduce the chance of having results contaminated by certain confounding long-term social-economical trends. However, this strategy implies the risk of failing to capture the influences of the independent variables that were not reflected by the employment statistics of the same year. In fact, the undetermined time-span for globalisation processes to create labour market impacts posed a major challenge to the study of this issue. In this study, we plan to address this risk by performing regression procedure between the annual changes in independent variables with the changes of employment statistic during different time intervals. For instance, the change of the independent variables between year y-1 and y (∆TR y, ∆FI y...) may be correlated with the change of the employment rate during the time interval [y-1, y], [y, y+1], [y-1, y+1] and [y-1, y+2]. By comparing the F value calculated form each regression model, we would be able to determine what time interval during which the employment rate change can be best predicted by the independent variable we have. This result may shed some initial light into the under-investigated time-span issue regarding the impact of globalisation on labour market. As stated previously, the greatest threat for this analysis comes from its relatively small size of sample, which is restricted by both the availability of relevant data and the length of relevant history and is considered marginal for performing multiple regressions. Given all the constraints, however, it provides a feasible path to empirically assess whether globalisation cost job in an aggregate level. We may not be able to claim that globalisation does not cost any job if the statistical testing turned out to be insignificant, but at least, we will be able to tell whether such effects, if they exist anyway, are strong enough to be reflected in the aggregate level or not. <heading>II. Industry Analysis</heading>Analysis Unit: Some industry sections as defined by Standard Industry Classification (1992) Time Span: 1990- <heading>Independent Variable:</heading>TRi, gross trade of industry i as % of domestic production of industry I Source: trade data from time-series Trade by Industry - MQ10, 1990-, domestic production data from Detailed Index of Production Dataset C1, 1978-, ONS <heading>Dependent Variable</heading>EGRiy, employee number growth rate of industry i in the year y Source: employment data from time-series Employment & Earnings- EG7, 1978-, ONS <heading>Control Variable</heading>NTi, net trade as % of gross trade in industry i IRiy, domestic industry production growth rate of industry i at year y Source: as independent variable. <heading>Hypothesis</heading>The null hypothesis is as follow: "The changes of industry-specific gross trade relative to domestic production do not provide any information in helping us predict the change in the number of job employed in the respective industry, while the possible effect of net trade relative to gross trade and industry-specific production growth rate being controlled." <heading>Regression Equation:</heading> FORMULA  Industry analysis applies the identical logic underlying national analysis to the industry- specific data on trade and employment. One major difference is that, in the industry-related employment statistics, there exist no corresponding measures of the employment rate in national statistics, so we use employment growth rate as substitute indicator. The availability of applicable data is largely limited by the absence of comparable industry classification schemes in early trade and employment data. Hence we are forced to restrict our analysis to the time when SIC became widely used in coding. Also, this analysis can only reflect the employment dynamics of the portion of workforce that is associated to good trading (e.g., agriculture, manufacturing, etc), which is actually shrinking in terms of its share in total workforce. Nevertheless, we can still get useful information regarding how the change of employment in certain industries might be associated with the change of the trade share in their domestic production. Such information is crucial in responding to some popular challenges in globalisation debates. <heading>Schedule</heading>This study is estimated to be finished in three months. Here is an outline of schedule. 2 nd Week, data collection 4 th Week, data analysis 9 th Week, first draft of report 12 th Week, final draft of report <heading>Conclusion</heading>In summary, two analyses concerning the application of multiple regressions on existing archival data are developed in this study to address whether globalisation cost job in Britain. National analysis investigates how the change in gross flows of trade, FDI and migration, as shares of GDP and population respectively, are associated with the changes of the national employment rate of British workforce and those of different age groups. Industry analysis, based on the comparable industry-specific data on trade and employment since 1990s, explore the association between the changes of the two factors. Both analyses are to certain degree restricted in terms of data availability and the applicability of findings. Nonetheless, both can still provide valuable information in responding to current debate. 