Cirilo Villaverde (1812-94) was a Cuban writer and political activist, ardently anti-colonial and abolitionist, who experienced imprisonment and lengthy exile for his activism. His best-known novel Cecilia Valdés is a foundational fiction of the Cuban nation, not only because it was one of the earliest Cuban novels written, but also because of his unique central figure, Cecilia Valdés. He originally introduced her in 1839 in a twenty-five page tale that primarily attacked sexual licentiousness. But by his final draft in 1882, Villaverde meant for Cecilia to be interpreted as the embodiment of the national tragedy that was colonial, slave-holding Cuba in the 1830s. It is no coincidence that his protagonist shares his birth date of 1812 as well as initials. Born at the dawn of a brief constitutional period and the same year as the most serious slave uprising, Villaverde struggled throughout his life for a new Cuba. In her way, so did Cecilia. Villaverde's 'tragic mulatta' is far more complex than the conventional archetype of the fallen multiracial woman, who becomes depressed, mentally ill, or even suicidal, for engaging in interracial liaisons. Villaverde's narrative of Cecilia's life is his sophisticated illustration of the cause of his nation's ills, and deserves further inquiry. How far Cecilia is a 'tragic' figure with respect to her family life, her racial origin, her class position, her gender, and her sexual licentiousness will be examined (which were all, of course, intrinsically linked). Then it will be concluded as to whether Cirilo Villaverde intended for Cecilia Valdés to be utterly tragic, and the extent to which her racial and cultural identity represents 'Cuba' will be judged in addition. As the novel begins with Cecilia's birth, we shall consider her family situation as the first element of her 'tragic' existence. She was conceived by forbidden interracial love rather than cruel exploitation, but Don Cándido did not feel dishonour enough to leave his family after she fell pregnant. He was supportive at the birth, and exerted himself to ensure that his baby daughter would be baptised with the name Valdés, so that she could have the best possible social position under the circumstances of her being illegitimate, of mixed race, and quickly without a mother either. But her name would have been Alarcon in any event, which was not ostensibly the name of a mulatto or slave, so she need not have been separated from her mother at all. Cecilia's fate was controlled to a great extent by Don Cándido, then, from the outset. Don Cándido was bent on saving Cecilia, 'from death first when she was an infant, and later from poverty, obscurity, and degradation when she was a youngster,' but this only really meant that he provided money and lectures to her grandmother about Cecilia's behaviour. He was not able to protect his daughter from his son because of his own pride. With no father or mother, Cecilia lacked a meaningful disciplinarian or responsible nurturer. Her grandmother certainly was a positive role model and a moral voice, but her entreaties were largely empty threats, and she influenced Cecilia less and less as she grew older and past being afraid of stories, embracing isolation and religion instead of continuing to guide Cecilia. This somewhat 'careless upbringing' left the 'tragic mulatta' with a 'vagabond nature'. She seems doomed from the beginning, through no direct fault of her own. In the end, it is the Cuban establishment that saves Cecilia when the magistrate attempted to deter Don Cándido from his plan to abduct her, advising that it was his responsibility to control his son. The legal system confined her to a mental institution where she was actually reunited with her mother, rather than subjected her to a more deadly punishment. Villaverde's portrait of Cuba as a wholly rotten society is not quite complete, then. <fnote>The surname Valdés was often given to abandoned children and orphans when they were baptised, in honour of Bishop Gerónimo Valdés, who founded an orphanage at the beginning of the eighteenth century. The name was sufficiently 'white' to offer advantages to orphans of 'white' appearance. However, as the practice became more well known, it was of course more likely that an individual named Valdés would be presumed to have obscure origins. </fnote><fnote>Cirilo Villaverde, Cecilia Valdés or El Angel Hill (Oxford, 2005), 252. </fnote><fnote>Villaverde, Cecilia Valdés, 41. </fnote><fnote>Villaverde, Cecilia Valdés, 242. </fnote>The incest, a traumatic theme found in most Cuban abolitionist literature, is central to Cecilia's relationships throughout the novel. Incest represents ultimate moral debasement of a society, but in this case it is not of the most abhorrent sort - that between parent and child - but between the more distant half brother and sister. The incest actually has a slightly positive element, if one follows Freud explanation of incest being a desire for sameness. The attraction of Cecilia and Leonardo is a natural expression of the equality of the races, and so is foundational to the Cuban nation. Far from feeling revulsion at the incest, Villaverde directs the reader to feel sympathy for the deceived lovers, and hostility to the immoral society they are absorbed in. The reader is stirred to feel outrage at the treatment of slaves instead. Even her involvement in incest, then, does not render Cecilia a wholly tragic figure. <fnote>Sibylle Fischer, 'Introduction', Cecilia Valdés , xxii-xxiii. </fnote>So Cecilia's origins are very damaging to her life chances, but her race is the deciding factor in her fate. Her appearance and legal status as a mulatta dictates her economic and social condition. For a slightly ruddy complexion and a few traces of kinkiness in her hair Cecilia is condemned to live subordinately to white Cubans - politically powerless, socially looked down upon, and economically worse off. Moreover, José Buscalia-Saldgado argues that white Cubans saw free mulattos as a vital buffer between themselves and their slaves. These mulattos strongly identified with the master class, and looked on racial 'inferiors' with contempt. Cecilia's appearance is notably very 'white', so she does receive some privileges usually reserved for the higher racial stratum. For example she is treated with more respect by men - the slave Aponte always addresses Cecilia as 'mistress', a title only afforded to white Cubans. But perhaps her relative whiteness renders Cecilia all the more tragic, because she is so close to achieving the highest social status, but will never quite reach it. On the other hand, Villaverde could have presented a more tragic figure than her if his protagonist had black skin, and therefore no social privileges at all instead.  <fnote>José F. Buscaglia-Salgado, Undoing Empire: Race and Nation in the Mulatto Caribbean (Minneapolis, 2002), 203. </fnote><fnote>Villaverde, Cecilia Valdés, 50. </fnote><fnote>Richard L. Jackson harshly criticises Villaverde for being excessively preoccupied with race, neurotically describing every single character by their racial appearance as soon as they enter the narrative. He also lambasts Villaverde for concerning himself with mulatto culture, and so perpetuating the view that 'blackness' is undesirable. </fnote>Cecilia's fixation on 'whitening' herself and her future children could also strike the reader as tragic. The vast majority of mulattos, although probably fewer during the periodo negro, were obsessed with the notion of mestizaje, which has been variously translated, including as the practice of interracial procreation that leads to 'whitening'. Of course mestizaje required a mulatta to procreate with a white(r) man, in order to transcend their place in the racial hierarchy by association with a whiter partner, and consolidating their 'improvement' by producing children whiter than herself. Cecilia's grandmother quotes the infamous maxim, "one should rather the mistress of a white man than the wife of a black one." This inclination to secure a white man exposed mulattas (and black women) to manipulation and violation. However, Leonardo was involved with Cecilia because he was passionately in love with her. Impossible love is tragic, but at least it involves genuine feeling. Martínez Alier persuasively argues that most white men married mulatto or black women not for love or honour, but for practical (exploitative) reasons - for a bed companion, a nurse, or a cook for example. She spurns a suitor more suited to her long-term happiness in favour of socially conditioned ideal partner, only to lose both. The greater tragedy for the author than Cecilia's ill-fated attempt to 'whiten' herself, however, is that she did not choose the counter-ideology of self-worth. In the white imagination, a mulatto making the last "step" to whiteness was not only improving his or her own race, but also produced tangible proof that the original sin of the white man or woman was redeemed. Cecilia's quest for whiteness could be painful for the reader because she wishes to change to progress in society for selfish reasons, rather than challenge an unjust system. <fnote>A brief period of cultural flourishing among the educated mulatto class in Cuba during the 1830s and 1840s until the colonial government's reaction to the Escalera Conspiracy, which largely destroyed this vibrant class by 1844. </fnote><fnote>'In view of the generalized aspiration of "whitening", a coloured woman was certainly easily persuaded to yield to a white man's advances.' Verena Martínez Alier, Marriage, Class and Colour in Nineteenth-Century Cuba (Ann Arbor, 1974), 66. </fnote><fnote>Buscalia-Saldgado, Undoing Empire, 193. </fnote>Finally, gender implications that render Cecilia 'tragic' mainly concern how her beauty, and wanton behaviour are her downfall. The district commissioner describes Cecilia as being 'the girl who drives men crazy'. She is the Little Bronze Virgin who is 'queen of the ball'. But she develops aspirations too high, and attracts a man who will bring about her ruin. The reader is assured that Cecilia has no power over Leonardo when their future is concerned. She is unsuccessful at convincing him to stay for Christmas, and certainly cannot convince him to marry her or keep him interested once she delivers his illegitimate child. She is not promiscuous to the extent of conventional racial stereotypes, but her skin colour and behaviour still expose Cecilia to public disapprobation. Her virtue is redeemed somewhat because Pimienta, the real hero, continues to love her after she has Leonardo's child. <fnote>Villaverde, Cecilia Valdés, 34. </fnote><fnote>Villaverde, Cecilia Valdés, 40. </fnote><fnote>Villaverde, Cecilia Valdés, 260-261. </fnote>In conclusion, there continues to be a discourse of debate over whether Villaverde achieved his goal of producing a realist novel. In gushing praise, Roberta Day Corbitt credits Villaverde with creating a photographic, rather than artistic, picture of every social class in Cuba. Verena Martínez Alier agrees that Villaverde gives 'an excellent description of the predicament of the coloured woman." But Cecilia Valdés is more important to the development of Cuban history than simply being a faithful portrait of life in the 1830s. As celebrated intellectual José Martí argued in the 1890s, so-called miscegenation was the primary signifier of Cuba's national cultural identity. This is, of course, deeply ironic because there was no place for the mulatto in Cirilo Villaverde's society. Interracial encounters were so central to Cuban nationalism because it would only be possible to create a national identity by racial integration. Cecilia is not the conventional heroine more than she is not a wholly tragic figure. The most tragic element of Cecilia's life was that she lost the man she loved, but to the reader, her misguided attempt and failure to escape her position in Cuban society is more acute. If Villaverde had portrayed her as utterly desperate, he would effectively have been condemning his country to a state of abyss with no prospect of future improvement. Villaverde was a freedom fighter, an idealist, and so it is inconceivable that he would have presented such a bleak case for Cuba. Searching for other 'tragic mulatto' characters in the novel reveals that every figure has tragedy in their life. Cuban society in its entirety was experiencing tragedy as the result of Spanish colonial rule over national independence, and slavery over freedom. Doris Somner suggests, in fact, that the hero is Isabel. In the end, when her new husband is dead, it is Isabel who withdraws from the rotten society and becomes a nun. But her apathy is not conducive to progress, while Cecilia, with her illegitimate but whiter daughter, re-enters society after her confinement without the oppression of her white lover, and a more stable family - able to live and prosper in what will become the new Cuba. <fnote>Roberta Day Corbitt, 'A Survey of Cuban Costumbrismo', Hispania, 33 (Feb., 1950), 42. </fnote><fnote>Martínez Alier, Marriage, Class and Colour, 115. </fnote><fnote>José Martí, cited in Vera Kutzinski, Sugar's Secrets and the Erotics of Cuban Nationalism (Charlottesville, 1993), 6. </fnote><fnote>Doris Somner, cited in Eve Allegra Raimon, The "Tragic Mulatta" Revisited: Race and Nationalism in Nineteenth-Century Antislavery Fiction (New Brunswick, 2004), 8. </fnote>