<heading>Setting the scene</heading>Lifelong learning has established itself as a key component of today's life. Government policies and targeted funding programmes, as well as employers' calls for an increasingly skilled, knowledgeable and mobile workforce, have promoted lifelong learning to a must status rather than an optional one (Edwards 1997). Benefits of lifelong learning are expounded by governments, policy-makers and adult educators alike (Merrill 2000) and there has been disagreement amongst many regarding the extensive initiatives to promote lifelong learning and "widen participation" and the prominent reasons for this ie for economic or social benefits. Economic theorists argue for the need to move with changing times in order to remain competitive in the market place eg by accessing employment or career progression (Fryer 1997). Social benefits can be varied and difficult to measure, but much support is shown for using lifelong learning to improve the individual's well being eg in improved self-confidence (Merrill 2000), creating more tolerance of today's multi-cultural society in which we live (Feinstein 2002), or becoming an active citizen (Fryer 1997, Martin 2003). It can also be questioned whether economic and social benefits overlap as in the current commercialised society the only 'winners' are those who are part of it (Ranson 1998, Martin 2003). Those who remain excluded from learning lose in terms of employment and career opportunities or good health and subsequently fail to contribute to the success of the nation. However, there may be other benefits that are not currently recognised by the policy makers, such as improved health generally - a major base from which all other things emanate (Feinstein et al 2003, Schuller et al 2002). This essay considers Edwards' quote in context. It investigates both economic and social arguments and looks behind each argument to provide an understanding of the complexity of the question. Past and recent policies in the UK and Europe are reviewed and the impacts of these considered in line with the question. The essay also goes beyond the scope of the question to consider other benefits ignored by government policy, but which are being show by recent research to be of vital value to the promotion of lifelong learning. <heading>Lifelong learning as the key</heading>Although lifelong learning has been the focus of much recent and current government policy and committee reports, the concept is not a new one. As far back as the 1970s (Faure et al 1972 in Hodgson 2000), following the economic crisis, the topic was a common matter for discussion (Edwards 1997) and since then lifelong learning has been looked at from a multitude of angles. Lifelong learning has been the focus not only of government papers commissioned by both the Conservative and Labour parties - "Framework for a Learning Society (1996) and "The Learning Age" (1998) respectively, but also EU publications - "Towards the Learning Society" (1995). The definition and benefits of lifelong learning vary greatly depending on the perspective of the author. Kennedy (1997) views lifelong learning and work as inseparable. Chadwick in 1993 (:21 in Edwards 1997) considers learning a "cradle to grave" process and Wain (1991 in Edwards 1997) went further by saying that individuals have a moral duty to learn. Whilst Coffield (1999) questions whether the process of lifelong learning is really social control in disguise. The Centre for Research in the Wider Benefits of Learning (CRWBL) and the DfES report wider social benefits identified with crime, health, ageing, parenting and social cohesion (Feinstein 2002). However, there is consistent agreement amongst all parties on the point that lifelong learning is essential and benefits both the economy Kennedy (1997) and Fryer (1997) and the individual (Field 2000 and Hammond 2002). Looking at Europe, in Sweden Abrahamsson refers to a "move from recurrent" education to recurrent learning (1993:67 in Edwards 1997) showing that the need for learning for life is recognised outside the UK. The traditional 'front end' model of education, emanating from the 1970s, with its assumption that the only education required for life was that undertaken at school, is no longer relevant to today's world in which needs change so quickly. Both Kennedy (1997) and Fryer (1997) declare that further education (FE) must take a prominent position in peoples' lives to assist in the process of lifelong learning. Both "Learning Works" and "Learning in the 21 st Century" detail how government funding and the removal of FE from local authority control will open up the service offered by FE institutions. Thereby providing ever-increasing ranges of learning programmes, in a variety of formats and at an extensive range of levels to meet the needs of all categories of learner, the employers and the market place. This will widen participation in learning and provide benefits to the economy by training people in the skills needed for current and future jobs, as well as improve social cohesion by providing people with enhanced personal skills. There are however, criticisms that the picture is not as bright as has been painted above. Without central control there is no commonality of provision between FEs, institutions who offer a variety of learning programmes, differing from institution to institution. Ainley and Bailey (1997) and Green and Lucas(1999) argue that institutions will offer programmes that attract the most funding. This impacts the social aspect of learning, providing a fragmented provision neglecting potential courses that may improve social aspects (Coare and Johnston 2003). Programmes offered are often those with an emphasis on work related learning rather than for self development, political or community awareness (Hodgson 2000). Programmes which address areas where there are skills shortages such as teaching or early years education will be offered in preference to those which could provide a gateway to learning, such as leisure or fitness activities. Hyland and Merrill (2001) purport that in order for the intention of widening participation to become a reality by an improved and expanded FE provision, input is required from a variety of diverse areas. In order for the 'less powerful voices' (Merrill 2002 :48 in Hyland and Merrill 2002) to be heard FEI members must be drawn from the local community and students, as well as professional bodies. They are optimistic that with the introduction of the government's "Excellence Challenge" initiative, students from poorer backgrounds will be provided with easier access to FE. In contrast with the UK, Europe does not have such a delineation of provision, but link vocational, academic and personal development programmes much more easily. In this way there is more emphasis on including those outside the learning arena, rather than those already in it (Kennedy 1997). Criticism is also raised about whether the widening of participation in learning and the increase in the number of qualified people has the effect of widening the gap between the qualified and the un-qualified (Field 2000). Does this also lead to the devaluation of qualifications in that so many more people are competing for the same jobs and the selection then becomes between subject of qualification or institutional standing? There is also some disagreement about the emphasis of benefits of lifelong learning ie should economic benefits be considered the priority (Kennedy 1997), or are the social benefits of greater advantage (Field 2000, Merrill 2000). Both arguments are reviewed below. <heading>Economic benefits - maintaining competitiveness</heading>According to Baldock (1999) the key concern of economics is efficiency and the measure is how well a nation organises its people and resources to the most efficient state. It is necessary to find the balance between production (labour and resources), product mix (correct combination and amount) and consumption (what is desired) to ensure a stable economy. However, this is a complex process as it is often difficult to raise the standard for one social group without reducing it for another eg raising taxation on high earners to provide benefits to the unemployed. Further, Coyle (2000) refers to a new type of economy, following 1998 markets crash which highlighted the unpredictability of the economy and increased the focus of the need for flexibility of skills and knowledge. She refers to this economy as 'weightless' in that "- what people want and are willing to pay for - is increasingly intangible or literally weightless" (:141). The world is an ever-changing place and in more recent times the pace of change has increased dramatically and with that brings a change in demands. Modern technology and the development of the microchip have resulted in an electronic revolution far beyond original expectations. Just a small example is of a greetings card containing a musical microchip that has as much computer power as existed at all in 1945 (Coyle 2000). This increase in modern technology has resulted in faster methods of processing data and speedier and wider communication networks. Restrictions of time and space have been lifted and the world has become a smaller place, even difficulties of communicating over differing time zones can be overcome by the use of e-mail and video conferencing. Easy money transfer, international trade and the growth in multi-national countries breaks down barriers. Globalization, widening national boundaries across the world, is seen by Giddens (2001) as being responsible for reducing the effectiveness of traditional economic and social policies upon employment and income distribution. Therefore, new approaches are required to maintain economic stability. Technological advances have been so far reaching that they have actually changed the make up of markets. Whereas traditional industries required manual labour and physical strength such as mining and ship building, modern technology brings with it a reduced need for these and instead requires new skills and knowledge. The OECD (1998) identifies problem solving, motivation, teamwork and openness to new ideas as key skills to meet the demands of future employment. The DfEE (2000) report an increase in computer use at work from 25% of workers in 1992 to 60% in 1999. Whilst manufacturing markets are reducing service industries are increasing (Edwards 1997, Field 2000). The demand for knowledge has replaced the need for muscle or mechanical power. Not only has this impacted the picture of the market place, but it also brings with it a requirement for different skills, such as computer programmers and customer service personnel (DfEE 2000). Robinson (2000) argues that globalization is not responsible for accelerated unemployment, but rather changes in the pattern of the job market. However, the resultant change in skill demands will necessitate the acquisition of different qualifications ie service and caring skills instead of manufacturing expertise, jobs that can be carried out in the third world at lower cost. Multinationals, recognising the increasing need to remain competitive in the market place, relocate to cheaper production areas which, aided by unrestricted communications, can be sited anywhere in the world eg call centres to India. This results in fluctuating employment opportunities as large employers set up or close down their businesses to maximise the profit potentials of cheaper or more highly skilled labour markets (Coyle 2000). This dramatically, changes the face of employment patterns by providing a multitude of new opportunity one minute and reducing an area to zero employment the next. In view of this it is not surprising that, in contrast with as little as 25 years ago, the ethos of a job for life has disappeared (Edwards 1997). Employees are required not only to be more flexible and constantly up-skilling, but must also be prepared to move to wherever the employment is located. Flexibility and mobility of employees are becoming key aspects to meeting the demands of increasingly competitive employers and changing markets patterns (Field 2000). Therefore, by using lifelong learning to provide new skills and upgrade existing careers, one group's social well being can be elevated without any detriment to another's and the benefits of a stable economy experienced by all; but is it this simple? <heading>Social Inclusion - creating a cohesive society</heading>As with lifelong learning, no one definition can be found for social inclusion, likewise there is little agreement about what factors create social exclusion or who constitute excluded groups (Minter 2001, McGivney 1993). Robinson considers it a state where "everyone can participate fully in society and no-one is blocked from doing so by lack of political and civil rights, by lack of employment or income, by ill-health or lack of education" (2000 :154). Lister (2000) argues that some camps only consider participating in the world of work as being included (not recognising unpaid work such as caring or bringing up children); she concludes that "exclusion has to be tackled at both the material and the symbolic levels and across a range of dimension" (:51). Therefore, being in paid employment, cannot be the only just solution to remedying exclusion. Others take a broader view and include the contribution people make to society, by active citizenship as an essential component of social inclusion (Field 2000). Cousins (1998 in Askonas and Stewart 2000) considers the term, which has been favourable with the EU since 1989, to be a replacement for poverty. Giddens (2001) identifies three categories of exclusion - economic, political and social. Economic exclusion resulting from those excluded from the workplace by means of permanent employment, it is difficult for people to re-enter the labour market once they are excluded from it. Also, in terms of consumption, people can be excluded "in regard to what people purchase, consume or use in their daily lives" (:323) for example not having a telephone excludes people from their family, friends, or the community as a whole. Homelessness can be seen to be one of the most acute forms of exclusion as there is little chance to participate in society on equal terms. People excluded on political grounds, ie do not contribute to rallies, lobbying or attending political meetings, do not have their voices and needs heard and therefore do not contribute to the overall social make up. People can be socially excluded as they do not have equal access to community facilities or leisure amenities, reducing contact with others. Giddens also includes another angle to the issue of social exclusion. Whilst he recognises that it can sometimes be as a result of circumstances outside a person's control, for example banks might refuse to issue a credit card to someone living in certain postal code areas, but there can also be some degree to which individuals create their own exclusion. People have the right to abstain from voting or participating politically, they can chose not undertake learning, or become economically inactive by not working or turning down employment. It is therefore clear that there is a plethora of situations and areas that result in people being excluded. This will make it difficult to identify remedies for social exclusion so that all are included in lifelong learning or society as a whole. Participation in lifelong learning is seen as an important vehicle to improve social inclusion, in that learning leads the way to improved employment opportunity, encourages membership of associations and contributes to wider social aspects such as social cohesion in local communities. (Johnston 2003, McGivney 1993). It could also be a way out of poverty for those trapped there and much emphasis is given by the Government to providing equality of opportunity to learning by targeting lower socio-economic groups, unemployed, women and ethnic minorities (Hodgson 2000). More recent government policies are clearly aimed at not only improving economic advantage, but also reducing social exclusion. Lifelong learning is seen as the key to increasing social inclusion and providing far reaching benefits to individuals and the country as a whole (DfEE 2003). In "The Future of Higher Education" (DfEE 2003) numbers of students from lower social classes will be monitored, the Access system for mature students will be reviewed, SENDA will be introduced to counteract discrimination of disabled students and measuring of admission in respect of ethnicity will commence in 2004. With this improved equality of opportunity of access to learning, more focus will be placed on including those who may previously have been disadvantaged. There is much support for the claim that people who participate in learning become more involved in community activities thereby improving benefits to the society. Preston and Hammond (2002) believe that learning creates social networks and bridges differences, especially between ethnic groups, leading to increased tolerance and active citizenship. Merrill et al (2000) provide evidence of how learning has changed peoples lives, either in terms of improved feelings of self esteem or to changing careers, irrelevant of the time of life the learning is undertaken. Research from a variety of sources (NIACE 2002, NALS 2001 and ELLFS 2001 in NIACE 2003) all report an increase in the number of people participating in learning over the past 10 years, however it is difficult to see a corroborative picture as each of the bodies has included varying assessment criteria. Although this increase might be clear, what is also noticeable is that the number of people not participating in learning is still high - 42% have participated in a learning activity in the last 3 years whilst 36% have not participated in any form of learning since leaving school (NIACE 2003). What is of particular interest is the difference in participation between socio-economic classes - just over 900 for AB and in excess of 1,500 for DE and this is despite all the initiatives to include members of lower social classes in some form of learning (NIACE 2003). Despite all the emphasis on lifelong learning it is recognised that the divide between those who participate (considered to be those who are "knowledge-rich"(Field 2000:112)) and those who do not (the "knowledge-poor" "(Field 2000:112)) is growing (NIACE 2002). Lifelong learning seems to be more attractive to those who already possess qualifications (Kennedy 1998) rather than those with "least initial education" (McGiveny 1993 :15). If we look at knowledge in terms of currency - does this affect those included/excluded in society as well as in the learning arena? (Coyle 2000, Field 2000, Giddens 2001, Stewart 2000) There are many and varied forms of social exclusion and ways of promoting social inclusion are prolific and government policies provide the foundation for change. <heading>Government policies promoting lifelong learning</heading>There has been a plethora of government policies relating to education, skills and the competitiveness of the country and as the focus on these areas has increased so has the number of policies. Policies addressing different aspects or looking at the situation from a different angle have emerged. The 1997 Dearing Report highlighted that the UK lags behind Europe in terms of educational competence and the Kennedy report considered learning and work inseparable. Lifelong learning was officially decreed as essential in the 1998 green paper "The Learning Age" and the 1999 "Learning to Succeed" (Field 2000) policy provided a new framework for post 16 learning. Coming into the 21 century the National Skills Taskforce Report again revisited comparisons with the EU and the 2001 "Skills for Life" (Field 2000) policy placed the emphasis on improving basic skills, literacy and numeracy. What does all this mean? The government has recognised areas that they believe affect the competitiveness of the country, not only in poor educational standards and lack of essential or new skills, but also the diverse make up of the British people and the reduction in social cohesion. The policies introduced target these issues in a variety of ways. For example setting targets to raise qualification levels, such as "that three out of every five adultd workforce should be qualified to at least NVQ level 3" by 2002 (Kennedy 1998 :165 in Ranson 1998). In contrast, the Learning and Skills Council (LSC) are only just planning to provide funding for training that does not lead to accreditation during 2003/04, ie courses such as fitness and handicraft courses which could provide physical or psychological health improvements (LSC 2003). "Learning to Succeed" introduced the LSC and the University for Industry (UfI) - both bodies aimed at restructuring post 16 education provision. Early Conservative policies put more emphasis on the economic benefits which would result from increasing participation in learning ("The Learning Age" (in Hyland 1999) - increase number of those in post school education by 500,000 by 2002 to 700,000 overall). More recent and Labour policies tended to extend the remit of the policies, to not only improve economic competitiveness, but also to promote social inclusion eg increasing 'active citizenship' and social cohesion (Ranson 1998, Hodgson 2000). This cannot be achieved by government policies alone, but needs the involvement of employers, trade unions, professional associations and of course the individual. The individual is seen to be emerging as the key motivator to participating in lifelong learning and many policies include aspect directed at 'encouraging' people to take responsibility for their own learning. For example, the now removed system of Individual Learning Accounts (ILA) where individuals could apply for funding of training they chose to do. Or provision of free courses in IT via the LearnDirect service, introduced under the UfI umbrella, offer self directed learning. There is also an extensive advertising programme offering free access to Basic Skills courses in literacy and numeracy, mostly suggesting that parents would be better placed to help their children with their school work if they possessed improved skills. The DfEEs white paper published in 2003 provides a framework for expanding higher education provision. It includes many positive changes such as more flexibility of provision, recognition of prior learning, eg informal or qualifications other than A levels, both of which will make it easier for mature students to take up HE study. There will also be provision of a wider range of qualifications, not just academic provision, and closer links between HE and FE, which will encourage both parties to offer programmes outside academic realms. A key point for those who wish to pursue HE whilst in employment is an encouragement for employers to contribute towards learning - whether in terms of time or financial contribution, which could lessen the difficulty of juggling both commitments. More funding is promised to learners from disadvantaged areas although the route to acquiring this funding is somewhat complex. In contrast the paper also contains some elements of bad practice which are likely to reduce access. If employer support will be encouraged, will the support only be given to training decided by the employers (vocational or relevant to business sector), not necessarily what the learner (employee) might want? (Green 2003) The key focus for government argument still remains with vocational qualifications, which narrows the choice of learning available. The rigorous and transparent measuring outlined in the paper may well serve the purpose of being able to assess progress towards targets, but will this not involve a large amount of manpower to collect and is this of any real benefit to the aims? If part of the intention is to consider social benefits, the expansion of e-learning provision will certainly not address this, as much social benefit can be gained from attending site and spending time with fellow learners (Giddens 2001). The most controversial issue, which is currently attracting much debate in both Parliament, the education sector and students as a whole, is the issue of universities being able to set their own fees from 2006 (up to a maximum of £3,000 per year). It is difficult to see how this will in any way provide benefits to learners, but especially those unable or struggling to meet current fee levels. European policies contain much the same initiatives as UK policies, although there are very different provisions across the countries. For example, more stringent university entry requirements in Spain and Germany compared to the UK, exclusion of older learners to elite universities in Belgium (Merrill 2000) or paid education leave (PEL) (McGivney 1993). The Communication from the Commission (Brussels 2001) places emphasis on the mobility of the workforce across the European Union, its definition of learning includes "all phases and forms of learning from pre-school to post-retirement" (:9), which is truly lifelong learning in its widest sense. With an estimated 8% of EU 26-64 year olds participating in education and training, they agree that this vision seems a long way off (CEC Brussels 2001 :7). The Communication identifies that people are key to a successful economic future. It promotes the idea of knowledge and skill acquisition as a way of extending active participation in society. Like the UK (DfEE 2002) it highlights a need for an improvement on basic skills levels and providing equality of opportunity and access to learning, as well as addressing labour shortages and competence gaps (Field 2000). Availability of funding from the European Social Fund (ESF) will support lifelong learning programmes across the EU, mainly through the Socrates programme (Merrill 2000). However, Field questions whether lifelong learning in Europe has "become a convenient political shorthand for the modernising of education and training systems" (Field 2000:4). With the resultant curriculum changes that followed the intervention of the UK government in the education system (Shilling 1989), maybe this is so. Although Coffield (1999 in Minter 2001) argues the essential need for educational policy and industrial strategy be integrated. <heading>Moving beyond the main arguments to a healthier future</heading>Whilst the debate continues about whether the aim of lifelong learning is primarily for economic or social benefits, there is a third consideration raised in recent research which takes us beyond this debate and the scope of the question itself. Research from the Centre for Research on the Wider Benefits of Learning is producing interesting, although sometimes conflicting, findings about the benefits of learning which are more specifically benefits to the individual, but which may subsequently impact the wider world in a positive way. Feinstein et al (2003) report considerable improvements in the reduction of smoking and alcohol consumption amongst people who participate in learning. The benefits vary according to the type of learning undertaking with increased benefits becoming evident with the increased number of courses undertaken. Other improvements reported are an increase in exercise undertaken, improved racial tolerance and a more likelihood of membership association (Feinstein 2002). Findings also show particular benefits to those with below Level 2 qualifications that participate in leisure courses, such as increased civic participation. (Feinstein et al 2003, Schuller et al 2002). Feinstein et al (2003) and Shuller et al (2002) disagree that participation in leisure courses reduces the potential or improves the mental health of those suffering from depression. However both agree that participation in learning can substantially improve health and prevent ill-health. Wider benefits of improving confidence and self esteem are also agreed to be important reasons to commence and continue to learn. It is interesting to note then that government policies do not recognise that providing funding to leisure courses can play an important part in providing substantial health improvements; as well as a vital step into learning which is likely to result in learners pursuing other opportunities insides the learning arena . This is supported by the LSCs current policy of non recognition and non provision of funding to courses which do not result in an accreditation or achievement of measurable learning aim (LSC 2003). Research undertaken by Wilkinson (Giddens 2001, Hammond 2002) report that the countries with the richest people are also those with the poorest health, whilst those countries with higher social cohesion (those with a more equal balance of wealth) show the best levels of health. Wilkinson's work is criticised because of his lack of clear links between the two criteria (Judge 1995 in Giddens 2001), however, other researchers' work show support for the concept that people from lower socio-economic groups suffer the poorest health (Graham 1987/1994 in Giddens 2001). Both Graham and Oakley (et al 1994 in Giddens 2001) identify that lack of sufficient support networks amongst working class women promotes or exacerbates ill-health. Could it then be argued that by providing learning to these groups of people their overall health would be improved? This being so, would greater participation in society as a whole follow? In terms of how general ill heath can impact the economy, information published in respect of the cost to employers and society of ill-health are alarming. Feinstein (2002) reports a staggering estimated annual cost in 1993 of £3 billion in respect of NHS costs and lost working hours as a result of depression. The Mental Health Foundation (1999 in Splash 2003) reports that over 91 million working days are lost due to mental heath illness each year. Equally alarming, the Government's Green Paper "Pathways to Work" (Splash 2003 :4) "indicate that the number of people coming Incapacity Benefit has more than trebled across Britain since 1979 to 2.9 million people". Equally, improved general health is shown to increase the likelihood of inclusion in society. "Networks are basic components of social capital. Learning helps people develop and maintain networks in ways that may be unavailable otherwise" (Schuller 2002). If including people in learning improves general health (especially of those in lower socio-economic groups (Feinstein 2002)), which clearly support both the Governments' economic and social arguments for including people in learning, why is there a lack of support for such initiatives in government policy? However, a word of caution needs to be stated. Whilst researchers agree on the benefits learning can have on health as a whole, there is evidence that intense activity in study can be detrimental to the health. Green (2002) states that the stress levels of people studying in the "skills rising" category of her research, showed increased stress levels of 60.5%, compared to those with "unchanged skills" of 35.3% and 26.6% for those with "skills falling". Hammond (2002 :2) supports this theory by adding "individuals who are more successful in terms of their education are more likely to experience eating disorders". The space allocation within this essay is insufficient to pursue this interesting subject further, however it is undoubtedly ripe for further research and lobbying. <heading>Lifelong learning - for economic, social or further reaching benefits? </heading>The two sides of the argument about whether government policies in respect of lifelong learning are to provide economic or social benefits have been discussed in some depth and a third argument introduced to extend the boundaries of the question. There is much evidence to support the argument that lifelong learning is being used as a vehicle to provide economic benefits (Edwards 1997), as the major focus of government policies to include people in learning are directed predominantly towards vocational and industry related subjects (Kennedy 1997). Thereby providing new and upgraded skills to meet the demands of shifting national boundaries and changing market demands, resulting from the technological explosion world-wide (OECD 1998). Policies are very clear about raising standards and closing competency gaps (Field 2000) for example in raising general qualification levels (Kennedy 1997), increasing the number of people participating in learning (Hyland 1999) and addressing ICT skill shortages (DfEE 2000). In addition, ensuring that all have equality of opportunity to learn by increasing basic skill provision (Field 2000) and improving disability access (DfEE 2003). The promotion is clearly on including everyone in learning to ensure contribution towards economic benefits - theme that is supported Europe-wide. In reviewing the social benefits of lifelong learning it can be seen that early government policies have been expanded to address issues of social as well as economic benefits (DfEE 2003). There is much support for the argument that lifelong learning can be used as an effective vehicle to promote social inclusion and social cohesion (Preston and Hammond 2002, Feinstein 2002, Johnston 2003, McGivney 1993). Initiatives aimed at encouraging disadvantaged groups into learning, such as the homeless (Giddens 2001) may prove insufficiently effectual as it is so difficult to find agreement about what constitutes social exclusion and what groups are encompassed by it. Could it be considered that the overlap in the policies, for economic or social benefits, is so great that they are one and the same? If the only winners in society are the ones contributing to economic stability ie generating wealth for the nation, what measure is placed on more social aspects of active citizenship and social cohesion - is the latter just a pathway to the former? An important area neglected by government policy outside of the economic/social argument of lifelong learning as been identified by recent research (Feinstein 2002, 2003, Green 2002, Hammond 2002, Schuller 2002). Ill-health costs the nation and employers considerable amounts of money each year (Splash 2003, Green 2002) and yet no initiatives have been aimed at improving the general health of the people. Has the government got it wrong, should it be a bottom up approach - improve health and well-being (lower socio-economic groups benefit from participating in learning (Hammond 2002)) - rather than top down - raise earnings for those who already have qualifications (higher levels of learning incur more health risks (Hammond 2002))? 