There are many references these days to e-something and this essay looks in particular at what e-learning is and how it can be used in the learning environment. The relevance of e-learning to meeting today's employment skills and the identification of which skills are sought after by employers are investigated. Not forgetting government policies, these are reviewed to ascertain whether the resultant initiatives to widen participation in learning can address the skills gap. Using the learndirect service as an example, the benefits and drawbacks of e-leaning provided are discussed and questions are raised about the level of benefit and the cost to individuals of participating in e-learning to a greater or lesser extent. <heading>What is e-learning? </heading>e-learning has been around for about 10 years (Pollard and Hilage (2001), but has become more prominent recently with the gathering momentum of ever increasing technological advancements, which drives towards an almost essential use of computers for the smallest tasks. However, there are differences of opinion about what constitutes e-learning. According to Elliot Masie (quoted by Cross 2002 in Pollard and Hillage(2001)) "e-learning is the use of network technology to design, delivery, select, administer and extend learning". What does all this mean? Pollard and Hillage(2001) provided the following explanation. In it's simplest form it can provide employees with online information eg information about a company's products or personnel or even information to support employees to do their jobs. Online learning provides new knowledge or skills which are learned via interaction, this might include induction programmes or business applications. Even more complex is multi-dimentional learning, which can provide a system for capturing and sharing expertise and knowledge so that it can be made available to other members of an organisation. These often need to be supported by online conferencing or e-mailing facilities between peers, tutors or coaches. IBMs management development programme is a good example of this. This is a multi-faceted Web-based training programme designed to teach managers coaching skills. Learners work their way interactively through set scenarios and are provided with feedback on their chosen solution. The increasing number of managers using it confirmed the programme's success.(Rosenberg (2001) E-learning also has an administrative aspect in that it can be used to register learners online and record learners achievements. <heading>What is the relevance of e-learning to today's employment skills? </heading>The proliferation of computers in the home and workplace offers an excellent opportunity for the use of e-learning applications. To show the increase in computer use, compare the following - in 1990 from a class of 60 people only 10 had computers at home, by 1997 this was estimated to be 7 out of 10 - a marked increase (Hallam ed by Jane Field (1997)). By 2006 the e-learning Foundation aims to ensure that every school pupil has access to a personal portable computer. It is clear then that the need for up to date IT skills are an essential part of life. Looking at the world of employment, Appendix A describes the evident demise of manufacturing and manual jobs and the increase of more services related professions (Baldock et al 1999). This shift replaces traditional manual skills with greater demand for knowledge and people skills, as well as information and communication technology (ICT). There are few workplaces these days which are not supported by computerised systems, even working in the corner shop involves computerised cash registering, as does working in a pub. The Fire Service is required to operate complex computerised communication systems by fire-fighters who had previously no need for ICT knowledge or skills. Computer literacy is not the only area in need of development if individuals, and the workforce as a whole, are to meet the demands of the new economy. Several recent studies paint a sorry state of affairs. A report undertaken by the Institute for Employment Studies entitled "Employers' Perceptions of Key Skills" identifies six key areas of 'key skills' - skills required by the workforce to meet the demands of current jobs: communication, the application of number (numercy), IT, working with others, improving own learning and performance and problem solving. Additionally, the National Skills Task Force report "Skills for All" concludes that the UK is lagging behind other European countries in respect of basic qualification/skills levels. It confirms that demand for communication, problem solving and IT skills are increasing and adds that if no action is taken to increase and improve the level and availability of these skills, the future looks bleak. It can be seen that not only are IT skills essential for an effective workforce and these are currently lacking, but also that there is a major deficit of key skills to meet the demand of employers in the existing climate. It is clear that without action to improve this situation, this situation will deteriorate further and thus impede business planning for a successful future. <heading>What has government policy done to address this problem? </heading>In the 1998 Green Paper "The Learning Age" (Department for Education and Employment) responsibility for learning was squarely placed upon the individual. Not only that, but individuals were responsible for learning throughout their lives in order to meet the changing demands of the jobs created by an increasingly more technological economy. By 2001 policy dictated that basic numercy and literacy skills of adults were to be increased to address the severe deficiency of these skills in a large proportion of the workforce (Government white paper "Skills for Life - literacy and numercy skills" 2001). Appendix B shows targets set and achievement to date. To support this initiative, the University for Industry was created and under their umbrella, up until 16 December 2002, 1,963 learndirect centres have been created (learndirect website 28/12/02). These centres have been established in colleges, libraries, community centres, private training providers and even cafés. Their purpose is to provide easy access to learning with the specific aim of widening participation in learning. The old trickle down method of education - educating the higher social classes with the hope that knowledge will 'trickle down' to lower social classes - has been abandoned (Kennedy 1997). The modern focus is on individuals becoming much more responsible for their own (lifelong) learning and the creation a network of facilities to encourage all, but particularly those at the lower levels of education/ qualification, to participate in learning. Widening participation in learning can be seen as an area of major focus in the current times - Kennedy (1997) describes widening participation in learning as providing increased access to learning, opportunities for success and progression to more people. She goes on to state that "learning is a weapon against poverty. A route to participation and active citizenship" (Learning Works (1997) pp4). Between 1 April 2000 and 16 December 2002 641,131 learners have registered with learndirect. <heading>How does the e-learning service provided by learndirect operate? </heading>Learndirect centres can offer any of the 903 courses available, although some may chose to offer only those subjects they can support technically. For example Henley College offers IT and Skills for Life (Basic Skills) courses, but do not offer Car Maintenance as they have no expertise in this area. Other centres may offer more subjects and learners will need to access online help if they need to do so. Training courses are available from the Internet online via a computer, but training material can also be provided on CD-ROMs or paper workbooks. <heading>How does the learndirect initiative address the issues of widening participation and meeting today's employment skills? </heading>Access to the online learndirect service provides learners with the opportunity to learn when and where they wish. This could be at home for example for mothers with young children, at work in conjunction with workplace/vocational learning or at any one of the numerous centres, this provides immense flexibility to all learners whether or not they have computer equipment in their homes. The number and locality of learndirect centres provides easy access for those without transport, therefore enabling access for learners from lower social levels. Learning sessions are available in modular format so can be completed to meet the learners' time demands and they can learn what they want when they need to know it. This also provides individuals with control over how quickly or slowly they learn or complete modules. Learning in small chunks, rather than spending a whole day at a training event, aids better retention of the material learned. The information contained in the learning packages can be easily updated and therefore the most up to date knowledge is available to learners quickly. Learners are free to make mistakes without having to share their mistakes with a group of people they may not know very well. There is also an element of equal opportunities in this as a computer system in unable to discriminate on grounds of gender, age or ethnicity for example. Compared to traditional training events, the cost of introducing more online courses to meet identified employment needs is relatively low, as is making the courses available for use. IT and Skills for Life are available free to all learners, this again will encourage learners who would be unable to meet training course costs. With 903 courses to chose from and small businesses being targeted, the learndirect service provides an opportunity for employers to train their staff without incurring the cost of arranging training events or sending employees away from the workplace to attend courses offered by external providers. <heading>Are there any drawbacks? </heading>If learners wish to work at home they must have access to computer equipment, not only that, but the equipment must meet the specification set by learndirect in order to run the programmes, for example "courseware has not been tested against Windows XP" (learndirect literature 'Getting Connected' 2002 left centrefold). Learners may also need some familiarity with computers or have access to someone who has, should operating problems occur which they cannot resolve. E-learning may not be suitable for all types of learning for example where facial expression or body language play a part in the learning. For those with poor written skills e-learning will be difficult to use as there is a reliance on words to perform the learning. Learners need to be self-motivated in order to maintain the momentum of their learning. Learners may lose a valuable source of learning which is available from learning in a group, as centres only allow group work to be undertaken by prior arrangement, most learning is done in isolation. Although centres are heralded as providing support from an on hand tutor, the reality of this must be questioned if the number of learners is high and the tutor support low. <heading>For better or worse</heading>It is clear that the world is ever increasingly changing and to meet the challenges created by advancing technology the workforce must learn new skills to sustain a successful economy. However, some resistance is evident in the research undertaken by the Skills Task Force (2000), who highlight a lack of interest in further learning among adults. The high incidence insufficient qualifications, especially of poor IT and Basic Skills, shows a need for action if the UK is to compete effectively in the European job market (National Skills Taskforce 2000). With nearly 2,000 learndirect centres offering over 900 courses easy access is provided to update skills and widen participation for learners, however, will this result in learners feeling they are joining a treadmill of 'enforced' lifelong learning? Spending predominantly more hours on work and updating skills than on family, leisure or community activities? (Giddens 2001). Henley College learndirect centre reported improved confidence for their students who completed training courses and this enabled them to secure temporary work. Whilst this is very positive, if completing a learndirect course does not provide a qualification, will employers recognise the learning achieved? How does this satisfy the blatant current trend in emphasis on qualification even to the point of introducing accreditation for non-accredited courses, may of which are leisure activities such as sports and fitness? (LSC paper "Progress and achievement in non-accredited adult and continuing education" 2003). The setting up of the learndirect service has widened participation in learning, but it is doubtful whether the isolated learning at a computer really provides the employment skills required by employers in today's job market, where communication, working with people and problem solving are high on the list. 