With a fervent, crowd-pleasing rhetoric, John Fitzgerald Kennedy spent most of 1960 campaigning to become the President of the most powerful nation on earth. With his father's money, a charming public persona and more than a modicum of assistance, he would ultimately succeed in fulfilling his aim. Kennedy would spend less than three years as President before his untimely death on that fateful November day in 1963, a death which may have done more to protect his reputation than any one single piece of legislation ever could during his time in office. Perhaps this view is too cynical, and Kennedy's legacy is being tainted by recent publications such as Seymour Hersh's 'The Dark Side of Camelot.' However, the question of style over substance is one that certainly needs readdressing. Disputing John Kennedy had good PR is not really the aim of this discussion - he undoubtedly possessed the skills necessary to adapt and use the medium of television, a trait which proved valuable both during his election campaign and his time as President. The ability to communicate with the public however cannot be seen as a powerful enough facet of good presidency in the long run, as the Kennedy legacy will be judged now more so than in the past, on the abilities he showed as holder of office of the executive branch of the US government during a time of national and international crisis. This essay aims to highlight the role he played and the crucial decisions he made primarily in foreign policy but also at home during his brief but tumultuous thousand day presidency. Speeches stressing "it is time to get this country moving again" provide the energy for action, but lack the specifics required to convince commentators that due consideration was made in their execution. The question remains; are there enough examples of relative achievement or a sincere willingness to achieve by President Kennedy, which coupled with his good PR, deny the accusation that he was a bad President, or can the titles claim be verified through findings which suggest it may just be accurate? <fnote>Tom Wicker, JFK & LBJ, (US, 1968) p86 </fnote>The task facing President Kennedy on the foreign front was tense to say the least, as the previous decade had seen a wave of anxiety sweep the affluent yet tense atmosphere of the nation during the Cold War. The fear of Communism and its associated threats, delivered so forcefully by senator Joe McCarthy during the 1950s, was responsible for such an atmosphere, and historian Rorabaugh notes that the Cold War encompassed not only a battle between good and evil, but a battle for dominance of the cold war world, whilst at home, the internal threat of communism had to be extinguished. Much of the internal suspicion within politics and society regarding the communist threat which could be found in abundance during the fifties, died down during the Kennedy administration. This was not the case internationally however; Kennedy and his administration playing dominant roles in notable events both within Cuba and later, further a field. The Bay of Pigs 'fiasco' as it has been dubbed, has been widely criticized as a total failure, damaging America's great power credibility. In recent studies, Kennedy's decision to withdraw an air strike over the (beach) landing area has been condemned. However, this appears to be the only failure attributed to the direct action of the President. During the fiasco, those in a position to understand events were commenting on such a failure, examples of whom include former President Eisenhower, who was unhappy, that prestige could be lost without the use of force to gain success. Former Secretary of Defense Robert Lovett saw the event as "a shocking example of what not to do, as well as how not to do it," and Republican Barry Goldwater looked to seize upon the disaster claiming Kennedy had "clearly lost his nerve." <fnote>W.J.Rorabaugh, Kennedy and the Promise of the Sixties (US, UK, 2002) p30 </fnote><fnote>W.J.Rorabaugh, Kennedy and the Promise of the Sixties (US, UK, 2002) p30 </fnote>Much of the information regarding events of the time was kept from public view however. Historians of the time, looking for an explanation, such as Ted Sorensons, felt Kennedy's inexperience was crucial. Surely when judging a President, one should take into account, that inexperience, at this level, is a rather unacceptable excuse. Since the release of such information, academics such as Seymour Hersh have used it to paint a different portrait of Kennedy and his administrations role during the Bay of Pigs fiasco. Hersh highlights the quality of Kennedy's advisors, claiming they did not inform Kennedy extensively that the Cuban's knew about the coming invasion and that much of the planning was carried out by Kennedy advisors and the CIA without direct consultation with the President. On such a level, deciding whether Kennedy was a bad President is difficult, especially if he has no real control. Such a controversial theory is all but extinguished with Kennedy's direct, personal efforts during the missile crisis of October 1962. During the invasion of 1961 however, question marks over his presidency are raised. Kennedy had apparently told the New York Times not to publish information on the planned invasion and yet had condemned their decision not to do so in its aftermath. This highlights Kennedy's personal confusion over the event, and privately, Hersh believes the President blamed the recommendations of the CIA and joint chiefs, as well as his own decision to trust them. Publicly, Kennedy accepted responsibly in a news conference, winning him enormous support. After all, PR was Kennedy's strength; although even he must have known that Castro's low approval rating played a vital role. Historian Fairline's approach to studying Kennedy more fully encompasses the role of Robert Kennedy than many other studies, and Fairline suggests that Robert Kennedy's desire to kill Castro was a character flaw that rubbed off onto the President. Kennedy didn't want to appear as just another liberal, and yet his failure to kill Castro alienated the right. Peace movements would also lose faith in Kennedy, whom they had hoped would support forces representing peasants. It could be argued that a President is often judged on major events during his time in office, and that discussion often overlooks the more discrete decisions that are made away from fervent public discussion. One argument in favour of Kennedy is that his time in office was dominated by the Cold War and that, as Commander-in-Chief, he took on a lot of responsibility during well-documented moments in what we now know as history. The discussions over Laotian neutrality represent an example of Presidential involvement out of the public eye. Yet the American-Soviet deal to neutralise Laos sparked historical argument because Kennedy appeared to have changed position having told a reporter before the Bay of Pigs that he would go to war in Laos. The jury is still out on this issue, Rorabaugh arguing Kennedy, unconfident in military advice, looked toward a non-military solution, learning from the Bay of Pigs fiasco. In early June 1961, Kennedy and Khrushchev would meet in Vienna for a summit regarding a nuclear test ban. Lawrence Freedman writes and excellent account of the event, highlighting Kennedy's personal fatigues as well as the overall negative result of the meeting. Consumed with good PR concerning the space race, Kennedy's desire to promise the American people that the US would triumph perhaps blinded the President from the truth. As Freedman notes, little thought had been given to policy implications of actually being ahead. Despite the talk of outer space, what Kennedy was really doing was pushing the missile gap thesis harder and harder. Debate had raged concerning whether any gap existed by 1961, but the Americans were certainly catching up fast. Khrushchev saw Kennedy as "young, inexperienced and apparently inept" following the summit and Freedman argues this was down to a lack of faith on Kennedy's part regarding his own position. Despite the Communist position crumbling in Berlin, a jet-lagged Kennedy entered into an unconfident ideological debate with Khrushchev, ignoring his advisors warnings not to. Test Ban discussion would prove more successful in 1963, but in Vienna, Khrushchev had applied his own personal pressure on an inexperienced Kennedy and no positive outcome had been reached. Peace activists were unhappy at the outcome. However, much information regarding the summit was kept from public view until 1990 and so good PR may have assisted many of Kennedy's failings. <fnote>Lawrence Freedman, Kennedy's Wars (US, 2000) p46 </fnote>Much has been written of the Cuban Missile Crisis since its tense occurrence in October 1962. Praise for the way Kennedy acted to resolve the crisis was rife at the time. Commentators of the time highlighted Kennedy's decision making as crucial and it would appear they held a fair view. The nation feared that invasion of Cuba would lead to a catastrophic war, and yet Kennedy would be politically reviled if he did nothing. When Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles from their bases in Cuba, the sheer relief throughout America was enough in itself to hand Kennedy a 'victory.' Vice President Lyndon Johnson praised his poker style abilities in such a fearful moment. Yet, despite this supposed 'victory,' historians now debate whether Kennedy deserves such a reputation for his role in the Missile Crisis. James L. Giglio believes that a greater understanding of the event now allows us to cite other possibilities explaining the outcome. Giglio argues that due to the potential for miscalculation and misperception concerning nuclear weaponry, crisis avoidance; the theory of Mutually Assured Destruction, played as much a part as Kennedy's abilities as President. Giglio also supports the theory that one event in Cuba directly lead to the other, and he agrees with Fairline, blaming John and Robert Kennedy's desire to kill Castro and cut off trade with Cuba as factors which bound Cuba closer to the USSR. The President's policy statement in September 1962 may also have been at fault as Kennedy warned Moscow that "the gravest issues would arise." Such ambiguous warnings may have reinforced Khrushchev's belief that the US would not respond strongly to Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba. Concluding, Giglio writes that Kennedy's actions before the crisis were unwise, unwarranted and unnecessary. Military leaders had seen it as another missed chance to Kill Castro. The Presidents responsible leadership however, had assisted in avoiding a worse outcome - Kennedy emerged with a 75% approval rating. <fnote>James L. Giglio, The Presidency of John F Kennedy (US, 1991) p191 </fnote>This discussions focus on Vietnam is minimal for one reason; it is unclear what would have unfolded as a result of President Kennedy's decisions due to the Presidents untimely death. His advisors later claimed that Kennedy would have prepared for American withdrawal from Vietnam, but those advisors convinced Johnson to send ground troops to Vietnam in 1965. His initial action, sending advisors to south-east Asia, shares common ground with his non-militant missile crisis stance. The administration however shared an enthusiasm for counter-guerrilla warfare arguing specially trained personnel were needed. Kennedy's speech declaring, "It is their war. They are the ones who have to win it or lose it. We can help them," sounds increasingly ominous, and in hindsight, the outcome shares that view. Following Diem's death in 1963, columnist Joe Alsop wrote "we are in an awful mess in South Vietnam."  <fnote>W.J.Rorabaugh, Kennedy and the Promise of the Sixties (US, UK, 2002) p62 </fnote><fnote>W.J.Rorabaugh, Kennedy and the Promise of the Sixties (US, UK, 2002) p63 </fnote>Domestic politics took second stage to the criticalities of the Cold War, perhaps with the exception of civil rights, which had been brought to the forefront of politics in conjunction with Martin Luther King's rise to prominence, a man who had encouraged and played a role in major civil rights activities in the late 1950s and early sixties. Despite his international commitments, President Kennedy was unable to avoid the civil rights question. Evidence that the President was personally prepared to place civil rights legislation on the agenda is abundant within many of his speeches such as his televised speech responding to Alabama Governor George Wallace's public admittance that he opposed desegregation. Argument has risen however that Kennedy felt, according to Rorabaugh, avoiding a split in the Democratic Party was more important than any one piece of legislation. The political agenda in this circumstance is crucial. The idea that Kennedy didn't want to alienate Southern Democrats is a relevant one indeed, although one has to question the validity of a President concerned more with re-election than legislation, not to say that Kennedy is alone in that respect. There is evidence that the President attempted to convince the senate on civil rights in his February 1963 speech, where he told them "the right to vote....is the most powerful and precious right in the world." Kennedy must have been aware however, that the southern black vote would be his, and a cynical commentator may claim his personal political agenda may have influenced his concern. <fnote>Ed Alan Nevins, The Burden and the Glory (US, 1964) p173 </fnote>Southern Filibusters made Kennedy's job all the more difficult and it could be argued that the Washington March of 1963 was more crucial in pushing civil rights. Fortunately, his liberalism of economic growth produced some results; GNP grew and unemployment fell. Even his proposed tax cuts however couldn't get through congress until after his death, and his ability to deal with congress has been more recently questioned. Historian Tom Wicker provides a case for the defence of Kennedy's poor showing on the domestic front. Indeed the first chapter title in his book 'The influence of Personality upon Politics' called 'Alone at the Top' conveys his approach into the study of domestic legislation within congress. Wicker includes Kennedy's claims to the National Press Club that the President "must wield...powers under extraordinary limitations," and the author goes on to describe the mechanisms behind the Committee of Rules of the House of Representatives and how this committee challenged Kennedy's power. However, Wicker also writes that Kennedy's decision to drop his first civil rights bill in 1961, based on political realities (Kennedy feared a filibuster and a hold up of other legislation) was a bad decision, as liberal supporters saw the necessity of the time more clearly than the President. Fighting for a strong civil rights bill, whether it could pass or not, would have done a great deal to shore up the notion of Kennedy as a vigorous liberal and to hold his supporters together in loyalty and enthusiasm.  <fnote>Tom Wicker, JFK & LBJ, (US, 1968) p89 </fnote>Tom Wicker doesn't doubt that Kennedy had an excellent personal charisma, but he claims that this very attribute was the cause of misplaced optimism. Kennedy became the first real television President. He had defeated Nixon on TV, and had assured the nation in public presentations time and again with a charm and assurance that was his alone. If Wicker is accurate, then even those who argue his good PR makes him a good President are mistaken. In fact, Kennedy's fantastic public relations may have proved his Achilles heal as President of the United States. Kennedy made sterling promises on which he couldn't deliver, speaking with such a confidence as to assure a nation unaware of his misgivings. He may have been inexperienced during the Bay of Pigs, but a stronger personality may not have given in so easily to military advice. His performance during the missile crisis can be applauded if only because damage avoidance was achieved. The term 'bad president' is such a harsh description of a man who both during his time in office and afterward has been afforded a great deal of respect by many Americans, and yet, it is difficult, when reading today's accounts, to find any real justification for calling him a good one. <fnote>Tom Wicker, JFK & LBJ, (US, 1968) p84 </fnote>