The affluent society, a consumer based culture of comfort and conformity, emerged after World War II, and this essay discusses the reasons for that emergence. To achieve these ends, the main body of the study will be split into two sections, detailing economic factors, and factors involving the very desires of the consumers that were an integral part of this affluent society. Each of these two sections will further be split into sub-sections which individually look at one potential facet of the emergence of this society, and attempt to account for it. The essay will discuss the war-time economy as well as the broader post-war economic status of the country, before discussing government intervention, looking at the GI Bill and the FHA, before looking briefly at the 'other America' and accounting for their lack of government funds and resultant white flight. In addition, the second section discusses the idea of the family nucleus, its consumer desires and their abundant availability, especially in the housing industry and other off-shoot mass-produced industries. The conclusion draws upon these sections in order to evaluate the importance of all factors, playing strict attention to means, supply and demand. It is important, at the outset, to account for the increase in personal savings and the general post-war overturn of the depression era economy. As both a factor accounting for the affluent society, and as an impetus for it, the availability of finance is important. During the years 1939-44 for example, salaries doubled, as a result of overtime pay and an expansion of jobs. Liquid savings sky-rocketed and this improvement affected corporations as well who benefited from wartime prosperity. Internationally, America's wartime production had stimulated the economy to such an extent, that it was, through the Marshall plan, able to loan to countries in Europe that had suffered as a result of wartime demolition, a problem that did not face America post-war. <fnote>William H Chafe, The Unfinished Journey (4th ed. Oxford University Press NYC 1999) p8-10 </fnote>These factors are certainly important, but certain texts, such as 'The Unfinished Journey' and 'The Proud Decades', are eager to stress the positives, to simply say that affluence was the natural consequence of a boost to the economy following the war. Economist Harold G. Vatter produces a more comprehensive view of the post-war economy however, that suggests this essay will have to look at more complex factors in order to fully account for the emergence of an affluent society. Economic history is an important component part of any study of affluence, abundance and increased consumer spending if one wishes to discuss these matters in any sufficient depth. Harold G Vatter's 'The US Economy in the 1950's' is a thorough account of all aspects of industrial, agricultural, managerial, private and public economies after WWII, and in antithesis to more general history texts, there is an emphasis on a lack of economic upsurge. In terms of statistics, this essay does not attempt to challenge Vatter's findings, but rather uses his study to understand why, despite such a moderate economy, certain factors, both at the government and consumer level, enabled the affluent society to emerge after the war. Vatter's Statistics, in regard to the US economy as a whole, clearly show that, in terms of GNP, the economic growth in output was lagging behind that of the period 1921-29, at a rate of 2.9% (1951-59) compared to 4.6% three decades earlier. (Chafe claims the 1950's figures are as high as the 1920's, but these figures are biased because of the Korean War output - post Korean output was lower, and so, more significant). According to Vatter, "the 1950's seemed to extend a...long-run downward drift in the growth rate of total output." Vatter even goes as far as to say that "the rate of economic growth in the late 1950's was insufficient to stimulate population growth rates as high as those obtaining in the early 1950's." Despite these conclusions however, statistics are not defining of an era, there are too many factors to combat general statistical hypotheses, and it is important to look at them to ultimately answer the question. Firstly, those middle-class families who were larger were the ones with more money, thus enabling them to sustain the spatial and consumer needs of a larger nucleus. Secondly, suburban growth stimulated areas of the economy most-relevant to its sustenance, so in terms of affluence, the economies of government and private spending in the suburbs outstripped the all too broad GNP. The economies of the affluent society can be attributable to the mixed economy, where government regulation and expenditure stimulated private spending. Thirdly, the recession Vatter mentions in 1948-49 was seen as mild by Diggins, but this is only because it was offset by the powerful upward surge in demand for new housing. Finally, affluence was accentuated by depressed areas, the urban living conditions that were a facet of 'white flight' lacking severely in public spending. <fnote>Harold G. Vatter, Economic History in the 1950's (W.W. Norton & Co. Toronto 1963) p7 </fnote><fnote>Chafe, p9 </fnote><fnote>Vatter p7 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p8 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p23 </fnote><fnote>John Patrick Diggins, The Proud Decades, (Norton & Co.NYC 1989) p181 </fnote>It is not sufficient therefore, to claim the economy of post-war America was thriving and this resulted in the affluent society. Vatter produces enough evidence to suggest that economy alone cannot guarantee affluence or the lack there of. The remainder of this essay will focus therefore, on the factors mentioned above. In this initial section on the economy, the focus will be on factors two and four, discussing the government involvement in a mixed economy providing mass-produced housing and the GI Bill, as well as the economic attitudes toward the depressed areas. The second section of the essay is concerned with want, and details factors one and three, discussing the family unit and the need for consumer goods. President Roosevelt knew the G.I. Bill of Rights would be passed by congress. As Blum argues, "with an election pending [congress] could not resist promising to men in uniform the post-war benefits that they and their families most wanted." The GI Bill is very important to our study of the affluent society, because, in simple terms, it gave returning veterans the opportunity to be affluent. They were given monthly allowances while looking for work, and allowances for education at many levels, such were the demands for trained men within the post-war economy. After an expansion it also provided for medical care, and Blum goes on to comment that it "did about as much as legislation could to help veterans to attain and enjoy a secure, bourgeois status in employment, education and residence." While not extended to all Veterans, over half, in total 7.8 million, benefited. William O'Neill certainly approves of the provision, celebrating the governments focus and intent rather than the opposite, which would have been to randomly release funds with no control. This control, in combination with the housing legislation, set up a frame-work of affluence at a specific veteran level. Concerning the importance of the GI Bill as a facet of affluence, Daniel A. Clark comments, "Imagine the implicit future of Willie and those like him after attending college - a house in suburbia, a secure job with a major corporation, and perhaps even two cars and a television. From an everyman-GI to a new inductee to the broadening American middle-class, Willie reflects a new post-war American dream that the GI Bill helped to fashion." While Clark's vision of this middle-class affluence is perhaps a little utopian, and while the GI Bill did not single-handedly account for the emergence of the affluent society, his point is celebratory enough to emphasise the importance of this legislation. <fnote>John Morton Blum, V for Victory (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, NYC, 1976) p248 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p250 </fnote><fnote>William O'Neill, American High (The free press, NYC, 1986) p10 </fnote><fnote>ibid </fnote><fnote>Daniel A. Clark, The Two Joes Meet. Joe College, Joe Veteran: The G. I. Bill, College Education, and Postwar American Culture, (History of Education Quarterly, 1998) p167 </fnote>The question over private and public housing was a hotly debated one. Many veterans did not receive the benefits of the GI Bill, and housing quality pre-Levittown was poor. Interpreting the political wrangling that confronted the issue, the debate raged over government involvement. Republican senator's, such as the infamous Joeseph McCarthy, saw public housing as a form of socialism. More qualified and less 'red-baiting-minded men, such as private investor William Levitt saw that government intervention on some level was needed to solve the problem. The outcome highlighted the benefits of a mixed economy, whereby government legislation allowed for private investors to borrow funds to build without securing buyers. This legislation, known as title VI under the FHA was a crucial piece of legislation in accounting for the emergence of an affluent society. It allowed men like Levitt to supply for what he knew was a great demand. Indeed, the GI Bill and Title VI work in tandem, the former guaranteeing demand for the latter. Veterans were not the only ones demanding better housing, and as we shall note later, the new family nucleus provided the impetus for this mass-produced suburban explosion. <fnote>Rosalyn Baxandall & Elizabeth Ewen, Picture Windows (Basic Books, NYC, 2000) p87 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p94 </fnote><fnote>Ibid p122 </fnote>It is difficult to argue that the conditions of the inner-city poor lead to the emergence of an affluent society, and while they are certainly not paramount in the discussion, certain studies, namely those of Galbraith and Harrington, imply that money was available for the middle-classes that were not available for those city-dwellers in need of welfare. The affluent society benefited from government spending on housing, money that was not spent on urban development, and a viscous cycle ensued, where poor conditions in the city lead to white-flight and the subsequent affluence of the suburbs. Galbraith alludes to this cycle as he discusses an economic imbalance, the reluctance for the suburban consumer to desire public spending projects when private products were more highly desirable. This concept is interesting, and private consumption will be noted in the latter section of this paper, but Galbraith produces a social criticism throughout his account that only fellow critiques of the affluent society would fully appreciate. Harrington comments that those who need protection and cushions most have them least, that new rejects, penalised by pensions, credit, home-owning and a lacking welfare state do not survive because of the help of federal governments. The affluent society emerged because the great majority of Americans favoured economic growth, (which occurred in consumer based suburban culture they enjoyed,) not welfare, as the cure to poverty. The lack of consumer provision and economic assistance in cities, it can be argued, drove those who could afford it, to the suburbs. Unemployment and poverty in the cities further accentuated the affluence beyond their limits. <fnote>John Kenneth Galbraith, The Affluent Society (Hamish Hamilton, London, 1958) p190-204 </fnote><fnote>MichaelHarrington, The Other America, p19-38 </fnote><fnote>O'Neill, American High p22 </fnote>A steady supply of mass-produced products, whether they be houses or all other amenities sold to a consumer based market, require a demand secure enough to meet, and possibly exceed the supply. This section argues that the affluent society emerged because this demand existed. Before discussing the demands of the new 'classless' suburban culture, it is of primary importance to explain why the traditional family nucleus prevailed as dominant ideology after the war. The changing expectations on the role of women are as pertinent a place as any to begin. Women worked during the war. The burden of war extended to them, as war-production industry could not be maintained by a male workforce fighting on the front-line. According to Elaine Tyler May, this was not the desired ideal. Connotations of female housewives in "comfortable homes" had not been destroyed during the war, just put on hold. Unfortunately, this positioned women in an awkward position. The ironic nature of their situation was exemplified thus; they must be Rosie the Riveter during the war, but in 1946, "tough, gritty women were no longer idealized, softness was back." This very notion had been echoed during the war; that single working women were a threat to family life. During the war, women were needed out of necessity, but the prevailing ideology concluded that their services were temporary and merely extensions of patriotism. Government propaganda emphasised the nuclear family as the foundation of democracy, and, given the troubles of the depression era and the baby-boom, this prevailing ideology found support. Advertising emphasised the cherished version of the true American way of life, with connotations of the traditional family unit. That isn't to say no women worked, but important to the scope of this essay, is that enough nuclear families existed to provide the demand for the kind of consumerism that flourished on their desires. <fnote>Elaine Tyler May, Homeward Bound (Basic Books, 1988) p50 </fnote><fnote>Ibid p56 </fnote><fnote>Ibid p61 </fnote><fnote>Ibid p65 </fnote>The consumer society that emerged after the war resulted from the return to traditional family values, increased savings and, after twenty years of depression followed by war, one might say, an eagerness to put politics behind them and move into a bountiful new world. During the years 1950-60, 18million went to live in the suburbs. The new Levittowns were an improvement on the cramped apartments of the city and suburbia met a need. More than that, consumer industries were creating products that they had generated, amenities for the home, lawn-mowers and the like. All over America, Levitt-style sub divisions heavily advertised how cheap down payments were, and in many instances, a payment wasn't necessary. The importance of the automobile must not be understated here. It allowed access to and from work, so living in the city was no longer necessary. The affluent society was born of this "fusion of need and desire." <fnote>Chafe, Unfinsihed Journey, p117 </fnote><fnote>Ibid p119 </fnote><fnote>David Halberstam, The Fifties, (Ballantine Books, NYC, 1993) p142 </fnote><fnote>Chafe, Unfinished Journey p117 </fnote>Narrative accounts and statistics are not complex enough to account for consumerism at a sociological level however, and academics Whyte and Reisman have attempted to understand how the nature of the individual plays its role in this 'affluent society.' Reisman theorises that the consumer culture, fuelled by conformity that he terms 'other directed' alludes to a society whose needs and ideals are based on those of others and the media, and that self-definition is not seen as necessary quality. Whyte discusses the 'organisation man' and emphasises a loss of individualism within the newly sought after social ethos. O'Neill contends that much of this collective ideology was forged during the war where young men, and women, shared experiences at a more intense level than those of previous generations. <fnote>David Reisman, The Lonely Crowd, p17-25 </fnote><fnote>William H. Whyte, The Organization Man p3-14 </fnote><fnote>O'Neill p28 </fnote>The pit-falls of such works are that they try and define a group of people too strictly in order to substantiate a theory, and in doing so, assume an authority on a subject as complex as individualism, which ever since Alex de Toqueville tried to evaluate in the early nineteenth century, has proved a difficult topic to characterise the American people by, precisely because it works in tandem with a collective, social ethos. These works should not be discounted however, aiding as they do, the study of conformity, a conformity which allowed advertising to paint images of the technological future that everyone who bought into the consumer culture anticipated and craved. It is pertinent here to make mention of an important fact. Advertising played an important role in selling the notion of the affluent society. Even though it was only the top 40% in terms of family income, who moved to the suburbs, advertisements and popular sociology came from the same bracket, and assumed everyone to be riding the same wave, when in fact, this was not the case. <fnote>Roland Marchand, Visions of Classlessness, Quests for Dominion in Chafe Sitkoff & Bailey ed. History of Our time (Oxford University Press, NYC, 2003) p66 </fnote>In conclusion, it can be argued that all factors discussed did contribute to the emergence of the affluent society, but it was their combination which produced the outcome. No matter the precise economies of the period, the means; the sufficient individual savings and the thrust of economic activity within the consumer/suburban/affluent culture are of utmost importance when discussing this question, but of equal importance is the demand, the existence of a family unit that required mass-produced housing, and in general, a public whose desire for post-war goods had been emphasised by the advertising industry's biggest ever budget in 1944. It is certain, that before the war had ended, the suburban unit was being carefully cultivated. Government involvement, especially in creating the GI Bill of Rights and aiding the mass-produced housing market played its role also in supplying the public who had the means to purchase whatever new product was made with them in mind. As has already been noted, the affluent society didn't come about just because of war-time boom economies and availability of funds. Nor was demand sufficient without a supply, a supply provided for by a mixed-economy and an advertising campaign that sold not just products, but the post-war way of life. <fnote>Blum, p100 </fnote>