'Were these colonies left to themselves tomorrow, America would be a mere shambles of blood and confusion,' said Massachusetts' James Otis in 1765. Such a statement fully represented the views of a man who, like many other politicians, drifted in and out of opposition politics during the 1760's. Yet less than twenty years later, Americans would unite together, in what would become one of the worlds most stable and sustainable governments, a feat achieved through a grueling and most unlikely victory against the all powerful British Redcoats. This discussion aims to highlight key reasons why popular resistance to British rule grew from the middle of the 1760's, briefly noting general recurrent themes, before discussing Radical Whig ideology in Massachusetts and its insistence on rebellious anti-parliamentary rhetoric, spawning popular extra-legal activity within the colony and especially, within Boston. Political response in Massachusetts, a response born of frustration at, most notoriously, an increase in British parliamentary involvement in colonial affairs, played a vital role in shaping the outlook of many American citizens, a difficult maneuver indeed when, as historian Edward S. Morgan points out, 'the great majority of Americans...still spoke of England as "home."' <fnote>Edmund S. Morgan, The Birth of the Republic, 1763-89, (US 1977) p5 </fnote><fnote>Edmund S. Morgan, The Birth of the Republic, 1763-89, (US 1977) p5 </fnote>In order to understand how important some factors are in the years before revolution, it is perhaps pertinent to discuss American attitude toward English government and their power over the country. Many colonists, especially in the north, had their own land, an important factor as a widespread ownership of land meant there was no real rich-poor division, no bowing to a noble ruling class. During this period before 1764, Americans enjoyed a relatively peaceful existence with the 'home' nation, a period void of any real conflict that may have led to revolutionary action. Americans therefore, were not particularly bothered by the Navigation Acts which Britain imposed placing restrictions on trade. The fact that trade was restricted to England can not be seen as a huge factor, as she was the most advanced country in the world offering the best prices. Most Americans at this time didn't really mind that these acts were passed by a government in which they had no representative. The reason for this content lay in the fact that England's running of the empire was inefficient and due to loose communication of instruction, the colonists did what they pleased. The British Empire was inefficient, but its inhabitants were prosperous, and they were free. The very possibility that a government, (following the English civil war), that had more power than the King, may grow tired of this lose control, could perhaps be the most obvious origin of a change in American mentality. Except trade law, American's had made their own laws, the assemblies had learnt how to deal with royal governors and parliament supremacy was associated in colonial minds, with assembly supremacy. Both stood for liberty, where any change in the power structure could be seen as an attack on the freedom of the colonists. If this happened, Americans would have to think whether freedom really did reside in parliamentary supremacy, or whether action had to be taken. In order to understand the importance of a change in mentality of the American people, it is important to discuss any precondition they may have had for independence before parliamentary upset from 1764. The most important precondition would arise through the question of national identity and an American character, if indeed there was one. This discussion can be argued and disputed at different levels of significance but one thing is clear, there was no united national identity before the declaration of independence. Historians Tindall and Shi believe that following the French and Indian war, 'a sense of American nationalism was maturing." They believe that for over a generation, the ability to self-govern had forged an American character and that following the victory, the Americans could look forward to a prosperous future with their newly gained land. It is appropriate to say that most Americans had been born in America; many had never seen England and those from England had escaped dissatisfaction with British society. However, it would be too one dimensional to argue that there was a national American character following the French-Indian war. It has already been noted that traditional beliefs of English national heritage stood firm in the hearts of many Americans and it can be argued that due to this antithesis of ideology among Americans across the entire nation, there was no unified assault against the British, even after the parliamentary action following 1764. The idea therefore, of an American identity, is perhaps, due to its ambiguous existence, of rather subordinate importance to other factors, namely the aforementioned parliamentary increase in control and with it, taxation. <fnote>America, Tindall & Shi, (US 5th Ed. 2000), p130 </fnote>It would not be accurate to say that the introduction of taxation immediately called for revolutionary activity after 1764. It is more appropriate to consider the knock-on effects of this new grievance for the colonists, including the violent activity carried out as a consequence and the use of propaganda by leading protesters. In order to understand why this new kind of parliamentary activity caused such uproar, this discussion will now concentrate on the political scene in Massachusetts. Political alignments and party organization were not common features of the American colonies of the eighteenth century, simply because of the basic system of government that existed based on loose British Parliamentary control. Governors presided over the legislative activity within the colonies and although people realized that this form of political organization was flawed, pride accounted for a lack of polarization. Following the implementation of the Stamp Act 1765-66, which would place stamp fees on all paper documentation, from newspapers, to playing cards, opposition to the Massachusetts governor arose. The Governor pledged obedience to the Stamp Act, as was his role, and from this, a group of politicians, among their number Samuel Adams, Thomas Cushing, John Hancock, Joseph Hawley and James Warren, coerced in opposition along ideological lines; a desire to maintain the balance within American society that had been forged by loose British control on the politics and economies of the American colonies. The formation of this 'faction' highlights among others, one very notable point of interest as we see for the first time in the American political sphere, party politics in action. This study of Massachusetts aids the discussion because it provides an excellent example of political demand for public support. Although not parties by name, the issue of obedience or resistance took hold within Massachusetts between Governor and faction following the Stamp Act, as the Governor, Francis Bernard, espoused 'the [British] constitution as a framework for the exercise of sovereign power." Known as the Boston Whigs, these opposition politicians denounced such supremacy calling for protection for the citizen against the power of the state. Such political rhetoric gained the support of artisans and shopkeepers, a collection of which called themselves the Sons of Liberty. These men had been responsible for a demonstration on August 14 1765 which had led to the stamp master's resignation. Popular support in Boston went beyond controlled behavior however when popular support of the opposition lead to more riotous and at times violent behavior. The whipping of popular support by opposition leaders was essential to the Boston Whigs and through public declarations; this was achieved on a remarkable scale throughout Massachusetts. <fnote>Revolutionary Politics in Massachusetts, Richard D. Brown (US, 1970) P21 </fnote>Opposition to the Stamp Act adopted a theme of 'liberty' across much of the North, following on from Boston's lead. Americans believed that parliament had no right to remove the property of men who were not represented in their government and that this action was a threat to the freedom of Americans. In response, Thomas Whately, a subordinate of Grenville, the chancellor responsible for the Sugar Act of 1764, stated that most Englishmen didn't have the vote but were still represented in a similar way to the colonists, by virtual representation. Following these arguments, the Americans concluded that the right to legislate was not the same as the right to tax. Americans firmly believed this and rejected both virtual and actual representation. Colonies united in their common belief that Parliament had no right to tax them. Americans had shown for the first time during the passing of these acts that they were prepared to defy the most powerful government in the world. Following the Sugar Act, the colonists had reduced colonial imports to put pressure on the English. The real defiance came as a consequence of the Stamp Act, where Boston Mobs used violence against stamp distributors and newspapers refused to publish. The action taken against this act in particular was very effective as in 1776 Britain repealed the Stamp Act. Events during 1764-66 had united American colonies together in their common desire to resist parliamentary interference and their rebellious attitude sowed the seeds of an ongoing breakdown in relations between the two countries. Boston Whig rhetoric, which had spread across much of the North, had played a very significant role in inciting popular rebellion. Historian Richard Maxwell Brown talks of rioting as 'a persuasive weapon of protest and dissent' and that 'the cockpit of Revolutionary turbulence was Boston.' <fnote>Ed. Stephen G. Kurtz & James H. Hutson, Essays on the American Revolution, (New York, 1973), Essay 3, Richard Maxwell Brown, Violence and the American Revolution, p84 </fnote>The British government used the American argument that the British only had the right to legislate, when passing the Declaratory Act, stating that parliament had full power to make laws binding the colonies. This proved a shrewd move by the government, a government still believing in the difference between 'external' and 'internal' taxation. Townshend, Chancellor after 1767, knew there was no distinction between these two types of taxation, but he didn't realise many Americans were aware. The Townshend Act to follow forced Americans to pay duties on imported items including glass, lead, paints and tea. Again, the Americans reacted, deciding to boycott English goods in favour of homespun. Historian Professor O.M.Dickerson called the Townshend Act 'England's most fateful decision,' believing events leading to the revolution can be attributed almost directly to it. Thomas Hutchinson, acting Governor of Massachusetts after 1969 had spoken the year before of how, following the Townshend Acts, people were 'more inclined to independence than they had been.' <fnote>Edmund S. Morgan, The Birth of the Republic, 1763-89, (US 1977) p36 </fnote><fnote>Revolutionary Politics in Massachusetts, Richard D. Brown (US, 1970) P32 </fnote>Public support was by no means a guarantee for the Boston Whigs as the 1770's approached. In order to cement such support, the leading members of the Boston opposition formed the Boston Committee of Correspondence. The conception of such a political unit was designed to bring greater legitimacy to the opposition and to revive popular opinion in favour of the opposition from a governor who sought order in his colony. The Boston Committee of Correspondence's appeal to the local populace in Massachusetts would prove all important and despite the fact that, as Richard D. Brown writes, 'the Boston Committee cannot have been totally representative of opinion in Massachusetts,' a great number of towns, including those who had never previously considered imperial issues, all agreed on the necessity of defending their rights. <fnote>Revolutionary Politics in Massachusetts, Richard D. Brown (US, 1970) P99 </fnote>The Declaration of Independence, states 'We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." The Boston Whigs, perhaps the most notable opposition group in the northern United States, were instrumental in campaigning for popular support based on ideological grounds. They believed that the British Parliament was abusing power, and soon, this notion became commonplace throughout much of the north. Sam Adams, a very important figure in Boston believed parliament had no right to legislate for the colonies and he organised protests in Boston, using newspapers as his medium. Historian Philip Davidson says 'the Propagandists openly began the attack on the British government which ultimately grew into the American revolution." Political activity and its ability to arouse a popular fervour in opposition to parliamentary activity has been the central theme of this discussion as it proved all important as a means of establishing a resistance, a resistance which then proceeded to flourish in the hearts and minds of many Americans through campaigning and quite often, violent behaviour. The ability to be proud in a traditional English heritage was, to a great extent, destroyed during the period, along with any desire to be ruled by a country which no longer offered the basic freedoms and happiness that Americans desired. <fnote>The National Archives Experience, Declaration of Independence,  URL  </fnote><fnote>Philip Davidson, Propaganda and The American Revolution, (US 1941) p31 </fnote>