<heading>Part AQuestion One</heading>The concept of creativity over the last years has attracted much attention both from academia and industry. Andriopoulos (2003) -based on his study of three successful creative organisations- mentions that modern companies have realised the importance of enhancing creativity, and making it an integral part of their culture in order to gain a competitive advantage over their rivals. Moreover, Dougherty (1996, p.174) supports the aforementioned opinion by adding that creativity is thought to be the main attribute for developing viable new products/services, improving output quality and revitalizing "mature businesses". This paper focuses on the key-factors required for a creative organisation, followed by the identification of key-barriers to implementing these factors, and an analysis of the ways to overcome these barriers. Finally, mind-maps for both the key-factors and the key-barriers can be found in the appendices. <heading>1.1 Key-Factors for Creative Organizations </heading>Two general key-factors were identified after completing the literature review: Organisations' Resources, which include: <list>Human Resources TimeMoneyWorking Environment</list>and Organisations' Culture, which includes the following elements: <list>Multidisciplinary TeamsKnowledgeAutonomy and FreedomCommunicationRecognition and Reward for Creative Work </list>An in-depth analysis of all these elements is presented as follows: <heading>Organisations' Resources</heading><heading>Human Resources </heading>Human resources are the first and probably the most important factor required for a creative organisation. Andriopoulos (2003, p.375) stresses that companies strive to take full advantage of their peoples' ideas so as to "unleash creativity within their working environments". However, the ways that managers and employees can foster creativity are different. Starting with the role of managers, Amabile (1998, p.81) notes that they are responsible for appropriately matching people with tasks. This match should be based on employees' skills and expertise and it must "ignite intrinsic motivation". Andriopoulos (2003) supports this opinion by stating that the appropriate match between projects and employees will enable people to work creatively; at the same time, employees must not feel either bored or overwhelmed while working on the project. Achieving nevertheless this match, is not an easy task; managers are expected to have plenty of information both for their people and the assignments, so as to make the most successful choice (Amabile, T., 1998). Andriopoulos (2003) appears to be of the same opinion, as he mentions that managers must identify and choose projects that will be considered interesting and will allow creative thinking. Finally, he argues that managers should build cohesive teams with employees that have diverse backgrounds. The success of these teams will heavily depend to the existent balance between diversity and cohesiveness. Employees on the other hand, according to Sutton (2001, p.99), should have "varied and even offbeat" backgrounds, which will enable them to approach tasks from different perspectives. When such people collaborate, achieving creative work stands more chances. <heading>Time and Money</heading>According to Amabile (1998, p.82), time and money are the second most important elements of organisational resources. Time is a significant factor for creatively facing any task assigned, and although some times urgent deadlines enforce creative work, in general, time must be adequate since creativity can often be "slow going". The same author suggests that funding also plays an important role in creative organisations. The allocated amount of money to each project must be sufficient, in order for the people to come up with creative ideas and not to spend their time trying to find additional resources. <heading>Working Environment</heading>Finally, workspace is one more significant factor for enhancing creativity, but it seems that there are no certain rules for how it should be. Amabile (1998, p.82) suggests that "creative teams need open, comfortable offices", while a graphic designer interviewed by Andriopoulos (2003, p.382) states that his ideal working environment includes "Music playing around, people shouting, clients being in the middle of the room...this all help creativity". Thus, what is important for an organisation is to find workspaces that make employees feel comfortable enough to produce creative work. <heading>Organisations' Culture</heading><heading>Multidisciplinary Teams</heading>Having already discussed the importance of human resources, using them in order to format appropriate multidisciplinary teams is the next step for creative organisations. Amabile (1998, p.83) mentions that teams that are built up from people with various backgrounds -thus, different problem approaches- are most likely to be creative. In addition, team-members must "share excitement over the team's goals", must be willing to help their team-mates through difficulties, and last but definitely not least, they must recognise the individual value and unique knowledge of each team-member. Meyer (2000, p.12) goes one step further, by stating that each team-member must be recognised as capable of "generating new ideas and appropriate solutions". Moreover, cooperative behaviour is essential and the ideas of team members must be clearly stated and communicated. Finally, teams should encourage people to express their opinions freely and this can be achieved when team-members feel valued. <heading>Knowledge</heading>Knowledge is the next key-factor identified. According to Dougherty (1996, p.182), the "development and exploitation of knowledge" gained from the interaction with the customers, is a crucial factor for creative work, since customer-orientated companies stand more chances to achieve product innovation. Furthermore, a more thorough understanding of companies' technical capabilities enables organisations to apply the gained knowledge more effectively. Hackett and Robinson (1997) support the abovementioned, and suggest that creativity can derive from a better and deeper understanding of customer's needs, of work's nature and of work practices. Furthermore, Andriopoulos (2003, p.384) mentions that "gaining new knowledge can minimise mistakes that may occur in the creative process", while M. Wilken (graphic designer on Margo Chase Design) points out that experiences and things learned from previous projects are invaluable, since one can base on them and "recognise which elements about each product are appropriate to another product". (Meyer 2000, p.16). Finally, Dougherty (1996) highlights that an efficient linkage between market and organisation's operations and technologies is sine qua non for effective product innovation. <heading>Autonomy and Freedom</heading>These are the next two interlinked key-factors for creativity. Amabile (1998) argues that employees should be provided with the necessary freedom, but they must also have well-specified and stable targets. Such conditions enhance organisations' creativity. Providing people with freedom about the way they manage their tasks, should be integral part of every creative company. When employees are not expected to follow established processes on managing tasks, creativity arises since people come with new approaches and innovative ways of facing these tasks. <heading>Communication</heading>Communication is the next identified element for creative organisations. Amabile (1998) suggests that creativity is fostered when people inside an organisation exchange ideas and data and expose themselves to various approaches to problem-solving. Thus, information sharing and collaboration among employees is the basis of creative work. Dougherty (1996, p.183) pinpoints that creative companies are characterised by communication in terms of "consultation rather than command", and instead of instructions, communication is based on advice. Meyer (2000) seems to share the same opinion, by stating that creativity is enhanced when directions are given in the form of feedback and not through strict control. Finally, Hackett and Robinson (1997) specify the role of communication among leaders in creative companies by mentioning that communication among leaders can help on making and implementing changes in the organisation more effectively. <heading>Recognition and Reward for Creative Work</heading>These are the last key-factors for creative organisations. According to an employee: "...one of the important things about being creative is to be encouraged, to be told that what you are doing is valuable..." (Andriopoulos 2003, p.380). Sutton (2001, p.101), states that creative companies reward both success and failure, since it is "impossible to generate a few good ideas without also generating a lot of bad ideas". He highlights though, that what it is important for creative organisations is not to permit their employees to be inactive; only this attitude deserves punishment. Finally, Amabile (1998) states that acknowledgment of creative work is a vital factor, and should be made before the commercial results of a creative effort become known. <heading>1.2 Key-Barriers</heading>The key-barriers to implementing the abovementioned key-factors, as well as the ways of overcoming these key-barriers, are analysed below. <heading>Key-Barriers to Organisations' Resources </heading><heading>Human Resources </heading>A key-barrier connected with organisations' human resources is identified by Amabile (1998), who points out that managers usually lack detailed information about their employees and the existing projects. Thus, they fail to successfully allocate the available assignments to the appropriate people. Instead, what erroneously do is simply allocating the most qualified employee to the most urgent project. Usually, such an action results in disappointing outcomes. Overcoming this barrier demands from managers to have or (to search for) all the available information for both employees and projects. Companies on the other hand must ensure that such data are available. <heading>Time and Money </heading>Amabile (1998, p.82) also suggests that organisations often 'kill' creativity by pushing their employees to succeed in unrealistic or impossibly achieved deadlines, creating thus either "distrust or burnout". Moreover, managers often keep their resources tight, making their employees search for additional funding instead of creative ideas. Strong leadership is essential here since the appropriate allocation of company's resources is very important. Thus, managers must roughly know in advance the amounts of time and money that a project will necessitate and should try to ensure that the company would agree to them. Sutton (2001, p.103) seems to agree with the abovementioned, but he approaches this problem from a different perspective. He states that companies usually devote more resources (time, people and money) on "exploiting old ideas than to exploring new ones". However, what companies must do is exploit the gained knowledge and experience and successfully implement them in new ideas. <heading>Key-Barriers to Organisations' Culture</heading><heading>Multidisciplinary Teams</heading>Instead of building multidisciplinary teams, Amabile (1998, p.83) states that managers quite often prefer to form homogeneous teams, encouraged by the fact that these teams often reach solutions more quickly. However, as very cogently stated by the author, "everyone comes to the table with a similar mind-set. They leave with the same". Managers should promote multi-background teams. Although such a team may initially face communication difficulties due to different perspectives, in the long run it has much greater chances for innovation than a homogeneous team. <heading>Knowledge</heading>According to Meyer (2000), many organisations seem unable to learn from their previous experiences, thus undertaking each project from the scratch, although sometimes this may not be necessary. However, on the same article, M. Wilken (graphic designer on Margo Chase Design) suggests that a lot of projects have similar elements and identifying them, saves a lot of time; time that could be spent on looking for creative ideas and approaches based on already gained knowledge. Overcoming this barrier is not an easy task. Organisations must be able to track down knowledge both internally and externally. Understanding a company's operations and technical capabilities and connecting them with market demands (Dougherty, D., 1996), is an example of such an action. <heading>Autonomy and Freedom</heading>Amabile (1998, p.82) mentions that managers often grant "autonomy in name only". Employees are supposed to be free to act on their own will on finding solutions; however the case is that the working processes are usually predefined, thus autonomy is undermined. In the same article, the author suggests that managers should give to employees the chance to act freely and creatively. Processes should not be predefined and each project must be considered individually, since different approaches to problems, might provide organizations with innovative ideas. <heading>Communication</heading>Communication among employees is often inhibited by strategies such as 'Segmentalism' in order to handle new problems. This means that companies break down problems into smaller pieces and assign them to different people inside the company. (Meyer, S., 2000) A holistic approach to problem-solving fosters creativity, since collaboration between employees, give people the chance to experience the different approaches to the problem-solving process. Thus, companies should try to face problems in a generic frame, avoiding breaking them in smaller parts, hoping to reduce complexity, but ending losing any creative idea that can be generated from employees' teamwork. <heading>Recognition and Reward for Creative Work</heading>Amabile (1998) argues that in many organisations, managers not only fail to recognise creative efforts, but they tend to criticise and reject innovative ideas. The idea of praising both success and failure (see part 1.1) seems rather utopian, since according to Sutton (2001, p.101), "Few companies tolerate failure, let alone reward it...". Overcoming this barrier demands that managers change their established views and start acknowledging and praising creative efforts. More importantly however, senior managers must act as role models for creativity, highlighting through their attitude the importance of creativity for their company. Finally, one more significant barrier for creativity is related with the organisations' general culture. According to Hackett and Robinson (1997, p.15), "most companies are still production-oriented rather than system-oriented". This means that companies are more interested in sales rather than trying to understand and affect the way that their employees work and think. Sutton (2001, p.96) makes this attitude even clearer by suggesting that creativity, although unquestionably important, is not and will never be any organisation's number one activity, since companies are focused on "making money right now from tried-and-true products". Overcoming this last barrier necessitates that organisations strive to understand their employees' way of working and thinking, and whenever necessary, to try and change these attitudes in order to foster creative work. Finishing with the examination of the key-factors required for a creative organisation and the key-barriers that must be overcome, some interesting conclusions have come up. Most companies focus on "doing things right", rather than "doing the right things" (Dougherty, D., 1996, p.180). This approach affects employees stance, since they are concentrated on simply following the established processes in fear of unpredicted (or even worse, undesired) results; thus coming up with innovative ideas seems rather difficult. Nevertheless, the existence of successful creative organisations indicates that achieving creative work is not as hard as it may sound. Finally, A.R. Wheeler's (President /Creative Director for Rev. Group) opinion that "solutions lie in looking at something familiar and then looking it again upside down and backward" (Meyer S., 2000, p.16), points out that infusing creativity inside an organisation is not an impossible task. <heading>Part BQuestion Four</heading>The impact of efficient product development processes on successful product introductions is highlighted by Zirger and Maidique (1990), who state that efficient processes are key-factors for the prosperity and growth of manufacturing firms. Furthermore, Cooper (1990, p.44) pinpoints that leading "new products from idea to market faster and with fewer mistakes" is the key for successful companies. The aforementioned statements justify the significant role of product development processes for a successful company. Under this perspective and in order to answer the assigned question, three product development processes are selected and described. Furthermore, the similarities and their differences are identified, and finally, the reasons that forced industries to develop these processes are discussed. <heading>4.1 Product Development Processes</heading>The three processes presented below are the Stage-Gate Systems, the Third-Generation Processes and the Life-Cycle Engineering. <heading>Stage-Gate Systems</heading>According to Cooper (1990, p.44), "a stage-gate system is both a conceptual and an operational model for moving a new product from idea to launch...a blueprint for managing the new product process to improve effectiveness and efficiency". This system uses stages and gates to manage the product development process. It divides the process in different stages and in order to move to the next stage, the process must successfully pass from the gate of the previous stage. The following figure represents a typical Stage-Gate System: <figure/>Cooper (1990, p.46) mentions that "each gate is characterised by a set of deliverables or inputs, a set of exit criteria, and an output", while O'Connor (1994, p.185) argues that the role of each gate is to "assure a high quality of work performance...during each stage". Cooper (1990, p.46) also states that senior managers often act as "gatekeepers", formatting multidisciplinary teams responsible for a series of actions such as: <list>Reviewing the quality of the inputsAssessing project's qualityApproving the action plan and allocating the required resources.</list>Finally, the project team approach and involvement of senior management are two important requirements for the successful implementation of the Stage-Gate Systems. (Cooper R., 1990) <heading>Third-Generation Processes</heading>According to Cooper (1994, p.8), the Third-Generation Process is the evolution of Stage-Gate Systems. This process however focuses on efficiency; "speeding up an already effective second generation stage-gate process" and allocating development resource in a more efficient way. In the following figure, a Third-Generation Process is presented: <figure/>The particular process tries to balance "the need for thoroughness of action and complete information versus the need to move quickly" (Cooper, R., 1994, p.9). Finally, according to Cooper (1994, pp.9-12) four basic elements (4 Fs) characterize the Third-Generation Processes: Fluidity. Processes must be "fluid and adaptable" and overlapping stages is permitted, since speeding up the development process -providing that companies understand the involved risks- can be an essential part of a product's success. Fuzzy gates. Gates can cause serious delays if for example information is missing. With the use of fuzzy gates, such delays are overcome, since the process can be carried out under not fully predefined conditions. Focused. "Prioritization methods" looking at the entire "portfolio of the projects" are utilized, thus companies can allot resources according to their forecasts about the results of their projects. Flexibility. Finally, passing through all the gates is not compulsory anymore, since "each project is unique and has its own routing through the process". <heading>Life Cycle Engineering</heading>According to Dowlatshahi (1994, p.110), Life Cycle Engineering (LCE) is an approach to concurrent engineering which has received much attention from "those individuals who consider various implications of product design from its inception to disposal", while Wanyamaal. (2003, p.307) state that LCE focuses on designing and producing products with "minimal environmental impact during their entire life-cycle". Wanyamaal. (2003, p.307) view LCE as a "decision-making methodology that considers environmental, performance and cost requirements throughout the duration of a facility". Dowlatshahi (1994, p.110) suggests that LCE tries to anticipate the "behaviour of the product/system over its entire life", shifting thus the emphasis from the traditional product development to the overall life-cycle of the product. Moreover, he mentions that LCE defines life-cycle costing and utilizes the recourses effectively Wanyamaal. (2003, pp.307-310) highlight five important elements of LCE. Design For the Environment (DFE) is the first element and its main goals are to "manage renewable resources efficiently, reduce the use of non-renewable resources, and minimize toxic release into the environment"; by implementing DFE early in the stages of design, the risk of changes with significant cost impacts later on is avoided. Environmentally Conscious Design and Manufacturing (ECD&M) is the second element, which focuses on industrial applications (i.e. "reduction of hazardous substances in the process"). The third element is the Life-Cycle Analysis (LCA) and is used to "evaluate the environmental performance of a product/process/activity over its entire life-cycle". End-of-life Disposition is the fourth element of LCE and it is used for the identification of "ideal end-of-life strategies". Finally, the Materials used in the manufacturing process, is the last element. They are considered very important since they can "improve technical efficiency and productivity, as well as reduce the environmental impact". <heading>4.2 Similarities & Differences </heading>The identified similarities between the three processes are mainly to do with their structure and their implementation in modern industry. Third-Generation Processes are the evolution of Stage-Gate Systems; thus, the philosophy that lies behind them is the same since both use stages and gates to manage the product development process. Furthermore, they both make use of multidisciplinary teams, promoting cross-functional team effort and project's approach, and involving different company's units in the product development process (Cooper R., 1990, 1994). The main similarity of LCE with the Stage-Gate Systems and the Third-Generation Processes is their application in industries. Wanyamaal. (2003) highlight the use of LCE in the automobile (i.e. BMW, Ford) and electronics and electromechanical (i.e. HP, IBM, Motorola) industry, while the case study of Saural. (2000) confirms the above, by implementing LCE in the comparison of five different automobile fenders. Similarly, Phillipsal. (1999) -in their comparative study- examine the Stage-Gate approaches of Rolls-Royce, General Electric and Motorola, proving the broad use of the Stage-Gate Systems in these industries. On the other hand, there are distinct differences between these processes. Cooper (1994, p.13) suggests that the introduction of the 4 Fs to the Third-Generation Processes is their main difference from the Stage-Gate Systems. These new elements make the process more flexible and adaptable. Delays caused by lack of information are avoided and specific techniques can lead to projects prioritization. Moreover, he stresses that Third-Generation Systems are "much more tailored to the needs and specifics of each project", than Stage-Gate Systems. But, according to the same author, this attribute makes Third-Generation Processes much more complex. A last difference identified, is the increased 'power' that project teams have in the Third-Generation Processes. Cooper (1994, p.13) describes this phenomenon as "a shift in authority", and highlights that "given that the project team is more familiar with the details and intricacies of their project that any group of senior managers could ever hope to be, senior management must increasingly rely on the team...". Finally, LCE's main difference from these two processes is its focus on the environmental impact of the product development process, and how this impact can be minimized in order to achieve the most eco-friendly product. In addition, LCE seems to narrow -at least for the time being- its implementation in the two industries mentioned above, while Stage-Gate Systems and Third-Generation Processes have a much broader range of utilization such as telecommunication services and petrochemical industries. (O'Connor P., 1994) After analyzing the similarities and the differences of these three product development processes, it is considered important to discuss what prompted industries to develop these processes. Cooper (1990, p.44) states that the main reason that forced companies to develop Stage-Gate System approach for product development processes, is the "increased pressure to reduce the cycle time yet improve their new product hit rate". Phillipsal. (1999, p.290) point out that an increasing number of companies use Stage-Gate Systems in order to "overcome the problems of product performance, development cost increases and development time slippage". Moreover, the same authors (p.290) state that Stage-Gate Systems allow companies to improve their products' quality, remove activities that do not add value and "reduce risk associated with the product's development". Furthermore, Cooper (1990, p.49) highlights that Stage-Gate Systems are highly market oriented, since "market-related activities, such as user needs and market research" are often included in the preliminary stages of this process. In addition, the same author suggests that a key-feature of Stage-Gate Systems is the parallel processing of many activities in different stages. This feature results in time compression, while keeping high levels of quality. In the same article, it is also stated that Stage-Gate Systems' 'ability' to evaluate projects in a fair and consistent way, choosing the most promising to carry on, and having a well-thought and clearly defined structure, are two more features that have made these systems so popular among companies. Finally, according to Cooper (1990), -back to the beginning of 90's- Stage-Gate Systems were considered as an efficient tool for managing, directing and controlling companies' innovation attempts. Nevertheless, the comparative study of Phillipsal. (1999) suggests that this approach was still popular at the end of that decade, and effectively implemented by well-known firms such as Bombardier Aerospace Group, Kodak, General Electric, Lucas Industries plc, Rolls-Royce and Motorola. In the same article it is also mentioned that although there are some differences -especially among the number of stages and gates- between the ways that the companies make use of these systems, the main idea remains the same, and Stage-Gate approach seems to handle effectively the product development process. However, an important drawback of Stage-Gate Systems is documented in O'Connor's (1994, p.186) article, based on a forum conducted by companies using Stage-Gate Systems. The inability to "overlap stages of activities" is thought to be a significant disadvantage of these systems. This and some additional weaknesses are recognised by Cooper (1994), who suggests the Third-Generation Processes as the solution to the barriers raised by the Stage-Gate Systems. According to Cooper (1994), Third-Generation Processes were developed as an improvement of Stage-Gate Systems. The implementation of the 4 Fs (see 4.1), eliminates many of the drawbacks of Stage-Gate Systems, making the product development process more tailored to companies' different needs. Procter & Gamble is a archetypical example of a company that uses Third-Generation Processes. The company has adopted a much more fluid and adaptable process, which enables it to "overlap the beginning and the end of succeeding phases provided that we [the company] understand the risks involved..." (Cooper, R., 1994, p.9). Moreover, the same author suggests that detailed information is not required anymore in order to continue on the next phase, thus time delays are minimised. However, the importance of balancing in-time decisions versus risk management is clearly stressed. Finally, Cooper (1994) argues that the misunderstanding of Stage-Gate systems as a bureaucratic procedure from some organisations is revised here, since Third-Generation Processes provide a flexible road map, rather than a 'strict path' to follow. Finally, the importance of LCE for modern organisations and the reasons that prompted them to develop it, is discussed as follows. Wanyama et al (2003, p.307) point out that LCE has become "a norm for global companies", that want to retain their competitive advantage. According to the authors, environment, economy, regulations and standards forced companies to develop a product development process capable of producing an eco-friendly product, taking into account apart from its environmental impact, factors such as performance and cost requirements. Thus, LCE has been developed in order for the industries to successfully cope with all these requirements. Moreover, features such as "reduced future costs for disposal, reduced environment and health risks, improved product quality at lower cost, safer and cleaner factories and better public image", are some of the main reasons that forced companies to apply LCE (Wanyama et al., 2003, p.308). The authors also state that some other factors such as reduced "energy consumption and wastes" and the consumers' demands for minimization of the environmental impacts while using the product, enforced the implementation of LCE. As mentioned before, LCE's main applications focus on the automobile industry and on the electronics and electromechanical industry. Recycling was the main reason that forced automobile industries to adopt LCE, since "automobiles are the most fully recycled manufactured products worldwide" (Wanyama et al., 2003, p.311). Examples of companies that use different elements or approaches of LCE include Ford, BMW and the French automobile industry. Moreover, in the same article it is stated that the main reason for using LCE in the electronics and electromechanical industry is the pollution caused by these products; thus designers must consider the environmental impacts of their products, focusing on mitigating pollution. HP, IBM and Motorola are some of the well-known companies that use LCE in order to produce eco-friendlier products, satisfying customers' demands. In conclusion, LCE was developed so as to satisfy in a profitable way the increasing customers' demands for environmentally friendlier products and to develop products with desirable attributes in a very efficient way. It is clear that each of the three aforementioned product development processes have affected the way that modern companies cope with the difficult task of developing and producing new products in a competent and profitable way, according to customers' needs and demands. The processes described above are only a small fraction of the existing ones, but their contribution in the development of successful products is unquestionable. <heading>Part C</heading>The goal of the particular case study was the development of a new product/ service. The team's first meeting was basically focused on finding existing market gaps, selecting a proposed one and trying to find ways to satisfy this gap. Although different proposals were heard during the meeting, the team's final choice was based on the lack of transportation inside universities and the ways that these gaps could be satisfied. In the second meeting an evaluation of the various proposals was conducted, and the development of a service of renting bicycles was selected. The next meetings were focused on developing the idea, calculating the developing costs, establishing final details (i.e. target price) and considering future potentials of the team's proposal. The efficient communication and cooperation among team-members was the most significant strength of the team. All the meetings were completed on time, and team-members were participating equally to the various processes. The members came up with different ideas -from rather common to very wild ones- and tried to avoid expressing their disapproval of some opinions heard. Conducting fertile conversations substituted processes such as the one proposed from Pugh S., and in general, the team's final choices and proposals were agreed upon unanimously. Finally, members' willingness to participate and suggest solutions helped the team's effort in completing the task in a satisfactory way. <fnote>Source: WMG module Product Design & Development Management, 2006 </fnote>On the other hand, the team's main weakness was the difficulty faced coming up with a truly innovative product. The team did not succeed in finding a genuinely creative idea; however, since the time to come up with and develop a new idea was limited, and according to Amabile (1998, p.82) "creativity may be slow-going", the team can be partly excused. <fnote>References (Part A) </fnote>Finally, the identification of the learning outcomes of this case study is important. Firstly, the participation on the case study made clear how difficult it is to identify a market gap and come up with a truly innovative product/ service, especially under time pressure. Participating in a multi-ethnic team and trying to make this team work efficiently, was the second major challenge and significant lesson learned. Communication and cooperation between people who do not speak the same language, come from different educational and cultural backgrounds and hence different perspectives, complicates the whole effort. However, the shared excitement and the willingness to participate overcame all these barriers. Participating in the process of brainstorming was also a major learning outcome. The interaction between the team's members and the way that one idea could instigate another, was truly impressive. Finally, an important learning outcome was to avoid the 'temptation' of criticizing other peoples' ideas, and to step back and see problems from a different point of view without being affected by one's prior knowledge and experiences. In conclusion, the participation in this case study proved to be an invaluable experience, providing the opportunity to experience the difficulties that the product development process entails, but at the same time giving the chance to feel the excitement of being part of an ambitious project. 