For a number of years I have worked for a small business, watching it grow. Only in the past year have I started to think about the tools & techniques required to set up such a business and how to implement them. I now realize that even if you believe that you have the best idea or invention since sliced bread, without the ability to show to others the economic viability and strategy to support it, the future outlook is grim. <heading>Reflections on the upper level pitch development</heading>In our first group meeting we brainstormed a number of different business ideas. I started to control the meeting and was consequently elected as group leader. This role may have been better served by another member of the group, but at the time we had not assessed the individual strengths of each member of the group and consequently this was not known. A number of idea-generating meetings followed with little or no success. I asked each member to think about ideas individually to bring to the next meeting and collate them. This was a major mistake. Virtually no ideas were brought to each meeting. On reflection if we had spent more time brainstorming in a group, sharing ideas and creating new ones together this process would have been dramatically improved. However, when we did brainstorm as a group, many ideas were rejected very quickly without enough discussion as problematic areas were focussed on. If a more open minded approach had been taken instead of quashing ideas almost immediately, I believe that our final business idea could have been a lot better. We eventually settled on a business idea that was to become the worst mistake we made because of the problematic brainstorming process. Organising meetings proved to be difficult however. I started by e-mailing each member of the group to remind them of the meeting. This proved not to be enough and I collected phone numbers to call and see why they did not attend. With hindsight I would have called everybody an hour before the meeting to make sure they were coming as I eventually had to later on in the project. A massive phone bill was incurred however, which could have been avoided by asking group members to call other members in a chain, even this though would have not assured attendance. On the whole, the pitch was a success. The criticism received suggested that the techniques used such as the positioning map, outlining a clear break even point, etc. were utilized well, but the underlying business idea was questioned. With a clearer brainstorming process, this could have been avoided. <heading>Reflections on the upper level pitch presentation</heading>Even though I had twisted my ankle the day before and was presenting, our pitch stood up well. 2 of the group presented the pitch. More involvement from other members would have promoted a better image of teamwork, however I believe this could have confused the audience. We made the mistake of not rehearsing for the presentation until two hours beforehand. This caused the preparation to be a little rushed and elevated nervousness. The pitch was delivered well despite this, with the timing and words were clear in our heads. Preparing the night before as well as the hours leading up to the pitch would have caused the team to be more relaxed and could have possibly eliminated any technical problems (such as the break even analysis was wrong, but was not noticed by us or the audience) and allowed us to improve on the presentation of the slides. With hindsight I believe that if we had focussed more on promoting the niche market (especially after identifying a virtually identical competitor!) for our business, the future prospects would have been more convincing. <heading>Reflections on the business plan development</heading>As a team we decided not to start the business plan until after Christmas. I was not entirely happy with this and tried to change their minds, but to no avail. Knowing the time constraints we faced because of this, I would not let it happen again, trying harder to convince them what a bad idea it was. When the time came to allocate work for the plan I believe the team dynamics were developed enough to assess accurately everybody's strengths and apportioned work accordingly. One group member started to not turn up to meetings at this stage and was unreachable. At the time we didn't think this was a major problem and we kept sending updates via e-mail. The member's attendance was non-existent from that point forward. As we didn't address the problem immediately (finding out how to reach the member somehow through the EUO, for example) it got rapidly worse and virtually turned into a four person team which was a disaster. Continuous e-mails containing updates on the plan and the plan so far helped everyone to see the group's progress, allowing individuals to assess how much work others had done, praising those who had supplied a sufficient quality and quantity and causing the whole group to encourage stragglers to keep up. This was particularly good for me as it wasn't I wasn't the only one "encouraging" stragglers, causing a more productive response. I would definitely do this again. I am particularly proud of (and interested in) the financial section of the plan. Before this course I had no idea how to present the economic viability of a business without a history, believing that financial analysis in this case was basically guesswork. I now know that this is not the case (although some guesswork is involved) and by using market research a clear financial future can be accurately predicted. I have come to realize that the entrepreneurial process of starting a business needs a lot more structure than I first thought, with careful time management of all parties involved, using appropriate techniques to produce a business plan to a standard to convince investors of the viability and convince yourself, before leaping into a market with no prior knowledge, no financial plan and subsequently failing as many technically proficient engineers continue to do. 