<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>Opportunities and challenges are coherent in the target export market of Hong Kong and mainland of China where the market entry strategy will be analyzed basing on the external environments facing by Wallaroo Wines, Australian. Moreover, the each situation of the price, product, place, promotion (4P) strategies relative to four entry strategies: exporting, licensing, franchising and foreign direct investment will be considered. Consequently, a final entry strategy choice- a joint ventures strategy is suggest to company. </abstract><heading>1. Introduction </heading>The purpose of this report is to recapitulate how an entry strategy is set limited on the the materials provided by Les Brown and Wai-sue - Wallaroo Wines. The socre the report is the price, product, place, promotion (4P) strategies of Wallaroo Wines that will be regulated adapting to particular new environments in Kong Kong and mainland of China. Also, the extent of those particular 4P situations will diverge according to the degree of foreign involvement and the nature of target markets. There are four entry strategies are available, which are exporting, licensing, franchising and foreign direct investment. And finally, link company strengths with final strategy choice- a joint ventures strategy. <heading>.2. Background and Situation Analysis</heading><heading>2.1 Background of Company Products and the Current Market</heading>Located in the burgeoning winegrowing region in South-eastern Queensland of Australia where is a world-wide recognized tourist area, Wallaroo Wines is an undersized family owned winery holding on a 300 acre property with exquisite vineyards ( ) The advantaged soil and cool climate contributes to an excellent reputation for the delicate wine of white and red varieties. At cellar doors (winery outlets), Wallaroo Wines is pretty attractiveness to the tourists at a fruit flavours with a velvety feeling in palate packed the fruit characters - the elegant series as Cabernet Sauvignon, Shiraz and Riesling had already won medal, which are also available at wholesale prices to local restaurants, distributors, retail outlets (as bottle shops) and on-line sales repurchased by the visitors. <heading>2.2 The Market Problems</heading>As a lesser brand in Australia market with diminutive products categorization and producing scale, the disadvantaged position in distribution channels -- inadequate tourist resources, unattractive e-commerce on website, restricted bottle shops, intense brand competition and the unobtainable control over marketing power excluded the support from particular chief wine distributors -- threaten both domestic and international export marketing extending strategy. However, the introduction of convenience and low cost plastic wine casks technology and storage technologies such as Tetra Packs in Australian market can reasonably advantage Wallaroo Wines' exporting competitive. <heading>3. Market Analysis of the External Environment Variables</heading>As the modern society in the flourished stage, the Hong Kong and mainland of China, especially the eastern coast area including most developed cities like Shanghai are taken as the target markets for Wallaroo Wines. <heading>3.1 The considerations of the cultural environment</heading>Culture, defined as a distinguishing characteristics of learned behavior patterns and the members of a society (Czinkota and Ronkainen, 2004), is a crucial infective environmental influence at a successful traditional Asian markets entry strategy. The consuming values and attitudes in Hong Kong and the eastern coast area of mainland of China are like acculturated to accept the excellent things from other culture. At typical occasions in China like wedding celebrations, leisure gathering of family or friends, business entertainment activities, increasing Chinese individuals are taking their noses up at drunkable distilled spirits and rejecting the filling beer in favor of wine particularly in the red wine. The more and well educated public generally believe the gentle and elegant wine could be a symbol of status which is acceptable not only as a necessity of saving face but also is an evaluation of personal tastes for health. Also, customers on mainland of China and Hong Kong have more preference of the French wine to Australian in subconscious, while customers in Hong Kong more favored at XO. At the time, the local brand Wangchao and Greatwall are activating on in Chinese and international markets. In some views of aesthetics, the cherry color of red wine also is standing for a luck perspective. The growing public attentions to the anticancer avail and health protection effect of red wine have spread the word about the wine, which encourages a daily kiss a petty cup. Also the prevalence of e-shopping searching in internet can be a good opportunity to start the advertisement and introduction of wine brand. Those take Wallaroo Wine a facility into the two Chinese markets. Furthermore, the fashionable customers in Hong Kong commonly can select and evaluate a fine bottle of wine perceiving by critical sense in sketchy. However, although the adult literacy is 85% in 2000 (The U.N population database,n.d.) the knowledge of how to discriminate and degust wine and do a proper choice appropriate for the food or cuisine still isn't pervading in the mainland of China. In China, the preference of a smooth red wine to dry or white is immediately coming from the favor of a sweet in Chinese dietetic culture. A majority of the decision-making process is directly related to advices from personal relations via word of mouth, regardless the price. That makes Wallaroo Wine -- a new wine brand should pay more propaganda to the mainland market. <heading>3.2 The Analysis of the Economic Environment</heading>The mainland of China is a middle income developing area, where the economic environment is dominant role affecting the impetus of marketing. Inhabitants living in these cities located in eastern coast area of the mainland of China have a densest population (contain 60% China population) and strongest purchasing power supported by the $15617GDP per capita and occupies 18.72% consumable retail amount in￥72860 million of China in 2001. Also the macroeconomic went with a fantastic GDP per capita increase rate in 8.9 from 1990 to 2001, which is optimistically expected to maintain in such a high developing speed as a tendency of the next thirty years. (Difference in 8 Areas of China, n.d) As for Hong Kong, this newly industrialised metropolis--one of the orient four stats for its speedy and practical budding model, also famous as a recreational and shopping heaven attracted extraordinary consumption. The social development level illuminated from PQLT ( 94.08 in 2004) also is factually corresponding with the economical develop level in China, which mean the Chinese has the ability to turn their attentions of physiology and safe needs to the needs of social, belonging and esteem self-actualization (healthy, fashionable and luxurious) (Maslow hierarchy in Belch.G.E & Belch.M.A. n.d.). An attractive situation both in Hong Kong and the mainland of China is there are not local fertile resources as fine materials for elegant wines. That provides a huge and board potential market for the consumption of wine, despite of an intense competition. On the other hand, according to the enhanced negotiation power benefited from the strength of economic status, Wallaroo would deal with formidable distributors as well as in Australia. Webster says Hong Kong consumers are competing to build cellars of fine wines, with ideal storage conditions, to match those of their friends and business associates - but they also consume them. A few years ago, many of them barely knew that wine existed (Winestate, 2005). <heading>The Investigations of the Financial Environment</heading>' The credit availability determines sales and also related to the financial risk allowing the exporting. Commercial risk such as a delay or default of payment in the mainland of China won't be news. And the liquidation of bankruptcy isn't under an avowed and equitable measure controlled by insufficient law. Also a fixed exchange rate and interest rate in the mainland can be a risk influences the current flows of foreign currency when export to China. But on the other side, the flexible rate in Hong Kong maybe a potential foreign exchange risk as the financial storm in 1997. The advantage situation is that the worldwide first-class export trade insurance agencies and commercial banks standing in great numbers in mainland and Hong Kong guarantee the lender against default by exporter or importer to avoid financial risks. Official Trade Finance also takes an available third party place either as a loan or a guarantee provided by government. In Hong Kong, the security and facility of Foreign Exchange Market can provide hedge to avoid foreign exchange risk. <heading>3.4 The Investigation of International Political and Legal Environment</heading>The controlled economy of China under the macroeconomic regulations from government might be a weak point of export to China, such as a high customs for luxurious products to choke back a luxurious consumption habits. A attention should be paid upon the intelligent property protect law - such as using right of the brand, patent, trademark or prescription - isn't strictly carry into execution by policy, so a defended solution of counterfeit should be considered at advance. However, under the frame of WTO treaties, the an open, friendly and cooperating stance responding to global trade problems is the central fundamental of the international politic and legal work in China, definitely including Hong Kong. So, it is unnecessary to worry about whether there will be reluctances or restrictions from Chinese government. <heading>4. Strategy Formulations and Evaluation </heading>Pricing, product, place, promotion (4P) strategies of Wallaroo Wines challenges a new market entry strategy as an attack or a response to competitive changes. There are many choices available to Wallaroo with opportunities and threatens. <heading>Analysis of 4P Situations </heading>In a dynamic way, the feasibility range for price setting --price skimming with high-priced unique products, following the competitive market price or penetration pricing with low price to generate volume sale -- is established by demand, market structure and competition (risk of dumping action etc.), corporate objectives, environmental constraints and costs(fixed, variable and exported-related). In mainland and Hong Kong, the majority of people tend to purchase the wine with good price-quality. Production adaptation is basic marketing actions to fit consumers' standards of living, an increase in their satisfaction, and perhaps even more happiness. Lower alcohol and more sweet taste, or a lesser acidity will be close to Chinese choice. Moreover, cask is easy to store for restaurant such as western-style food which is popular at China, traditional branded bottle can used to pack wine top series such as the Cabernet Sauvignon used in serious occasion or for treasuring up, and bottle as 'clean skins' or new plastic tetra pak or can in a user convenience package for daily usage. Packaging aesthetic, a cheery color with a tersely shape, is practicality favored by Chinese. In International distribution, Wallaroo Wine can sells to its customers directly through its own sales force, indirectly through independent intermediaries or an outside distribution system with regional or global coverage. The current distribution culture, competition circumstances as well as the company objectives will alter the choice of place. Now, Wallaroo not has the financial support for setting up and maintaining a new channel system in China and Hong Kong. However, there are many useful place methods of direct or indirect export though cooperating with Governmental agencies --Export Management Company (EMCs), Export Trading Company (ETCs) or Private trade directories, brokers, distributors/dealers with a careful and adequate communication The promotional mix which includes the effect of advertising, personal selling, public commercially significant news will direct motivate the acceptation of Wallaroo Wine. Push strategies focus on personal selling, while pull strategies depend on mass communications through media (advertising of consumer-oriented goods) and integrated marketing communications coordinated a broad range of promotional tools to reach a target market. The Internet in modern society is a necessity that can expand marketing communications. Trade show or exhibitions participation can let customer examine the product and at same time cultivate goodwill and contact directly, <heading>Entry Strategies to the Mainland of China and Hong Kong</heading>Export intermediaries - independent public commission representatives or distributors - offering contacts with retailers, calling on customers, and managing delivery of goods can efficiently facilitate the exporting work for Wallaroo. They afford a better distribution access and more trading transactions. However, Wallaroo has to present a price advantage, technological advantage, unique products to gain the benefits from economies of scale, and at the same time has little time to proximity to customers directly. In both China and Hong Kong, Wallaroo have to motivate these export intermediaries by more discounts or benefits. Export market pricing will make the same price with competitors or cost-oriented (such as export-related costs) pricing and marginal cost method of a different brand belonged to Wallaroo or same brand at first entry to China can quickly help to occupy a share of market. The push strategy seems a direct and efficient method to enter. Also the varieties of market in the booming areas, the control and communication of the distributors seem more important. Licensing is one form of foreign market entry with huge potential profit and recovered costs. To quick preempt market entry before competition, licensing has more engaging in target market than exporting, and less risky than foreign direct investment. The licensor permits the licensee to use its intellectual property (product and/or patent rights) in exchange for a royalty payment. However, Wallaroo Wines will encounter the trouble of losing the control of product quality and marketing effects because licensee controls marketing functions, even worse is that licensee may become local and international competitor. Franchising is a licensing arrangement where the licensor concedes the licensee the right to do business in a prescribed constitution. Manufacturer-wholesaler systems or manufacturer- retail systems can be appropriate for Wallaroo Wines. This strategy requires a high degree of worldwide standardization of products, price and similar place layout and promotion activities. A foreign investment in China is the intense global market expansion manner. This obtains economic resources (human, materials or transportation) of production and ensures the supply of win is timely, accurate and facilitate to the market. Full ownership can provide powerful control of 4P. Or joint ventures share the knowledge and also risk. It encourages the customers, suppliers and distributors to respect the brand of Wallaroo and create more supports to circulate in the market chain. Moreover, the high customs can be avoided by a foreign directly investment --as if to build a product line in China or Hong Kong, Wallaroo Wines will gain even more tariffs favorable policies. <heading>5 Recommendations </heading>At the first stage of the market entry, the initial capital investment is such a huge number for Wallaroo. Consequently, joint ventures strategy seems like an appropriate choice for a less risk and financial requirement, what' more important is that provide a short distance to embrace local culture, customers and market pulse. Besides the retain of competitive element of standard core product - a fruitiness wine, a augmented product with lower alcohol and more sweet taste could be more favored by office lady account for half number of employee in China and Hong Kong, or a lesser acidity and one hundred percent nature without additive sugar can be better to Chinese adults' taste, especially the ever-increasing diabetic for business social intercourse. Traditional branded bottle with a cheery color with classic a tersely shape, plus a marketable price which will help to make the position and image of product linked to other brands at a similar price, adding with a charming advertisement - heath coming from the Australian grapes, is fevered brand is going to stir in the mainland of China and Hong Kong. It is a fantastic opportunity for these companies to gain exposure and access to key trade contacts and the local wine and trade media, also it is necessary to maintain and ease the wine cellar in multiple cellar locations with multiple notes. Add wines in the Food and Wine Festivals also is good place to show the wonderful brand. 