<heading>1. Introduction</heading>For a new business, business plan is an outline prepared for the purpose of capturing credit and supports. This business plan is trying to get financing for the new startup company-- My Mp3--. This plan focuses on the financing aspect to submit a comprehensive business plan over a five year period. After a brief executive summary, there are various revenue and expenditures categories that will be applied to the new business. Subsequently, the possible source of finance to fund the project will be reviewed and analysed. <heading>2. Background Summary </heading>My Mp3 is a new small-sized public limited e-company which is worked out its business online. The web page will be designed to sell various brands' Mp3 and Mp4 with the focus on the market mainly in China. Customers can easily compare different brands' products within similar functions (the price-value) and purchase their favorites on a discount price on www. mymp3. Com. While, there are also additional services including downloading music. The digital products - such as the Mp3 and Mp4--- are popular fashion products which are received by a board target. It is a growing industry where the customers and digital products providers are keeping changing their digital products frequently for updated or new-fashioned products. Moreover, although the competition is increasing by new market enters; a qualified service with well designed use-friendly webpage will help My Mp3 to success in this industry. The operational management team will include one full-time office clerk and one manager (the owner) to manage the website, post-sale and after-sale customer services, and one part-time IT professional designers to help the setup work for web pages. <heading>3. Financial Section</heading>Cash flow is regarded as the vital factor for a business in most contexts, which is a evidence if business is in a credit risk. This business plan comprises the revenue models and the cost models for the new business. <heading>3.1 Revenue Models</heading>There are two main income resources in My Mp3: the revenues from product sales and revenues from service sales. The detailed quantities are forecasted in a prudent (or conservative) practice, shown in the table 1 in Appendix 1. Those figures are assumed in an average basis for the five year. The first incomes model is form the sales of Mp3 and Mp4 that is the dominating revenues (appropriate 60 percent) in this business. My Mp3 will promote these digital products from different companies, which are available for both those famous brands and new jumped-up companies. It is forecasted that there is an average weekly sale of 10 items (Mp3 and Mp4) for the five years at least, with price range nearly from £30 to £150 (assuming that the average selling price is about £60). It is usually 10-20% lower than high street price. There are nearly 52 weeks a year, therefore, the annual revenue is appropriately going to be £62,400. The loss form a discount on the price can be offset by a saving from the payment for a marketplace rent. The advantage of this revenue model is that all business can receive cash immediately, which can be a vital factor for a new company to success. Secondly, the advertising revenue is another vital income for an online e-company, which normally occupies 20 percent of the total revenue or even more. My Mp3 will provide banners in the webpage as an advertising place for at least 5 companies, especially for these new jumped-up companies who are eager to find a channel to promote their brand image, not only for the online sales, but also for the market place sales. This banner advertisement fee can be paid by pay-per-click (PPC) (usually 10 pence is a minimum bid) or pay-per-thousand, depending on the website performance (online clickthrough rate, conversion rate) (Chaffey, et al., 2006). Moreover, My Mp3 can provide a professional webpage designing for advertisements, not only the products suppliers, but also other companies, such as a window of a public relationship management for IT companies. Totally, it is assumed the revenue in this part ill be £4000 for one advertisement for one year. The advantage of this revenue model is that it can bring additional incomes straightforwardly, as well as promote the own webpage together with other brands. Additionally, there is an extra service on the My Mp3 webpage, which is to provide music in MP3 and WMA formats for customers to download. It is planned to give the popular top 100 songs online, which will be updated every six months. Customers will pay 80p for each time to download a song, instead of 99p market price. And this discount price only for the clients who bought the products form My Mp3. This plan forecast the annual clickthrough rate is 10,000. Moreover, affiliates model will be used here for Mp3 and Mp4 insurance. My Mp3 provides opportunities (a link) to purchase insurance for their high valued Mp3 and Mp4, redeeming the loss for missing or breaking, for a short time (basing on a monthly insurance). My Mp3 will incorporate with a small insurance company. The affiliate fee will be calculated as a percentage (10%) of on a pay-for-performance basis. If it is assumed that My Mp3 just receives 500 one-month settlements per year (nearly half of the sales), the company can get £80 as a minimum. Furthermore, auction model can also contribute to the company's revenue in a certain level in the future. My Mp3 will provide a section for customers to sell their second Mp3 and Mp4 and charge the item listed for sale in a small amount (£1). It is used as a way to achieve a higher clickthrough rate rather than gaining a charge. On the other side, My Mp3 is new brand; therefore, it is not famous and successful enough to use the franchising model to sell the business operation 'idea', brand or a proven formula. The revenue sharing model in affiliate revenues model is not competitive because suppliers usually not will to afford the risk of others company's the selling performance. Moreover, transactions model is for the company who act an agency obtains commissions based on a transaction completed. My Mp3 is going to buy the products form other companies, therefore, this revenue model is not available. To the subscription model, My Mp3 is an e-retailer who does not offer a specially graded information or service in return for an annual subscription (payment) currently. However, it model can be used for music download in the future, where there is enough registered customers agree to receive a customized promotion portfolio (such as to pay songs by an annual fee). <heading>3.2 Cost Models</heading>The business plan will need to consider providing the adequate working capital to meet all costs including set-up expense, organisational operating expense, other expense for market development, technology and work team and so on (Nevitt & Fabozzi, 2004). The detailed figures for cost are assumed on an annual basis shown in the Appendix 2 in a prudent practice. Firstly, My Mp3 will bring set-up expense, including the initial payments of the good of sales to trade suppliers, provision for losses, land, and equipment. The main expenses are incorporation and registration fees and fixed asset requirement (involved the computers cost and a small storage room cost to store the products before selling). To maximise the cash in current business, the payments of the products sales will be depending on a credit, which implies My Mp3 will try to take a certain period (3-6 months) delay of payment for the digital products to suppliers. The business's selling income will ideally offset the stock expenditure without consuming the working capital. Alternatively, in practice, it may be more seasonable for the counterparties that there is a 30% initial payment (£18,720) and the rest of the payment would be settled after the products have been sold. It is assumed the cost of products sales is equal to 60% of the sales (£37,440, the profit rate is 40%). Moreover, this credit strategy will be similarly used in purchase the copy right for a music download service. The payment to music providers will be occurred when a song has been downloaded by a customer. It is assumed the cost of one clickthrough is equal to 40% of the sales (the net profit rate is 60%). These works can be audited and recorded by software without difficulty. My Mp3 will put out contracts with different suppliers on the payment polices. What is more, the storage room and computers (3 computers) will be leased, instead of buying a warehouse, to reduce the disbursement by cash. Together with other office equipment and office supplies, the annual payment will be appropriate £1,000. Furthermore, My Mp3 will bring other organisational operational expense. Those work team cost involves telecommunications costs (about £1,500), office place rent cost (a small low-cost place roughly in £1,500), website cost (an annual fee about£1,000), insurance paid (approximately£1,000), salaries cost and other overhead cost (around £20,000). The total cost is assumed at nearly £25,000 per year. Additionally, My Mp3 would authorise a third-party deliver company to carry out the transportation activities. According to the characters of digital products (small size), the transport cost, delivering the products from the suppliers, will be not too much, about £3,000 per year. The expense of delivering the products to customers will be offered by customers. Additionally, these free marketing tools will be the main marketing methods adopted in My Mp3, such as the registering the website and struggling the highest ranking indexed within the main search engines, opt-in emailing marketing, exchanging the advertise banner or using online public relations. The main marketing development expense will be mainly on the purchasing an e-mails lists, if it is necessary, which normally will take £1,000 per year. <heading>3.3 Project Analysis</heading>It can be deduced from the table 1 and table 2 that the project will require £29,000 -- £49,720 to cover the outflow of cash, and it will create a annual profit ( net cash flow )about £20,010 (£ 90,650-£70,640 = £20,010). Therefore, the company needs appropriate £ 30,000 -- £ 50,000 as working capital. What's more, the pay back period will be near 2.1 - 3.5 years and the accounting rate of return is between 0.28 - 0.47 (see Appendix 3). This profit could be an underestimate number because the revenue (such as the sales) is estimated in a conservative manner. The revenue will be increasing due to the growing webpage impression and online visit quantity. My Mp3 will have a small inventory for the products, and the e-business not does require an expense office in a good position, therefore, together with the lease policy, the fix cost does not tie up a lot of cash. What is more, the risk of a dead debit or bankrupt is quite low in My Mp3, because all most of the sales are received by cash and the outflow of cash is quite low because of the credit payment strategy. Furthermore, it is more than 90 percent possibility that the variable cost of per product will be decreasing due to a growing bargaining power from a larger amount of orders raised with increasing webpage impression and online quantity visit. Furthermore, there are a lot ways to cut the cost and raise the revenues. A lot of online communication and marketing techniques can be used to increase the sales online in a cost-efficiency way. For example, in the future, auction model could be a new important income streams as My Mp3 develops. Or ideally, after a strong cooperating relationship having been built between My Mp3 and its suppliers, the products can be delivered from the suppliers to customers directly in order to cut the transportation cost for customer and company, as well as building another competitive advantage over other competitors. <heading>4 The Sources of Finance</heading>My Mp3 will be willing to establish sound debt to equity relationships which contribute to the successful of the business through sufficient equity or excessive leverage (Nevitt & Fabozzi, 2004). My Mp3 is planning to obtain funds for business through a number of different sources. Firstly, because My Mp3 is a small e-company with a manageable business risk, long-term loans on a annual payment basis - 5 years loan-- are an excellent and main source of finance when the interest rates are relative low at current (Green, 2006). My Mp3 will give a loan guarantee scheme to require financial supports from financial institutions (such as banks), individuals or business angels (which will provide 3-5 years within small investment size). Loans, being engaged about 50 percentage of the working capital (£ 25,000), are often used for fixed assets payment such as warehouse and machinery at business starting up period. The advantage of is long-term loans that the interest payments will be lower than short-term, and brings advantage of tax deductions (Banks. 2001). My Mp3 will quest additional short-term financing to manage the uncertainty affects the cash budget (Broyles, 2003). It will be probably 10 percentage of the total working capital (£ 5,000). The main source is the flexible rated overdraft bank loan in the bank account for a short period, which will help My Mp3 to overcome the cash shortage (often is used for buying supplies) during the business running. Alternatively, equity funding is a good proposition to guarantee a good market value for business. It is a long term source of finance, requiring about £20,000 to finance the rest 40% of the total working capital. The self-financing from owner will up to £10,000 (50% of equity), and My Mp3 will give proportional shares (50% of ownership in total) to different private shareholders (individuals). It means a share in the control of the business. However, the advantage is that encourages the directors to operate the business and pay dividends under a well manner (Broyles, 2003). Furthermore, the equity financing will have more potential opportunities to raise additional capital by issuing new shares used for business expansion. What's more, debentures, venture capital and shares issued to public for a large sum are not suitable for My Mp3 currently. To gain more cash, the funds can come from the business' internal sources, such as reducing stocks, delaying the payments for suppliers and lease finance (as the credit strategy and lease contracts shown above). <heading>5. Conclusion</heading>My Mp3 is a new small-sized public limited e-company selling various brands' Mp3 and Mp4 with the focus on the Chinese market. This business plan comprises the revenue models, from product sales (60%), advertising (20%), music download, insurance and auction, as well as the cost models, from the cost of products sold, the copy right for songs downloaded, warehouse, equipment and office, work team, transport and marketing activities. This business can be paid back at 2.1 - 3.5 years and the accounting rate of return is between 0.28 - 0.47. Moreover, the main income resources in My Mp3 are coming from lone-term loan (50%), short-term loan (10%), and equity funding (40%) (includes the self-financing (20%) and shares (20%)). From the analysis shown above, it can not be denied that My Mp3 has a potential strength to last the business over a five year. 