<heading>Introduction: A Thought about Research Ethics</heading>Most of the textbooks about social research methods include a chapter that discusses research and ethics (Bryman 2004, Denzin 1970, May 1997). However, very few of them provide a definite conclusion at the end of the discussion, let alone a solution to the argument. Why is it difficult to draw a conclusion about ethics? There can be many reasons to explain this. Firstly, the issue of ethics is interwoven with the personal values of the researcher. If we accept the notion that knowledge is not "objective" but it varies according to interpretation, so is social research. Different researchers will have different interpretations on what is ethical and unethical, as Denzin put it, "What is ethical in one period, one university, one professional, or one group may be unethical in another" (1970: 256). Besides, a piece of research is not an individual craft. The research may be funded by an organization that has a particular expectation on the findings; the influence of the "gatekeepers" will come to play their roles when researchers have to negotiate with them for the access to information. Moreover, the interaction between the researchers and the research subjects should also be put into consideration. These interests can hardly be consistent with each other. Last but not least, if we all agree that the paramount goal of research is the production of knowledge (Denzin 1970), then another question still arises - at what cost should we pursue this goal? (Hammersly & Atkinson 1995) I would elaborate the above ethical dilemmas by the discussion of a piece of research study. <heading>Case Discussion</heading>Bryman believed that discussions about research ethics should not be restricted to the extremely notorious cases, when in fact the potential for "ethical transgressions" can be much more general (2004: 506). I cannot agree with this more. In support of his argument, instead of picking the "classical cases" of ethical transgression, I chose to review a random piece of research that was introduced in the previous seminar - the "Critical Realist Ethnography: The Case of Racism and Professionalism in a Medical Setting" by Sam Porter (1993), with a new ethical dimension, and in relation to the discussion of research design. Porter's work studied how racism affects the occupational relationships between the nurses and doctors inside a hospital. The approaches of case studies and ethnography were both adopted. (As Blaikie (2000) suggested, classification of research designs is not mutually exclusive, particular approaches can be combined together). Porter's study focused on one particular hospital in the north of Ireland, and participant observation was carried out for three months in 1989 when the researcher was an employed nurse in the hospital. Some particular research approaches are easily related to particular ethical issues. For instance, in the experimental approach, ethical issues may arise when either the "experimental group" or the "control group" is manipulated to be disadvantageous (Blaxter, Hughes & Tight 2001). While in ethnographical studies, access to particular settings may lead to the breach of confidentiality and privacy (Denscombe 2003). The case of Porter has offered the grey area for an ethical debate. During the three months of ethnographical study, he was also the employed staff in the hospital. His "dual identity" created the problem of the conflict of interest. His identity as a staff allowed him to access to the private talks among the nurses behind the "professional stage", where valuable information was provided. However, the close relationship between the researcher and his research subjects would make the subjects soon forget about the fact that they are participating in a research. It blurred the line between an "overt" and "covert" observation, especially when Porter did not give full informed consent to the research participants. Informed consent requires that the participants should be given as much information as possible to make an informed decision about whether or not to participate (Bryman 2004). It may sound reasonable and just in the first place, however, the ethical value of informed consent can be contradictory against other values that researchers tend to uphold. As Denzin argued, it is the struggle between the "reveal" and the "conceal", "Sociologists will always be criticized because they disclose a perspective...that someone wished to conceal" (1970: 268). Ethnographical researchers highly value the "natural setting" and they believe it is the way to guarantee a valid qualitative research (Wills 1978). However, once the research subjects were informed about the true purpose of the study, they may choose to "erase" all the related traces that they want to conceal in life, which subsequently distorts the "natural setting" that the researchers aim to preserve. We may question if the practice of "informed consent" has prohibited the pursuit of research validity in the qualitative study. It is a perpetual dilemma or struggle between the researcher and the research participants, and it is exactly the dilemma that Porter encountered; he chose to deal with it by "hiding" the fact. His research subjects were only aware that the research was about the "communication between nurses and the other health workers"; the word "racism" was never mentioned to the participants (1993: 599). If the participants have the chance to read the research findings and have noted that their careless utterances such as "bloody Arabs" (602) have been recorded and printed as "evidence" of racism inside the hospital, they may feel that they have been betrayed and deceived by intended misinformation. At the end of the report, Porter made a remark which stated, "In fairness to the nurses, racist language was rarely uttered" (607). I question to what extent the clarification can compensate the bad feelings that he created among his colleagues / subjects. The last debatable practice in the study is the matter of confidentiality. Does the omission of names mean the concealment of identity? In the hospital which houses 54 doctors and nurses (and only six of the doctors are from the racialised minorities), it is very likely that the staff can still tell "who is who" with regard to the other information disclosed in the passage, such as the "only" African doctor, the "nasty" Pakistani consultant and "bloody" Arabic doctor. Such kind of disclosure may affect the group dynamic as well as the team morale severely, since the report made the "backstage" racist comments visible to everyone. <heading>On the Other Side of the Power Spectrum: A Vulnerable Researcher</heading>The case of Porter has portrayed a "powerful" image of the researchers. They can place themselves "undercover" and invade private premises to observe; they can deceive the participants with or without intention. On the other hand, there is a "vulnerable" image of the social researchers available in some methodological discussions. Researchers can be under enormous constraints or threats which are imposed by the sponsors, gatekeepers or even the apparently "harmless" subjects. The piece of work that I am going to examine is one of these cases. In "Conducting Qualitative Research on Wife Abuse: Dealing with the Issue of Anxiety" by Sevaste Chatzifotiou (2000), the researcher examined the experience of violent abuse by conducting in-depth interviews with 53 Greek women. Chatzifotiou stated clearly that a "feminist and context-specific" approach was adopted as research design. The feminist approach is considered to be a "revolution" against the conventional value of social research (Lee-Treweek & Linkogle 2000). The emotional side of both the researcher and participants is emphasized, and the researcher's political stance is also made explicit in the hope of "ending women's unequal position in society" (Chatzifotiou 2000: section 3.3). In consequence, the feminist approach aims at establishing an open and active exchange between the participants and researcher. The notion of "equality" was emphasized repeatedly by Chatzifotiou. She attempted to minimize the gap between the (powerful) researcher and the (powerless) subjects by means of strictly following the researchers' "code of practice". For example, a full explanation of the research purpose was given to every subject, and the confidentiality of the collected information was also guaranteed. Sufficient preparation was made to protect the participants; unexpectedly, the researcher was also exposed to depression and anxiety during and after the research process. When interviewing the abused women, Chatzifotiou found herself trapped by a matrix of roles she was expected to play. She was at the same time a researcher, a listener, a woman, or simply a human being on whom the abused women depended for condolence and comfort. She felt stressed when she was "listening to the women's traumatized stories... and struggling to decide as to the degree and the way to respond" (2000: section 7.4). The traumatized feeling continued after she finished the interviews. <heading>Conclusion: A thought about Reflexivity</heading>The research experiences of Chatzifotiou and Porter showed a dynamic interplay of power between the researchers and their surroundings. The researchers may have ways to "manipulate" the settings, but they are also caught by the various constraints and danger in return. Chatzifotiou and Porter made their choices of which side to take in the diagram of value and power. As Becker argued, "The question is not whether we (the researchers) should take sides, since we inevitably will, but rather whose side are we on?"(1967: 239) How can we know which side the researchers are on? It depends on how "honest" the researchers are when they "talk" to the audience. The ethical issues of social research can be controversial, and sometimes "concealment" of the research purpose may be inevitable; however, the researchers should at least have the courage to give a full methodological account on their work and let society scrutinize and debate. Here comes the idea of reflexivity. The ways in which the researchers discuss their research process and findings in an open and inquiring manner, should be a fundamental part of the research process itself (May 1997), and it is how the researchers keep themselves ethically accountable to the public. (1634 words) 