<heading>Introduction</heading>Quantitative and qualitative research strategies occupy two distinctive foundations in the domain of social research. Their different assumptions about knowledge and reality lead to different sets of methodologies, which in turn have the strengths and limitations of their own (Bryman 2004, Creswell 2003, Denzin 1970) A straightforward solution to maximize their strengths will be the application of a multi-strategy research, which refers to the integration of quantitative and qualitative research strategies within one single project (Bryman 2004). However, instead of a simple assumption about "the more the better", a multi-strategy research can arouse more problems than it is supposed to resolve(Green, Preston 2005). If we would like to draw a critical comparison between single and multi-strategy research, three key questions should be addressed: 1. How effective is the chosen research strategy in answering the research questions? 2. Does the multi-strategy research enjoy exclusive "merits" that make it naturally "better" than the single strategy research? 3. Are there any defects in multi-strategy research? I would firstly give a brief introduction of my selected studies before I answer the questions. <heading>"Learning to Labour" by Paul Willis (1977)</heading>The study sought to answer the question, "Why do working class kids end up with working class jobs?", by following 12 white working class kids from school to work in two years. A range of qualitative research strategies such as participant observation, group discussions and informal interviews were adopted. Willis concluded that modern schools functioned as authoritative institutions, where teacher-student relationships became a relationship between the powerful and the powerless. Working class "lads" rejected the school's authority together with the knowledge, which made them remain with the working class jobs. <heading>"Money and Marriage" by Jan Pahl (1989)</heading>This is a multi-strategy research which examined the financial arrangement inside a household. 102 pairs of couple with at least one child who was under 16 years old were selected for interviews. Multi-strategy skills were employed in both of the data collection and data analysis process. For instance, in-depth interviews (qualitative) were carried out based on a structured questionnaire (quantitative), and findings were presented in figures (quantitative) and as direct quotations from the respondents (qualitative). The study identified 4 different finance arrangements among the couples; these typologies reflected the different power dimensions within a marriage. <heading>Match between the research problems and the strategies</heading>Enormous (and probably indefinite) approaches in combining the quantitative and qualitative strategies have been offered by many scholars. For examples, mixing strategies can be applied in the different stages of research (Brannen 2005), or in different priorities (Creswell 2003). The two research strategies may corroborate with, or contrast against each other (Bryman 2004, Hammersly 1996). In spite of their differences in the research objectives and strategies, the two pieces of study that I picked are both concerned about one central issue - the dimension of power. It is either about power inside a school (Willis) or within a marriage (Pahl). How was the question of power answered differently by different strategies? In "Learning to Labour", Willis provided the justification for his preference towards qualitative strategy, "Instead of charting the objective causal relationship between job choice, class, school and home, we wanted to know how these structural determinants actually worked at the personal and subjective level"(197: 52). This justification fulfilled Creswell's categorization - a subjective and abstract concept may be better answered by the qualitative approach (2003). Is qualitative research adequate in answering the questions about power? Many scholars do not think so. They expressed concern that the "macro explanation" may not be adequately supported by the "micro observation" derived from the daily school life (West 1984). <fnote>Indeed, in Kahl's "Educational and Occupational Aspiration of 'Common Man' Boys" (1953), he attempted to answer a similar question with multi-strategy research. </fnote>In responding to this concern, one may combine quantitative and qualitative strategies to "bridge the gap" between the micro and macro level, as what Pahl attempted to accomplish in "Money and Marriage". Pahl understood the constraints of her research questions and she regarded a multi-strategy approach as a compromise to settle these constraints. She acknowledged that neither quantitative nor qualitative strategies could give a full account on "money and power in marriage". A quantitative research failed to capture the rich complexity in the distribution of power within marriage; while due to the time and cost considerations, a large scale qualitative research was simply not feasible. She attempted to resolve this dilemma by completing an in-depth interview in a structured questionnaire, in which both open-ended and close-ended questions were raised. <fnote>Pahl spared an appendix section in "Money and Marriage" to explain the justifications of her study. </fnote>In the stage of data analysis, Pahl managed to bridge the gap between the micro and macro level by a process which I will call the "qualitative-quantitative-qualitative" trilogy of analysis. Starting from in-depth interviews (qualitative), the collected data were quantified into variables and presented in cross tabulations (quantitative). The researcher than further supplemented the figure findings with qualitative data - the transcripts from respondents. To give an example, figures showed that more than half of the interviewed couples adopted the "share responsibility" typology in managing finance. However, the wives did not see themselves were "controlling the finance" at home. Let's hear how Mrs. Robertson (a pseudonym) explained this contradiction, "(Despite a joint account) sometimes he'll moan when £40 has gone and I have to explain it to him... If I want a dress I'll get it - I will hide it at the back of the wardrobe till I've won him round!" (1989: 74). By combining the quantitative and qualitative findings, Pahl found out that a "share responsibility system" only increased the financial accountability for wives but not for husbands. A complicated power tension existed beneath the "equal" ideology of marriage. <heading>Is multi-strategy naturally "better" than single-strategy research? </heading>Another "merit" which is usually annotated to the multi-strategy research is the exercise of "triangulation". Triangulation refers to the application of more than one strategy to cross-check against the result of the investigation (Bryman 2004). In the study of Pahl, triangulation was not only applied across the qualitative / quantitative boundary (as I have stated above), it also transgressed the boundary between genders. Every pair of couples was interviewed first together and then separately. Such a measure was adopted to avoid a single-sided account on the research questions. However, does the mechanism of "check and balance" only exist in multi-strategy research, which makes a single research strategy less capable in capturing the different "slices of the social world"(Denzin 1970: 247), thus it is less "valid" than a multi-strategy research? It would be a narrow definition if one sees "triangulation" can only be applied to multi-strategy research. As discussed in the other writings of Willis, data validity can also be checked by various measures (Wills 1978). In "Learning to Labour", both the working class "lads" and the school "conformists" were interviewed in order to make comparisons on their various views on school and work. Moreover, detailed interviews were conducted with the students' teachers, their parents and supervisors (after they started working). The wide range of collected data can also serve the "cross-checking" purpose, which coincides with the objective of triangulation. As acknowledged by Willis, the difference in age and social status between the researcher and the "lads" required a lengthy period to establish trust between the two parties (Willis 1975). Willis attempted to compensate by carrying out a longitudinal study which allowed him to follow his cases for two years, in order to trace the changes of the "lads" from school to work. In this sense the match of research questions and strategies in the work of Willis is no less relevant than that of Pahl. <heading>Between research ideology and reality</heading>"Reality" is infinity. No matter how well the research proposals are written, none of them can neglect the practical concern in execution. By conducting a multi-strategy research which involved both quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis, Pahl's work in "Money and Marriage" lost the longitudinal "depth" and the "width" of data diversities when compared to the work of Willis. Despite the absence of figures which may help to generalize and to convince, I found the conclusion drawn from "Learning to Labour" not less thought-provoking. The rebellious working class "lads" were driven to "choose" to remain in the working class by the strong institutional and social mechanisms. After all, can one still say that a single strategy research is "worse" than multi-strategy? If multi-strategy research is raised from the demand of breaking down the dichotomy between the quantitative and qualitative "camps", drawing the boundary between "single-strategy" and "multi-strategy" research risks a return to the methodological dichotomy. On one hand, as Bryman pointed out, quantitative and qualitative research strategies are rarely given equal or nearly equal weights in the same piece of multi-strategy research study (Bryman 1988). Pahl also acknowledged that the study could have been more "qualitative in style" (1989: 180), by introducing checklist of topics instead of structured questionnaire to give more flexible interactions during the interviews. On the other hand, a research study can hardly be purely "single-strategy". As in "Learning to Labour", comparisons were made among different groups of students along the parameters of class, ability and the "standard" of the schools (either grammar or non-selective schools). These methods in selection and comparison correspond to the practice of sampling in the quantitative studies. If we accept that there is no hard-and-fast set of distinction between quantitative and qualitative research strategies, the same understanding should also be applied when examining single and multi-strategy research. The final decision about what strategies should be adopted still rests on a thorough understanding about the research problem, and its relation with the complex reality that researchers are set to investigate. 