As an amateur in sociology, who comes to the discipline only with a yet-to-be-solved social problem at heart, I never expected the necessity of understanding the relationship between problem, theory and method until I encountered the assignment topic. Imagine various research methods are the "tools" available in a department store, and we are shopping there with a household problem to be fixed. Can we just get the right "tool" for the problem and everything is solved? We never think a "theory" is necessary when we are doing shopping. However, due to the delicate nature of human beings, and the complicated connections between them and society, a social problem cannot be simply handled as a problem in the household. Bulmer described how problem, theory and method altogether "form a trinity at the heart of the sociological enterprise" (Bulmer 1977:15). This statement will serve as the framework when I compare and contrast the two pieces of research study, namely "Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients" by Erving Hoffman (1968), and "Critical Realist Ethnography: The Case of Racism and Professionalism in a Medical Setting" by Sam Porter (1993). The two pieces of study are oriented from two distinctive traditions of social research and their orientations have prominent effects on their theoretical and methodological assumptions. Goffman is a representative figure from the "symbolic interactionism" tradition (despite personally denying such a claim) (Cahill 2004). The tradition of symbolic interactionism emphasizes the subjective role of "self" in the society, "If men define situations as real, they are real in their consequences" (Thomas, Thomas 1928:572). Based on their ontological assumption of subjectivity, symbolic functionalists believe that humans take an active role in adapting, responding and further reshaping the social world; the social world is constantly recreated by human beings. According to Goffman, humans are the product, creator and shaper of the social world. The interpretivism stance of Goffman was further elaborated in his work "Asylums", where he investigated the social interaction between the individual patients and a "total institution" - mental hospital. In the chapter of "The underlife of a public institution: a study of ways of making out in a mental hospital" (which is on its own an individual study), Goffman described and analyzed how the mental patients made use of the various artifacts (known as the "secondary adjustment" according to Goffman) in a manner which was not officially intended, in order to modify or to reject the expectations that were imposed by the institution. For example, the mental inmates might enjoy participating in a game of volleyball not for the purpose of exercising (as intended by the institution) but to inmates of the opposite sex. A mental hospital is a total institution in the sense that every activity inside the hospital is programmed and is under close surveillance. However, Goffman could still see the "active role" or the "selfness" that the patients struggled to preserve against the institution. Goffman's assumption in the subjectivity of human being was developed to the fullest in such an extreme condition. Sam Porter's work on "The Case of Racism and Professionalism in a Medical Setting" was set to access the effects of racism on the occupational relationships between nurses and doctors in the clinic. Porter is a critical realist who believes in the existence of "separate reality" which is independent from humans' descriptions. Such a "reality" is not immediately apparent in the observable pattern and events. These underlying mechanisms behind the observable society are known as the "matrix of structures" according to Porter (1993:606). If this "matrix of structure" is not "visible" by human beings, how can we access its existence? Critical realists advocate that due to the complexity of the real world, explanation and interpretation is necessary in order to move from the level of the happening and phenomena to that of the mechanisms and structures which generate them (Carter, New 2004). As a result, despite the objective ontology adopted by critical realism, the tradition still inclines to move towards the interpretivist and qualitative end of the spectrum, as similar to symbolic interactionism. The common ideologies shared by the traditions of symbolic interactionism and critical realism are reflected in the similar features in the work of Goffman and Porter. Both of the researches took place in the clinic, and both focused on the inter-subjectivity or the social-psychological aspect of human being in their studies. At a certain point, Porter even employed Goffman's idea about "backstage" (where a "self" different from the one we portray in front of people is shown) and "secondary adjustment" to develop his argument, when he explained why racism was absent in the workplace, "when nurses were on their backstage, the mask of professional propriety was dropped". Porter argued, during tea and meal breaks, racist complaints and remarks will be generated or at least tolerated as the "secondary adjustment" (Porter 1993:601). The similar epistemological assumption (interpretivism) adopted by Goffman and Porter in turn involved a commitment to qualitative methodologies. Both of the studies depended mainly on participant observation and unstructured interviews to gather information. Goffman went "undercover" to be the director's assistant in the mental hospital; while Porter pretended his research topic was something other than racism, in order to ensure that the interviewees were not "pretending" when they were interviewed. Apart from the epistemological concern, their research problems also determined the research methods. The study target of Goffman (mental patients) and the negative connotation attached to the issue on which Porter discussed (racism), simply do not allow a qualitative approach such as formal interviews and questionnaires. Despite the similarities in their epistemological assumption, their methodologies, and their settings, a very different research focus and different implications were generated from the work of Goffman and Porter. Why? It is because of the ontological differences between the two. As I have explained earlier, critical realism argues that there is a "reality" which is beyond humans' description and this underlying mechanism determines humans' action. Follow this supposition, Porter's work was based in the study of the clinic, but more importantly, it looked "beyond" the clinic into the "invisible forces" of the society. He concluded by stating that "racism mechanism" effects will be mediated by the "profession mechanism" in the workplace. This conclusion is definitely "invisible" in the society but can be generated by the researcher's interpretation. While for Goffman, his discussion did not attempt to go beyond the institutional level (the mental hospital), as a result a microscopic research was generated. The above discussion tried to illustrate that problem, theory and method are never separated issues in the research of social science. Instead, they are indispensable of one and other. If data is presented without a theory, one loses the criteria for selecting the relevant data to present, and may end up to be perpetually swimming in the vast sea of potential data (Bulmer 1977). Otherwise, if the theory is not supported by any data, its "over-generalized" characteristic may not be capable of "grasping" the actual social problems (May 2001). Now the three ideas of problem, theory and method are interlinked. What I would like to add is the "direction of linkage" between them. Thomas Kuhn proposed that in a science research, if evidence does not support the theory, it does not necessarily mean that the theory is  falsified. Instead, the evidence only modifies the theory of our future research (Kuhn 1970). His idea about the evolution of science also enlightened the social science studies. The linkage between problem, theory and method is not one-way traffic. A theory that is derived from a problem can determine the method; on the other hand, the data that is generated from certain methods can modify the theory or the problem in return. An open attitude must be adopted when dealing with this "trinity", otherwise it may lead to the unnecessary total refutation of the theory; or to the other extreme -- a distortion of the research result if the researcher is too eager to select the "right" data to fit into his or her theoretical framework (May 2001, Bulmer 1977). An equally open attitude should also be adopted when we examine the differences between various research traditions and research strategies. "Hardcore" metasociologists may claim that theory and method must always go "hand-in-hand", a less optimal pairing of theory and method may make the research fall into the fallacy (Snizek 1979). <fnote>Metasociology refers to the branch of sociology concerned with investigating the assumptions and value judgments underlying the social research. For more detailed discussion please refer to Snizek, Fuhrman and Miller(1979). </fnote>I find this notion has a sense of irony. The evolution and accumulation of mankinds' intelligence leads to the fruitful diversities in the social research traditions that we are enjoying today. An over emphasis on their differences will only produce the undesirable polarization of the different thoughts and the "worship" of form over content. The work of Goffman may have employed a microscopic perspective in research but his influence is extended to the fields of cultural anthropology and psychology (Cahill 2004). So is the research focus of Goffman still "esoteric", and does it carry less essential concerns of social life (Ritzer 2000:67)? The feminist Ann Oakley has recently reconsidered the use of quantitative research in feminist studies, in order to "emancipate" the social science (Oakley 1998). I believe that in the common world of social science, different traditions with different theoretical and methodological orientations should be able to find the "common language" to exchange and communicate, in order to maximize their strength to contribute to the sociological investigation. 