Having a BEng or MEng from an accredited university course does not mean entering the stage of being a professional engineer, simply because there are so much more qualities that a person needs in order to become a professional either than getting pass exams and tests. But there is no doubt that a degree would give knowledge and experience which would help and enable the individual to become a professional in the future. Example would be Africa tribe builders who built and design shelters for their villagers who have their profession as an "engineer" within their village community, benefiting "human kind" in a smaller scale. Performing work commonly know as "what engineers do" does not mean being professional. What does engineers do? The answer is hard to define, since what commonly know as "what engineers do" is based on the view point of societies and therefore it might be biased towards one direction, and it is hard to judge whether "what engineers do" is right or wrong. Example would be Nazi engineers. In Nazi Germany, engineer who built and design warfare machines which is used for killing innocent people were considered as professional engineers by it's society. However, within other societies (e.g. Jewish community) their what so called "professional engineers" became nothing more than a group of mass murders never mind "engineers" or the professionalism that they proclaim. Being a chartered engineer does not necessarily mean being a professional engineer even thou most societies in the world relates "chartered" with professional. This is because professional codes are set by different institutions, and therefore it is likely to differ between societies, and might be biased. Therefore it is hard to judge whether the codes are morally correct or wrong. However, in order to become chartered, the engineer would already have gained many abilities and qualities which have approval from an institution through qualifications. Also, there are professional codes which the engineer would have to follow in order to become chartered. Therefore there is no doubt that becoming chartered is a big step towards being professional, proving the ability to performing and behaving morally towards the subject of engineering, with the codes there to guide engineers towards being as professional as they can be. Acting in a morally responsible way as a practicising engineer could mean being professional. This is because by acting morally means acting in a way that is taking considerations from and would be beneficial to the environment, mankind associates, family and the engineer himself. However, acting "morally responsible" is had to define, since the meaning of "morality" could differ from different prospectives. It could easily be affected by e.g. religion, government, family, cultures etc... Therefore there are still doubts on rather acting morally responsible means being professional or not. Example would be engineers who built nerve-gas bombs for Aum Shinrikyo in Tokyo gas attack - March 20, 1995. From their propectives, it was morally correct to kill others due to what they so called "helping others to heaven". After all, I believe in order to become truly professional, the engineer himself would have to have a clear understanding of what himself is doing and what of the consequences of his actions. His thoughts and actions needs to be in consideration of both the environment's and humankind's needs, with the aim to improve life for all others. 