<heading>1. Introduction</heading>Clayton Ltd is a small company which sells ski equipment, and has been successful for five years. Recently, Clayton is considering expanding its business into Internet. Additional £2 million capital is needed to support this expansion. Clayton has been given two financing options from different institutions. They need to choose the most feasible and suitable option to fund its expanding. There may be lots of factors that could contribute to the company's decision in the source of funds available. The basic methods of evaluating it is to consider the present situation of the company's financial status and then based on it decide which source of funds would be the best option for the company's welfare. This paper will firstly evaluate different financial ratios of this company which are based on Clayton Ltd's historical financial statements for the latest two years and deduce several factors that this company need to consider before expansion. Secondly, the two funding options will be examined both from the positive side and negative side and relative assumptions will be stated according to the ratio evaluation. Thirdly, under the current circumstances, alternative sources of finance for Clayton will be recommended. <heading>2 Financial Ratio Analyses for Clayton </heading>Financial ratio analysis mainly aims at determining the overall financial condition of a business (Dennis, 2006). Before any business expansion, it is crucial to analyze the current financial situation of the company and opt for the appropriate funding resources. As Gordon (2006) pointed out, ratio analysis can indicate how far a market might retreat and advance. Ratios for the financial status are to be calculated and referred as the foundation of the analysis. Ratio analysis is also an aid to decision making in the future, particularly in helping companies to decide what kind of funding sources they cold make use of in the future for either development, expansion or maintenance. The following part of the report analyses various financial ratios to help the company decide which source of funding would be ideal for the company. <heading>2.1 Profitability</heading>Profitability, namely, a business's ability to create revenues in excess of the costs of producing those returns (Dennis, 2006). <table/><heading>2.1.1 Return on Capital Employed (ROCE):</heading>Return on Capital employed is defined as fixed assets plus current assets minus current liabilities. It reflects a company's ability to generate revenue. According to Dunn (2006), ROCE is the main evaluation method of business profitability. It represents how well the shareholder's funds are employed in making profit. From table1, it suggests that the Clayton's capital has been utilized efficiently to generate return over the past two years. In another way, the ROCE is adequate to provide return to the shareholders. The future investors may be convinced they are not risking their investment in the company. <heading>2.1.2 Gross profit Ratio (GPR) and Net profit Ratio (NPR)</heading>Gross profit ratio is gross profit divided by total sales. Net profit ratio is net profit (net income after tax) divided by sales. Both of these two ratios indicate how efficiently a company is during its trading process (Dennis, 2006). The return may also be analyzed in more detail by using GPR and NPR. Apparently, as the Gross profit ratio results show that, Clayton has been trading fairly well in the latest two years. However, the NPR is much lower than the GPR, which indicates that the company might have a huge loss on other expenses or overheads, office expenses and salaries for instance. The company needs to see if they could reduce their other expenditures including yearly interests on their loans. By comparing these two years' gross profit ratios, a slight decline can be seen, which is from 66.14% to 64.63%. It can be concluded that although the Clayton has an increase both in gross profit and sales, they may experience a fall in selling price or a rise in cost per unit. If this trend continues in the future expanding, they might face a huge loss in trading. In addition, as Clayton decided to spend 250,000 ponds on working capital (one fifth of total amount of raising funds), which is only half of the investment on web sites. They may be unable to generate enough sales and income to support their heavier debts in the future (Deakin, 1972). <heading>2.1.3 Mark-Up Ratio</heading>This ratio is used to compare the total amount of profit with the cost of goods sold. From the table1, figures show that Clayton has achieved good selling price in the past two years. However, a slight decline of this ratio can be seen from year1 to year2. This trend may result from promotion activities, which aims at stimulating extra sales by reducing the gross profit. To make more profit from financial expansion in the future, this company may fall into overtrading. This will increase the risk of business failure, as they may not have adequate capital to support the higher level of sales. <heading>2.2 Efficiency Ratios</heading>Efficiency ratios show how well the business and its management use the assets to generate sales (Dennis, 2006). <table/><heading>2.2.1 Inventory Turnover Ratio</heading>Inventory turnover ratio is a measurement of the balance of inventory. It compares the average inventory with the cost of goods sold for the year. This ratio can reflect the quality of the stock and the efficiency of business management (Parker, 2006). The ratio formula is cost of goods sold divided by average inventory. In general, the higher the ratio the better the business is performing (Dennis, 2006). The figures from table 2 clearly indicates that Clayton have not been selling their finished products quickly onto the market. They have been keeping too much stock of their finished products with them instead of putting them out into the market. <heading>2.2.2 Non-current Assets Turnover Ratio</heading>It suggests how well the business recovers its investment in fixed assets and generating sales on its net book value. The above figures for the company show that the company is continuing to make good utilisation of its fixed assets in terms of the total sales of its products. <heading>2.2.3 Receivables Collection Period</heading>Receivable collection period is often determined by dividing the receivables by (sales/365) (Parker, 2006). This ratio is expressed as the number of days that a business uses to collect its receivables from customers. From the above table, the indication of the company's receivable period is very good and it is receiving all the money from its debtors at a very good pace. <heading>2.2.4 Asset Turnover</heading>The asset turnover is a measure of utilisation and management efficiency. The formula is net sales divided by capital employed. It is an indicator of how well the assets of a business are being used to generate sales or how effectively the total investment is utilised in generating income. As the figures present an increasing trend in asset turnover within these two years, this company's may have a good performance in trading on the Internet. <heading>2.3 Liquidity Ratios</heading>As Dennis (2006) concludes, liquidity ratios indicate the ease of converting current assets into cash and company's ability to pay current obligations when due. <table/>Current ratio is generally calculated by dividing total amount of current assets by total current liabilities (Parker, 2006). It is expressed as the number of times that the current assets cover the current liabilities. In normal circumstances, current ratio around two is acceptable. In this case, figures show that Clayton appears to be temporarily insolvent as it has far more current liabilities than current asset. Whereas, since Clayton has been successful for five years, they may have used others' money to fund its own activities. If this company has large sum of borrowings they do need to resolve its cash flow problems. Acid test ratio formula is current assets (excludes inventories) divided by current liabilities. The ratio shows the degree to which a company's current liabilities can be covered by its liquid assets (Parker, 2006). It is a more conservative measure than current ratio. As the inventory is not always easy to be exchanged into cash immediately, and for Clayton, its stock turnover period is too long, it is reasonable to ignore the stock when calculating liquidity ratio. The ratio is very low, which means Clayton may not be able to insure the payment of its current liabilities. Moreover, comparing the current ratio with acid ratio for each year, a large gap can be seen. This indicates that Clayton had a high inventory which may not be converted into cash quickly. Under the condition that a large sum of cash is needed on the next financial year to expanding their business, if the company cannot receive big profits or adjust its financial structure, the risk of disability to pay liabilities will be enhanced. In the worst place, this may lead to bankruptcy. Working capital equals the difference between current assets and current liabilities. It reflects a company's ability to expansion and retires its debts (Parker, 2006). As Clayton considers expanding its trading into internet, the amount of working capital on year2 balance sheet should be greater than that of previous year. However, the figures show that the company may be wasting current assets which could be more efficiently deployed in increasing sales and profits, or that the company may be undercapitalized, and thus the Clayton may fall into a period of weak business conditions (Parker, 2006). <heading>2.4 Investment Ratios</heading><table/>The gearing is the ratio measure the relationship between the long terms liabilities and capital employed of a company. In the situation of its long-term liabilities take up more than half of shareholders' funds, the gearing of the company is not quite healthy. As Clayton will fund its proposed expansion undoubtedly, they may borrow a large amount of money to support its increasing trading activities. As a result, the gearing ratio may be increased and if it is too high, the company may not earn enough dividends to pay its share holders and they may take a risk of paying more interests over its ability. To conclude, ratios can be used to forecast future variables and predict future business performance and bankruptcy risk (Athanassopoulos & Ballantine, 1995). Based on the historical ratios analysis, the profitability, efficiency and liquidity of Clayton have been identified. Moreover, the potential risk, significant, abnormal and changing trends are clarified. Those are the key factors that Clayton should consider before financing its proposed expansion. <heading>3 Part (b) Analyses:</heading><heading>3.1 Comparison between debt finance and equity finance</heading>Commonly, debt finance (loan capital) and equity finance (share capital) are the main funding resources for a business. As the Clayton has made its decision of business expansion, it is crucial to compare and contrast these two financing sources in terms of their advantages and disadvantages. <heading>3.1.1 Advantages of Debt finance:</heading>Debt finance is a kind of finance which involves a principal amount being lent by an institute for a fixed (or Variable) interest rate paid annually. This type of funding source is usually repaid over a longer period of time, usually within 5 to 30 years. This type of finance is quite quick for the company to gather and also it is quite stable regardless of the company's profits. Such a mode of finance creates a lower pressure on the cash flow of the company. Debt finance is considerably simpler to initiate at the start. One of the main advantages over equity finance would be that the borrowing company would not have to loose out on their control over the company to its investors. The company would not have to include its banking institute in the company's decision meeting policies. <heading>3.1.2 Disadvantages of debt finance:</heading>Since the interest amount would have to be paid annually the company would have to have a steady cash flow the entire year. Higher the rates higher would be the interest amount to be paid annually. The result of higher interest would be directly in terms of affecting the profit of the company. This would affect the balance and income statements' of the company in case of future source of funding. Most of the loans usually come as a secured loan - Debentures. This would mean that in case due to faulty interest payment annually, the company may risk loosing some of its property or any other thing which has been secured against the loan. <heading>3.1.3 Advantages of equity finance:</heading>Equity finance is another term for raising funds by issuing shares. In such type of finance there is no form of interest to be paid annually but the company needs to pay some form of dividends to its shareholders to create an interest in investing with the company. Another huge advantage over debt finance is that the principle amount never needs to be paid and the shareholders make or loose money according to the market demand of the company shares. In the case of liquidation also, the shareholders are the last in line to receive the funds and the company is not forced to pay its shareholders. <heading>3.1.4 Disadvantages of equity finance:</heading>As mentioned before, the company looses a bit of control over the company's decision making policy of the company to its shareholders. This is bad in case the company is willing to make change and its shareholders do not agree. The initial cost of issuing shares is also high. <heading>3.2 Analysis of two given financing offers</heading>To maximise the return for the business expansion, any form of raising funds should be as much effective as possible. Otherwise, in the longer term, the returns may fall. Thus, to examine and analyze different funding options is important for financial decision making. <heading>3.2.1 Analysis of option 1 - loan from banking institute:</heading>If the option 1 is accepted, Clayton will be given total expansion funds they need all at once, which is 2 million ponds per year with secured loan at a fixed rate of 14.5% from an insurance company. As part of the agreement, the insurance company requires the option to buy 500,000 new ordinary shares from Clayton at 10 pence rate. <heading>Strengths: </heading>Assuming that the insurance company is not going to buy shares from Clayton, the cost of sourcing finance will be largely reduced as there is no expense on issuing a prospectus. Moreover, the Clayton will remain its ownership. They are only required to pay fixed interests annually and repay the principal at some time in the future. <heading>Weaknesses: </heading>Raising the whole expansion funds by means of loan capital may lead to a huge loss of profit and impose an internal stress to the business, as Clayton has to pay considerable amount of interest to service its debts every year. As the insurance company has the option to buy new ordinary shares from Clayton at a very low price as part of the agreement, the Clayton might loose part of its owner rights. Additionally, if the banking institute decides to force the option of buying shares from the company, at the rate of 10 pence per share for 500,000 shares, the then market price of the share would drop drastically due to this. This would not satisfy the shareholders as their market value of the share has depreciated, and may distort the share market to some extend. <heading>3.2.2 Analyse option 2 - loan from venture capitalist:</heading>If the option 2 is adopted, Clayton is being offered 1 million ponds five year loan at the fixed interest rate of 15% per annum, and another 1 million in terms of 1,000,000 new par shares at a price of 1 pound per share. <heading>Strength: </heading>Based on the historical ROCE ratio analysis for the past two years, the Clayton has a successful performance in using equity capital. It has been able to pay dividends to the share holders. Therefore, to take half of its funding resources in terms of share capital will reduce the pressure on cash flow and increase the share holders' satisfaction. By adopting this option, it would even reduce the gearing ratio and hence look attractive for the shareholders in the future. Since the price per share , at which the venture capitalists, is prepared to give for each share is more than the first option, hence would not affect the price of the market share as much as option 1, in case they opt for it. This in turn would have less pressure on the cash flow of the company as the total amount of interest per year is lesser. According to this option, the company has to pay the interest only for 1 million pounds and the remaining amount would be dealt with in shares. There fore, half of the total amount is never repaid back. Venture capitalists also provide expertise to support management, which is a strategic alliance <heading>Weakness: </heading>Venture capitalist may take up additional security which could affect the working of the company in the future. Moreover, the more share in issue, the lower the potential for dividend and capital growth. <heading>3.3 Conclusion:</heading>According to Tinkelman (2006), the low levels of fundraising may indicate the ineffective efforts, but as fundraising expenditures rise, there may be an increase of returns and higher positive slopes. The company would be highly benefited if it chose the option with a lower amount of interest payable every year due to the usual trend of having a very low amount of liquid cash every year. Given indications that it is not a very high risk aversive company, this would strengthen the fact that it should opt for raising funds with the help of a venture capitalist company instead. <heading>4 Recommendations:</heading>Many businesses may experience sourcing additional funds when expanding, for Clayton, the lack of sufficient funding may be its most concern in the future. Therefore, alternative forms of finance need to be examined at the early stage of business expanding. In addition, the most appropriate sorts of finance for the business need to be deduced to minimize the risk of business failure. When a business is trying to raise finance for future development and expansion, the decisions may be based on which is the 'cheapest' source of funding. Alongside the issues relating to cost, another issue that is important is the impact of the chosen financing method on the business. <heading>4.1 Convertible Bonds: </heading>As Clayton is facing much pressure on cash flow, they may consider issuing certain amount convertible bonds, which is tax deductible and can be changed into ordinary shares at some time in the future. However, when the bonds are converted, additional share capital is being issued, this means earnings may be shared out among more share holders. <heading>4.2 Bank Borrowing: </heading>Bank borrowing is cheaper than bonds. Besides this fact, it is even quicker to get and more flexible than any other source of funding. It is more easily available to smaller companies like Clayton. Considering the cash flow, it may temporally release the repayment pressure, but has a disadvantage of being more risky. On the other hand, it is quite high cost. The rate of interests varies from different banks. There are even many banks would require a greater security against the borrowing, especially for smaller companies. <heading>4.3 Business Angels: </heading>Business angels are exactly what they say they are. They are usually groups of wealthy individuals who collaborate together to provide funds for small start-up companies or companies who would need funds for their business development and expansion. For Clayton, this would be an ideal choice as they would not have any pressure on the interest payment. It would be ideal also because they would not have to sacrifice their company rights to the business angels until and otherwise they (Business angels) would like to take part in the company's decision making. <heading>4.4 Incubators: </heading>They are especially to support start-up companies in terms of recruitment software services or finance. It is quite similar to a venture capital. This is also a good option for Clayton to consider as another source of finance for their internet expansion. <heading>4.5 Bills of exchange: </heading>It usually used for overseas trade, where the time scales are longer than normal trading activities. Business can receive their cash flow earlier than its due date. In terms of funding for Clayton, this option would not be ideal as they do not have any foreign investments and there is no sign from the management that they have any such intent in the near future. <heading>5 Conclusions</heading>The valuation of a business is a set of dynamic numbers which may change almost on a daily basis. The company has to be very specific and prudent while deciding the source of finance for any purpose that is of benefit for the company. Theories are all very well and sound good on paper, but it is not necessary to be a financial genius to know, for example that a business with more fixed interest bearing debt will be more vulnerable to changes in interest rates than a business with less debt. As a final word, Clayton has to be concerned about their liquid assets while deciding their source of finance. It could be the main factor for them to decide a source of finance form any other sources, as it is seen from the balance and income sheets that they do not have a very good record of keeping liquid sources with them, and could be a major are of concern for them in the future. 