<heading>Question1: Project team evaluation</heading><heading>1 Introduction</heading>According to Milton (2005, p189), an ideal project team plays an important role in project success. A project team is composed of a group of individuals who coordinate together for the achievement of a common objective for a specific project. Increasingly, building and developing an efficient team is becoming the vital key to any success of project management. Therefore, the appropriate and critical evaluation of team work performance is accordingly important as it tells the project manager how efficient the project team is. This report is an evaluation attempt which is based on a project team (6) work during the module exercise. The first chapter focuses on team roles review according to Belbin's team role theory. In the following section, the team lifecycle is analyzed by applying Turckman's team development model. The team decision making procedures are briefly discussed in the third part. The conflicts within the team and the team leadership are evaluated in the latter sections respectively. <heading>Teamwork performance</heading>Generally, team members play a different role but enjoy broadly equal status, and each of them has its own duties and responsibilities (Nicholls, 2005). The Belbin's psychometric test provides the disposition towards certain team roles and enables team members to develop clear expectations about the potential contribution of each team role (Belbin, 1993). <heading>Team's Belbin profiles</heading>To identify each individual member's style and behavioral preference, Dr. Belbin has developed a system which enables team members to assess themselves and by others within the group in terms of team role preference. A clear awareness of one's team role preference helps set up good understanding among team members which makes the team well-balanced (Belbin, 1993). Based on the Belbin's team role self perception results, each member of team 6 has been allocated with its primary, secondary and tertiary roles. In this chapter, each role functions, its strength and weakness will be discussed. Shown below is the table of Belbin profile of team 6 members followed by the explanation of each of the roles. <table/>The implementer IM: Generally, implementers are mainly in the positions of responsibility in larger organizations regardless of their own attitude and interests (Nicholls, 2005). Venne seemed to have relatively stable approach to work and well-developed organizational ability. However, she was lack of real ideas and flexibility as she joined the team late. Along with project approaching, she was inclined to be a CO and contributed much to coordinating with other colleagues. Pratap did play a good role as an IM as he was open to different ways of thinking and working, practical, conservative, responsible and strived to achieve the goals. Whereas, the common weakness of them is that they are slightly obstructive to change, even when it is positive. The plant PL: Creative, inventive and relatively quiet is regarded as Plants' distinctive characters (Nicholls, 2005). In this aspect, Indira has contributed the best to the team development and project completion. Particularly, when facing difficulties and problems, she was regarded as an idea person as she sometimes came up with winning possibility. Indira seemed to be good at communicating and exchanging ideas with others. However, according to Belbin's research, plants are good at starting up projects but less contributive in consolidating success for an established firm (Nicholls, 2005). This sign did occur in the late stage of project fulfillment. To maximize her contribution to the team, she should time her contributions during the discussions and strengthen her willingness to facilitate the team. The resource investigator RI: The RI role is similar to the role of a PL but more extroverted and inquisitive. They are inclined to collect different ideas from others and develop them, and good at exploring resources outside the group (Nicholls, 2005). Indira did have sourced several ideas and basic disciplines from instructors and developed them to some extent. However, she intended to loose the initial enthusiasm quickly. Besides this she also seemed not to have enough ability to collect and summarize others idea and develop them. Therefore, to maximize her potential contribution to the team, she should not only focus on sourcing information from outside but also the internal side. The coordinator CO: Nancy is inclined to be very extroversive, energetic and aggressive, especially when exploring feasible approach. Additionally, Coordinators should be skilled in organization and good at summarizing ideas from others, discover others' abilities and encourage them (Belbin, 1993). When conflicts came up, she was in the position of being an arguer rather than coordinating with others. Conversely, Sameer has some of the characters that the role of CO required. He possess acceptance, self-discipline that motivates other team members. He is calm, tolerant and unflappable at tough situations. However, his weakness to be a CO is that he appeared to be lack of enthusiasm and the persuasive argument .This might be unacceptable extreme during the team development process (Belbin, 1993). In practice, Sameer seemed to be a TW which is his secondary role rather than a team leader (CO), as he found it hard to lead the whole team. Therefore, on the whole, how individual member arrives at its given type of team-role behavior needs to be taken into account (Belbin, 1993). The shaper SH: Shapers are usually extroversive and energetic and aggressive. They are not hesitant to question and challenge others' opinions. Although Indira and Nancy did come up with many ideas and arguments, they sometimes agreed to others when they were convinced by persuasive evidence. This is one of the main reasons of achieving efficient decision making for the team and it largely shortened the time for team members to arrive in agreement. According to Belbin's research, shapers are likely to blame other team members. Practically, Indira, Nancy and Pratap appeared to be more tolerant than theoretical description. Pratap's shaper qualities benefited the team as a subsidiary role. He was in the best position to lead and balance the team when the team was slow-moving. Shapers need to both direct the team and coordinate team members' contribution without outmaneuvering them (Belbin, 1993). It seemed that all of them had a good performance of being Shapers, whereas, they should have more clearer targets and establish priorities to avoid misleading team. The monitor evaluator ME: Monitor evaluator is a person who has high level mental ability and disinterested detachment particularly when facing the conflict among team members, which plays an important role in a project team (Nicholls, 2005). Indira seemed focus on generating new ideas more than critical reasoning and seldom judged the merits of any idea. Compared with plant and RI, ME is more critical, serious-minded, prudent and considerate (Nicholls, 2005). Generally, the more complex the decision-making process is and the more conflict that arise within a team, the more important the role that ME play (Nicholls, 2005). As a ME, Indira should have the ability to clarify complicated issues, generate understandable ideas, identify the weaknesses in ideas and assess its practicability, and make constructive comment. However, the lack of monitoring function of a team may consequently lead to the unbalanced team profile and out of control when conflicts occur. The team worker TW: They are known for averting friction and enabling team members to corporate smoothly as they have the skill of listening to others' opinion and coping with awkward colleagues (Nicholls, 2005). Both Sameer and Venne are sensitive, trusting and supportive. When meeting barriers and difficulties, they can stimulate the team's morale and heal relationship breakdowns. They contributed the most to building a harmonious environment. However, their indecision sometimes raised conflict and pressure. Nancy's team role function seemed to be relatively weak as a TW. She was more like CO and SH as discussed before. The completer-finisher CF: Venne played this role as her primary option. Given that many managers are with much enthusiasm at the beginning of projects but are reluctant to complete what they start, the role of CF tend to be quite essential in a project team. Venne was inclined to be a perfectionist, as she seldom showed her opinion without critical thinking. She always kept an eye on the project approaching and spotted the mistakes timely. However, sometimes she appeared to be over critical and which resulted in the delay of decision making. As a CF, her main weakness is lack of the ability to finalize any undertaking within the group. The specialist SP: They, the team members, played a behavioral role rather than functional role as they are new to this area and not professional or technical in any aspects. The lack of relative experiences and specialized skills led to the failure of project timing. At the latest stage of project, all the team members agreed to risking time to enhance the chance for saving money and making big profit. Unfortunately, they delayed for three days although they made a relatively higher profit. This result may due to the lack of specialist who can tell and provide evidence whether it is worthwhile to take the risk or not. <heading>Impacts on team performance:</heading>The impact of gender and age: Although age and gender have offered a way of assigning roles, team 6 has not applied this method to separate responsibilities. Instead, each member took its own roles based on its preference and their capability and confidence to do the role well. Not many conflicts occurred due to the difference of age and gender as the distribution of each factor was relatively even. Culture: As all the team members are from different countries, the language barriers and culture background difference sometimes led to the delay of decision making and conflicts. In this situation, to correct this weakness, more time should be left for people getting to know each other and understanding the ways others approach the task, particularly during the team forming phrase. Language barrier: As English was not the first / native language of any of the team member, it did cause slight hindrances in the progress of the team goals. As mentioned above, the language and cultural differences did occasionally cause delay in decision making and some indifference among team members. As time progressed, the team members got to know each other well and the problems faced with language as a barrier got reduced with time. <heading>Excess team roles evaluation</heading>As shown in the table above, the team had various members play the entire roles essential to make up a strong team. However, there were few roles that were concentrated with team members and others which hardly had any. The IM role was the most crowded, with 4 members, and this was a spot of bother at the beginning as there were too many comments on how to start the work. Apart from this the complete finisher role was also crowded, with 3 members, which cold have been one of the main reason of the delay in the outcome. The remaining roles which had 3 members (TW and SH) were well balanced as those respective roles demanded extra help and effort and it boosted the teams performance with those extra members. <heading>Scarce team roles evaluation</heading>On the other hand there were few roles which had a scarcity of team members to carry out with it. As seen from the table, the PL, RI and ME roles were played by Indira. The lack of members was especially felt for the RI role as it is quite a labour intensive role. But Indira definitely deserves to be praised as she single handedly had to deal with the finding the right external resources, played the role as a Plant as well as monitored the entire project schedule. There were times when the team was let down due to scarcity of members for the above mentioned roles but in the end it did not affect the outcome by much. Apart from these roles, the coordinator and the specialist role was well composed off and had the right amount of members to complete the task. Even though at times it was felt that a specialist role should have only one specialist as there could be a dispute among to of them as a very critical approach is require to carry out the task. Belbin's (1993) work shows that a complete team should have all the team roles represented. The fact is that, the members are multidimensional. This means most people have the preferences for more than one role and can fulfill them within a team. According to Belbin, the behavioral styles' similarity within a team may arise conflicts. Therefore, the participation and complementation of each role are both needed to be recognized. To perform well, each of the balanced team members should identify others' strength and weakness based on their team role preferences. Moreover, respecting each other is another one of the key factors of building up a confident group. <heading>The team lifecycle</heading>Like a growing child, a growing team has different needs at different times (Zenger et al., 1990). They need to go through stages of development regardless of their functions and objectives. Particularly, newly formed teams need a period for adjustment and building up a harmonious working environment. Generally, the team lifecycle comprises of four sequential phases. These stages include serial teambuilding evens and movements which enhance the team's maturity step by step. Groups need to experience all these stages before they achieve maximum effectiveness (Tuckman et al., 1977). <heading>Forming: </heading>When team 6 members met each other for the project, there was a sense of anticipation and commitment. They had a high motivation, but their effectiveness was moderate as they are unsure of each other. Forming is the first stage which provides the opportunities for team members to get to know each other and define their common goals (Nicholls, 2005). After building up trust and confidence, the team roles were assigned to individuals. Accordingly, responsibilities were allocated to each member within team 6. During this stage, team 6 cultivated a sense of belonging and togetherness which largely encouraged team morale. However, they did not make clear work schedules at the earliest stage and which planted the potential of failure in project timing. At the beginning there would be a lot of misunderstanding and miscommunication among the team members. However, according to Belbin (1993), the profligate use of time may accelerate the prospects of success. <heading>Storming:</heading>After the first stage development, the team went through a phase of competition and conflict. During this stage, team members appeared to have less enthusiasm than the initial period, which led to frustration. Different opinions came up in this phase. Team members struggled to find ways to deal with the conflicts and realised that endless argument would have no positive effect on decision making. Although they can appreciate others' skills and experiences, this issue is difficult to be handled without ground rules and norms. The overlap of responsibilities and roles might be the main reason of conflicts. Therefore, a set of standards and methods needed to be deduced for handling conflicts and solving problems in the next stage. But it must be said that it was during this phase that the team members got to know each other better and there was a sense of trust being formed. <heading>Norming:</heading>Gradually, the team gained its balance and entered into "Norming" phase. In theory, team members need to find standard ways to routine their work and keep reviewing team performance regularly during this stage. Additionally, they need to try out new ways of working. However, in practice, some of them held back their new ideas for fear of further conflict. Rules of behavior should not function as a restrain of openness about feelings but as an aid to accomplishing the task. Individuals should listen to others' opinion, encourage new ideas and discuss them seriously. Being supportive and prepared to change are particularly important in this stage. It was during this phase when the team members really began to understand their role and their position in the team. This was the period when the most effective work was done by the team collectively and the team grew as a whole unit. <heading>Performing</heading>This is the final phase that a team goes about its project with self-confidence (Zenger et al., 1990). By this stage, the project team has developed a high level of maturity and has learned to disagree constructively, make adjustments and face the challenges. However, no matter how successful a team used to perform, a period of conflict may arise at any time (Zenger et al., 1990). Although, team6 has made constant progress within the previous three stages, they took an unmeasured risk in the final stage, which led to failure in achieving their goals at the given time. This failure may result from the self-pride, routine and the lack of commitment on its performance from outside. Therefore, it maybe the time to develop working alternatives, such as leadership rotation, changing routine, and including opposing views from inside or outside the team (Nicholls, 2005). <heading>Decision making procedures </heading>Decision making is one of the most crucial steps involved during team work, as was the case during the working of team 6 as well. The team did have the occasional conflicts during making decisions on occasions. But, on the whole, the team did very well in making the important decisions as a group. The team adopted two basic strategies to go about decision making. They are brainstorming and weighting. Both the methods had its good points and the bad points. The method of brainstorming was done initially when the team 6 had shortage of ideas on how to go about the issue of solving the problem. It was effective but it had its downfalls. It very frequently led to arguments and conflicts and as a result used to block the flow of ideas for some time. Besides this it was considered slightly more time consuming as there were too many ideas at any given instance and was making decision making process slower. But in the end it did make the team take the right step forward but at a cost in the form of too much time being spent on it. Apart from brainstorming, the team resorted to the use of weightage of each problem at certain occasions. This kind of decision making was based on the risk involved in making certain moves. Team 6 used this kind of a decision making strategy on a timely basis to figure out the best and most efficient way of reaching the team goal. This kind of decision making was more effective for the team as all the risk factors involved were discussed before hand itself. <heading>Conflict within the team</heading>When a new team is formed, there definitely will have conflicts, maybe even helping the team, as team 6 faced during the whole project. As Burke (2003, p216) points out there are many symptoms for conflicts to arise of varying degree. The most common symptoms are being lack of communication, jealousy among team members, ego, intervention of senior management and frustration due to low morale and commitment. Conflicts could be broadly divided into two progress defining factors - functional and dysfunctional. Traditionally conflicts were meant to hinder the progress of the team and were considered something which could be avoided. Such, dysfunctional conflicts, could be mainly due to the above mentioned reasons such as jealousy and lack of communication (Massey, 2004). On the other hand, Belbin (1993, p86) views conflicts is a healthy habit or considers it as functional for the team. He feels that any instability based on conflict symbolises that clear team roles are emerging. For this to happen, the inner conflict needs to be solved at a conscious level (Belbin, 1993). According to the author, people may be pre-eminent taking a certain team role or being versatile, but it is difficult for them to be both. Such types of conflicts are further proven to be useful the progress of a team and such conflicts are known as "constructive conflicts", where in it is considered important in fostering innovation (Varela et al, 2005). The author especially feels that such type of a constructive conflict is essential for developing a new product or design or concepts. In team 6, there were conflicts but not many as would have expected. The conflicts mainly arouse due to variation in ideas among the team members and was easily resolved after some sort of an agreement. From Belbin's point of view this is not regarded as a healthy team attribute as it meant that people were not voicing their opinions more openly and were ready to agree upon what anyone told regardless of the outcome. Given the tight time constraint upon the team, it worked for the team that there were very little conflicts to solve, as this would have otherwise had a drastic result on the final outcome. <heading>Team leadership</heading>Burke stated (2003, p216) "Leadership is about setting goals and objectives and generating enthusiasm among the team members, and stake holders, to work around that objective." Leadership is just not about doing what the assigned leader feels like doing. It is more, as in, to guide the team as a whole in the right direction towards the final goal. As Burke (2003, p220) points out in his book, there are certain styles that a leader should develop in order to lead the team. Apart from certain styles, a true leader needs to asses the team goals in terms of the necessity for each task, the necessity of the team as a whole and most importantly the needs of each team member. As Belbin (1993, p216) points out that a poor balance in the team composition would result in a poor outcome. With respect to team 6, the team members had not selected any particular person as their leader. Instead Pratap took the role of guiding the team rather than being a team leader. Apart from the usual qualities that a leader has to posses he had few shortcomings. He did not have a clear plan of action in times of conflict and was unable to resolve certain situations when needed the most. But credit needs to be given to Pratap for taking a bold step in guiding the team. On the whole, team 6 did get their outcome but were delayed by three days. This could be because the team was too ambitious in having the maximum profits instead of meeting the deadline on time. Moreover, the team didn't have the right leader to help us focus on the deadline instead of the profits. It was a matter of either getting the work done on time or to maximise profits by overshooting the deadline. Since the unanimous choice was profits, the team, as a whole, could not make the outcome before the deadline. <heading>Conclusion</heading>In conclusion, a range of personality types and technical abilities are the basis of building up an ideal team and optimizing team role performance. It could be said that team 6 performed well above expectation and derived the final outcome successfully, except for a slight delay. The success of the outcome has to be complemented on the fact the team had a good start and solid groundwork. The roles, divided according to Belbin's psychometric test, helped the team to divide the roles amongst its team members, although it could've been improved upon. Team 6 had a fairly good decision making strategy and worked well most of the times. The only areas where the team had conflicts could have been during exchange of ideas and during the norming stage. This could be due to the language and culture barrier which team 6 experienced. Besides this, where team 6 would have gained a lot would be due to the fact of not having a true team leader. This adversely affected the teams' decision making and resulted in the delay of the outcome. A team leader would have even helped resolve conflicts quicker and hence reducing the time to obtaining the desired output. Moreover, the balance of the team did not feel right at certain instances during the team work. This could be attributed to the fact that there were excess or scarce members for certain team roles. Apart from this, there are scopes for improvements as a team. It should be taken care that more emphasis is to be laid in the starting foundation, during the team roles division. There is nothing worse than to have a team member not suited for the role. Also, conflicts need to be viewed as functional rather than dysfunctional and the team needs to be open about every ones ideas, but learn to pick out the best suited one, for the team. After all, the success of the team does not depend upon a single individual, but the combined effort of every member in the team.  URL  URL <heading>Question 2: CPA and Gantt chart evaluation</heading><heading> Critical path analyses</heading><quote>"Critical Path Analyses is a path in the design which must meet certain critical timing requirements in order for the system to function properly." (Elsevier, 1995)</quote>In technical terms, the critical path of a project or a system can be defined as the path in which the "float" of all the processes is equal to "Zero". A float can be defined as the 'buffer time' available for each task to be completed in a complex project. It is derived once the critical path has been established. Critical path analyses (CPA) is considered to be a very powerful tool to schedule and manage complex projects of varying magnitude and size. CPA has become one of the tools that are most useful in practice and are applied in the planning and control of the realization of complex projects (Chanas et al, 2001). They were actually developed as means to manage and propagate various defense projects way back in the 1950's. But the main ideology behind CPA still exists with minor changes in the line up to suit various companies and organizations ( URL , 2006). Critical path analysis (CPA) is a method which is used to help layout, in a systematic order, all the tasks that need to be completed before a project could be termed as "completed". They not only serve as a basis on which a schedule could be prepared but also act as a source of resource planning and time management between the processes. It also acts as a "policeman" during the progress of the project as it monitors and maintains the progress of the project goals. This way it helps the organisation to change any processes mid way in case if any actions need to be taken which would over all improve the quality and efficiency of the project ( URL , 2006). Figure 1 below shows a very simple example of a critical path used in constructing a house. The longest sequence of path as highlighted below is the critical path of the entire project of constructing a house. <figure/>The fundamental basis behind which the critical path analysis works is that the next activity in a work flow cannot start before some other activities are over. In other words it follows a sequential flow of processes where in the end of each process is important for the start of the next one. For all the activities to progress the previous process needs to be more or less complete. There are other activities that may not be associated with this path. Those activities are known as independent or "parallel" activities, whose start and end time may not be as important for the proper functioning of the tasks in the "Critical path" ( URL , 2006). <heading>PERT (Project Evaluation and Review Technique)</heading><quote>PERT (Project Evaluation and Review Technique) is concerned with a 'project' comprising of large number of successive activities which are arranged in a 'complex network' (Hartley et al, 1966). </quote>PERT could be explained as an 'add-on' to the critical path analysis. It allows the company to know the exact time required for each of the tasks in a project. PERT is a variation on Critical Path Analysis that scrutinizes the view of time estimates made for each stage of the project. To use it, estimate the shortest possible time each activity will take, the most likely length of time, and the longest time that might be taken if the activity takes longer than expected ( URL , 2006). The formula used is as shown below:  FORMULA  This kind of an approximation usually helps in cutting the biased time scales that are usually employed for the various processes in a project. <heading>Effectiveness of Critical Path Analysis </heading>As a summary the major effectiveness of using CPA as a project monitoring tool could be explained as follows (Hartley et al, 1966): <list>In what order the tasks in a project need to be carried out.Along with the main sequence, what other parallel tasks could be carried on.The shortest and the most effective time in which the project could be completed.The exact amount of resources needed, be it in terms of human resources or other infrastructure, needed in executing the project.The sequence of the tasks, the timing for each task and the scheduling for each task.The most effective and efficient way of reducing time for each of the tasks in the pathTask priorities.</list>Critical path analysis plays a very important role in the successful completion of a very large and complex project. It plays a very important role as a mediator and talks to the employees and mangers regarding various problems if and when faced during the successful completion of each task which in turn plays a vital role in the successful completion of the whole project itself. <heading>Strengths of critical path analyses:</heading>The major strength that has been identified over other methods like Gantt charts is that CPA allows the team management to critically analyse each and every task of the whole project and gives a good indication of how much time each task would have to take in order for the whole project to be completed on time (Hunt et al, 2002). Apart from this, CPA also allows the team management to decide what may be taken as the shortest time in which the project could be practically complete (Clements, 1996). Besides, it also plays a vital role when there is a need for an accelerated project. It lets the management decide which task would have to be accelerated in order to meet the deadline of the project as well as keeping the financial aspects of the project within reach ( URL , 2006) . As a net result, it would reduce the cost as well as reach the objective of the project. <heading>Weaknesses of Critical Path analyses:</heading>CPA can be viewed as a two sided coin. It defiantly has a wide range of good points that can be viewed as its strengths. On the other hand it does have few weak links that could become a cause of worry for the project team management. For instance, CPA, at an instance, does not give the true relationship between the task and the time taken for the task to be completed. In other words it is more difficult to figure out and understand the CPA rather than any other method for example a Gantt chart. This could be a problem for the newer, more inexperienced staff, of smaller companies. <heading>Further applications of CPA using live case studies:</heading><heading>Case Study 1: Critical-Path Aware Processor Architectures</heading>Until recently (Mid 90's), the microprocessor industry used to manufacture the micro controllers the way it had been done since first invented in the late 70's. It was not until the mid 90's, when the critical path analysis was introduced, in the manufacture of high-end microprocessors and micro controllers. In the field of microcontrollers manufacturing, the method of CPA is used in a slightly more complex way to deal with the complex project of microcontroller manufacture. Like in the case of any other real project, the main idea of the programmer is to reduce the time to complete each of the tasks and in turn manufacture the microprocessor chip more quickly and at a minimal cost. During the process of the chip manufacture, the tasks that lie on the critical path are known as critical instructions, and the remaining tasks that are not related to the critical path are known as non-critical instructions (Tune, 2004). It has been further identified that to conclude the critical path of chip manufacturing is not as easy as expected. They need to firstly identify the essential hardware required, followed by predicting how it would improve or enhance the functioning of the chip and finally Control the behaviour of the processor at the micro architectural level using those predictions. These processes are known as Critical- Path Aware Processor Architectures. The introduction of CPA into the manufacturing of chips has considerably saved time for the programmer. By this method the programmer knows exactly and more accurately which paths through a circuit take the most delay. The CPA method is further broken down to "circuit critical path" and" program critical path" based on the convenience of the circuit designer and programmers (Tune, 2004). <heading>Gantt chart</heading>A Gantt chart could be explained, in simple terms, as bar graph that allows people to gain a quick and easy understanding of the tasks and time involved for each task to be completed In order to complete a project. It is a much simpler and less accurate version of the critical path analyses (CPA) method. Shown below, in figure 2, is a simple example of a Gantt chart <figure/><heading>Origins of the Gantt chart </heading>The true origin of the Gantt chart is not known, although there are instances of it being referred to, dated back in the earl 1920's. There are instances when graphical representations were used to plan out various tactics used during the World War 1 (Wilson, 2003). However Orr (2003, p24) believes that Gantt charts were invented by Henry Gantt (1861-1919) during his work on the construction of Navy ships during world war one. The method that was devised around 100 years ago is still proving to be an able tool for project planning and even, till today, not much has changed in the method and implementation of a Gantt chart (Orr, 2003). <heading>Gantt charts - the various stages </heading>At the first glance the Gantt chart may look deceptive and really tough to decipher. But once the understood, it is a very useful tool for team managers to follow. The whole process of Gantt chart preparing is mainly based on 3 main parameters, namely: <list>The grid, taskbars The dependencies andLag time.</list>The Grid: the grid is basically the matrix of horizontal and vertical lines which forms various amounts of boxes of the same size. Each of the boxes represents a specific frame of time. Usually the left side of the grid consists of all the tasks associated with the project and on the other hand the top part of the grid consists of the time frame of each of the associated boxes (figure 3). Taskbars: they are the main "lifeline" of the Gantt chart. They indicate the time each associated task would take to complete. It indicates, on the timeline, when each task would begin and if it begins as scheduled, when it would end. As CPA method demands, the taskbars are also placed in a sequential order where in, in most of the situations a particular task has to be completed for the next task to begin (Wilson, 2003). Dependencies: these relate to the tasks which depend on other tasks to be completed in order for them to begin. There are various types of dependencies. Finish-to-start, start-to-start and finish-to-finish are the most commonly known ones. Finish-to-start dependencies are the most commonly known dependency. It indicates that for the next task to begin the completion of the first task is necessary. Start-to-start indicates that both the tasks need to start at the same time, but the end need not be at the same time. On the other hand, finish-to-finish indicates that irrespective of when each of the tasks starts, they need to end at the same time, in order to complete the project on time. Apart from this, there are also partial dependencies. This indicates that another task could begin after a certain portion of the ongoing task is complete. Figure 3 indicates all the above mentioned stages in detail (Orr, 2003). Lag time :  lag time is equivalent to the float method used in critical path analyses method. It refers to the extra time each task could take in order not to affect the completion time of the entire project (Wennink et al, 1996). <figure/><heading>Strengths of Gantt chart:</heading>Gantt charts are widely accepted and used in various industries all over the world. Summarising the strengths of Gantt charts the following could be mentioned (Grover, 2002); Time is always in the foreword direction, i.e. linear. All tasks are visible in the form of a graphical taskbar, which is very easy to notice and follow. Deadlines are explicitly mentioned Project status can be shown at various stages of the project. Highly skilled managers not required to adopt this method. <heading>Shortcomings of the Gantt chart</heading>Just like any other project planning method, the Gantt chart also have few shortcomings. They could be overcome by few modifications during the Gantt chart preparation stages. They are summarised as follows (Durfee, 2003); The people responsible for each task cannot be figured out. This can be easily overcome by tagging each task with the initials of the people responsible for it. As the project get more complex and intense, it becomes difficult to decipher the dependencies of the tasks, unlike using the CPA method. The critical path is often not explicit. This could be overcome by marking it with a different graphical representation, a red box for instance, as in the case as shown in figure 3. The other resources, financial and logistic for instance, are not shown associated with each task. <heading>Conclusion</heading>As a final note, it is worth mentioning the importance and the usefulness of such simple yet effective and efficient project planning tools. In spite of the age of CPA and Gantt Charts, it is still considered an invaluable method for monitoring project management. The real factor that needs to be considered is that, these tools were nearly a century old and yet they possessed such ideas that were way beyond their times. In spite of few modifications over the years, to suit various needs of different projects of different sizes and situations, the basic structure of CPA, PERT and the Gantt chart still remain the same. The future scope without such methods of project monitoring would by unthinkable. There definitely is a huge scope for tweaking the methods for making it compatible for various projects of various magnitudes and various situations. 