<heading>Question 1. Strategies for E-Enablement of Small Delivery Company X</heading><heading>Introduction </heading>Building a successful e-business essentially involves a shift in the concept of the firm, in which organizational boundaries become less demarcated (Ali and Pauline, 2003). By e-enabling the small delivery company, customers can have access to the website, collect information they need, select the type of delivery services they want and fulfill the whole ordering process online in a few minutes. To any customer regardless of their location, company X will offer personalized delivery service directly to them. Meanwhile, the transition from a conventional to an e-business will enhance the market share and bring more profit for the company. However, many competitors have sprung up and occupied large portions of the market share since the e-business concept has been involved in many firms. To e-enable company X is a daunting task which requires multi-coordination and organizational integration of business processes and systems. Therefore, researching and examining the strategies of e-enabling the firm are quite crucial before setting up X online delivery company. The purpose of this paper is to focus on using e-technology and the internet to improve company X's business. The first section will focus on the business analysis. In the second part, the e-strategies for improving the sell-side of this delivery company will be discussed. The next section will turn to the e-business tools for the buy-side of this company. The last section will illustrate the ways of using e-techniques to improve X's internal processes. <heading>Business analysis</heading>To e-enable this small delivery company, it is important to well understand the breadth of knowledge in developing solutions and strategic choices. Analyzing the current situation and defining the requirements of the business should be at its earliest stages. <heading>2.1 SWOT Analysis</heading>SWOT has been widely used as an analysis method among many organizations, such as E-bay, Microsoft and FedEx. The assessment of the current situation, about the tools, resources and techniques are defined by SWOT. The strategies are devised based on the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the organization. <heading>Strength: </heading><heading>1. Feasibility</heading>Feasibility analysis is a process used to test the different parts of the business concept and assess that if the firm can achieve its goals (Kowalczykowski, 2002). For this small delivery company, its business concept has four parts: the customer, the service, the value proposition, and the distribution channel. First, as this small delivery company has already had its own entity and an established brand name in the market, its various services catalogues can be listed on its web site at the home page. The customers who are interested in its delivery services can get information from the home page. Second, if the customer is other business, the partner for example, they pay a subscription fee to be listed on the site and have their products displayed. Third, Internet can be another way for reaching those existing customers and delivering the benefits. This delivery company can benefit customers by providing the following services: <list>On-time parcel delivery Customer call center Free packaging Online paymentReal-time tracking information Free shipping software products Proof of delivery service</list><heading>2. Internet based communication technologies</heading>Customers are the lifeline of any business, and it is important to keep current customers by avoiding or minimizing their dissatisfaction (Zetocha, 1983). Any companies regardless the size need to communicate with their customers timely and effectively. Internet provides a communication platform which benefits both the company and customers. In order to retaining existing customers and acquiring potential customers, multiple communication channels can be set up on the web site for delivering quality service. Customers can use search engine, e-mail, write or call this company. Alternatively, they can find the answers to frequently asked questions online (FAQ) by typing the keywords. <heading>3. Customization</heading>To benefit the customers, a system can be set up to provide them with their individual information. After logging into the website, customers can track and monitor their shipment by using their own tracking number or reference, obtain signature proof of delivery, manage their account, view delivery history and make payment online. <heading>4. Business efficiency and cost-effectiveness</heading>The use of e-business tools will tremendously shorten the order-to-delivery processes. Requirements from more customers can be processed at the same time. Compared to the traditional telephone processing, the marketing cost of large amount of papers and the salaries for the telephone operators can be largely reduced. <heading>Weakness:</heading>First, to establish X online company, the brand image awareness can be a weakness as not many customers know its website. Second, another significant weakness can be the e-security risk. Employees, customers, suppliers and even competitors all have the access to X's webpage and even business data, the risk of losing valuable data and confidential information will increase. Third, the small delivery company is going to use e-technology to cut costs and save time, expand market, improve customer services and become more competitive. To complete this complex task, the lack of e-business experience can be another business weakness which may lead to the loss of customers and profit. Nevertheless, this weakness can be corrected by the improvement of computer system and elite working team. <heading>Opportunities: </heading>Although some famous corporations have been occupying a large portion of market share, there still exists potential marketplace for small delivery companies to target. In addition, the e-business is rapidly growing worldwide, which brings more and more opportunities for the development of the online delivery company. <heading>Threats: </heading>Since the benefits of e-business have been widely recognized by many other entity delivery companies, the increasing number of competitors will emerge in the online delivery service market, and the existing e-delivery companies also can be the threat. <heading>2.2 E-business plan</heading>Detail planning should be done before starting a new business or e-enable a business for reducing the chance of danger. To e-enable this small delivery company, several areas should be considered in the business plan. 1. If the business environment is suitable for e-enablement 2. If this business has clarified short term and long term objectives 3. Marketing strategies 4. Internet security 5. The budget for this venture <heading>3. Sell-side</heading><heading>3.1 E-Marketing </heading><heading>3.1.1 Target Marketing</heading>Internet marketing has been regarded as 'the application of the internet and related digital technologies to achieve marketing objectives (Chaffey, 2004). However, no business can be all things to all people. Instead, it must reach specific customers and satisfy their particular needs. As an entrepreneur, it is important to identify the target customers and well understand them. The process of finding and studying customers can be divided into four aspects: 1. Demographics: To identify the feasibility of e-enabling this delivery company, the population make-up of its target region should be clarified. The potential customer's age, gender, income level, education background and family circumstances are the key factors which will determine the company's targeting strategies. Female customers are the majority of those who have online shopping habits, therefore, they are most likely to visit X's website. 2. Geographic and lifestyle factors: For example, the undeveloped area where people do not regularly go online will not be the main target market for this online delivery company. Considering the customer behavior and lifestyle will help the company provide them with customized and personalized service and determine the price that customers can afford. By using GPS in local area, there will not be geographic restrictions on routes and the company can track where their courier are and make its delivery process more transparent. 3. Customer needs: One of the business goals is to maximizing customer satisfaction. Therefore, considering all the reasons why people might order the online delivery service should be the first step when intending to e-enable this company. The targeted customers are those who need some change in the process of ordering a delivery service and have the access to internet. Using the website, the customer can order the delivery service much more easy and fast than before. However, as there are many competitors in the delivery market, it is important to provide more services or added value to attracting new customers and keeping their loyalty. Once these key factors have been considered, the company can begin to make a more specific customer profile, a more focused description of its target market. This process will help the company make decisions about services offering, advertising, pricing and expansion plan. <heading>3.1.2 Advertising in E-Space</heading><heading>1. Objective</heading>The objective of advertising on the Internet is to persuade customers to buy a certain product or service. Internet advertising is regarded as the most effective method to lift sales, enhance the image of the brand, affect the consumers' attitudes towards the product, and enlarge the audience reach (Jones, 2006). <heading>2. Consideration</heading>As Statt (1997, p. 211) claimed that the presence of advertising in our lives is universal and pervasive. Along with the increasing number of internet users, online advertising is becoming the main stream as one of the branding strategies. However, the rapid increase in the number of people who access to the Internet, has resulted in similarly strong increases in the amount of money spent on online advertising (Briggs, 1999). Moreover, not all advertising in this new media form is effective to achieve its expected outcome and the increase in spending makes it more and more important that the effectiveness of online advertising need to be explored. Suggested considerations are as follows: 1. Visually appealing: The key strategy is to emphasize brand and firm's image to build up its brand awareness and reputation. The advertisements should be put on the top or right hand of the webpage where the customer attention will be attracted. 2. Page-loading speed: The content and pattern of advertisements should be simple, meaningful, and match the standard format. 3. Business content: The text should be clear, concise and easy to be understood or remembered by customers. 4. Navigation efficiency and compatibility: This means the links should be well-labeled, accurate and meaningful. The site compatibility with browsers and software should also be considered. 5. Security and privacy must be assured as many customers may concern about the viruses and cyber attacks. 6. Marketing customer focus: Delivery information, return policy and confirmation page after an order should also be included on the webpage. <heading>3. The advantage of online advertising </heading><heading>(1). Convenience and interactivity</heading>Internet is literally a hands-on experience (Rick, 2005). Customers can get detailed information about the services such as instructions about ordering, tracking and creating delivery report. The Internet can be used to create two-way feedback which does not usually occur in other media (Jones, 2006). It makes the communication between the company and customers more interactive. <heading>(2). Cost reduce and efficiency. </heading>As web advertising saves resources, it is very cheap compared to traditional advertisements such as television, newspaper, or radio advertisement. Online advertisements can be updated timely with low cost. Furthermore, it can reach very large numbers of potential customers or clients globally. The convergence of text, audio, graphics and animation makes the web advertisement more attractive as it combines the entertainment and promotions together. <heading>(3). Measurability. </heading>The efficiency of web advertisements can be measured by counting the click and reading the feedback of the questionnaire. <heading>(4). Reaching the right audience. </heading>Using the Internet, advertisers can focus on special interest groups and individuals (Jones, 2006). Generally, Internet users are well educated; they usually browse the web page for specific information. If the advertisement is not relevant to them, they will pay little attention and the effect will be reduced. Therefore, the advertisement should be attractive to its target costumers. <heading>(5). Independence of location. </heading>The Internet makes it possible to advertise not only in the local market but to a country without a local delivery company (Jones, 2006). <heading>4. How much to advertise </heading>For this small delivery company, the amount of advertisement and the investment need to be justified depending on their overall budget. The decision making should base on the company's expected revenue and cost analysis. <heading>5. Advertising methods:</heading>(1) Placed advertisement: It includes banners, pop-ups, micro-sites. Banner ads are the dominant form of online advertising (Hanson, 2000). Pop-ups include banners and buttons that appear on the screen without the user calling them (Laudon, 2005). To achieve target marketing effect, banners and pop-ups can be put on the specialized websites or the related catalogs on a portal site. Micro-sites are usually five advertising sizes larger than banners and linked to pop-up boxes. (2) Company marketing sites. Any promotion activities with order forms or news can be put on these sites. (3) E-mail. The first step is to identify target customers and obtain a mailing list by using agent technology, cookies or questionnaires. The second step is sending e-mails which contain e-news, promotion information or customized offer directly to relevant people. Since there are some customers may regard this as junk mail or spam, different options should be provided for the registered customer. They can choose receiving particular newsletters or other information or not. (5) Search Engine. Google is widely regarded as one of the most popular search engines. This company can collaborate with Google and put the advertisements on its website. The links to this delivery company homepage will display on the list of the search results when a user type in the keywords of 'delivery service'. This method aims at targeting these customers who need delivery service. (6) Chat room: As many customers may discuss with each other and share information in chat room or forum. Advertisements can be put on the border of this webpage which will attract more customers. <heading>Online branding. </heading>Recognizing that customers want to deal with one company to meet their transportation and logistics needs is quite crucial for online branding. As this is an existing delivery company, the key strategy is to extending its brand awareness on the internet platform. There are five strategies for online branding (Joe, 2002): Be true to the brand: The delivery service promise should be connected to what the company can provide in reality. Be relevant and engaging: The web page should present clear information that customers are looking for and reflect its unique business style. Provide branded interactive value: The key point in building the value of a company's brand is to make the logo linking with brand-relevant content. Integrate with off-line branding: The packages can be printed with details on how customers could access to the website and make their order. This method is a source of online sales and an effective tactic of building brand awareness. <heading>3.2 Logistics </heading><heading>3.2.1 Tracking: </heading>Customers should be provided with the option of tracking their shipments online and be informed by e-mail about the status of order on request. This substantially increases the service value for the customer and is an important relief for the call center. <heading>3.2.2 Online transportation scheduling: </heading>This process includes the path of distribution of packages, a schedule of the various orders which based on the priority and distance, route mapping, specific timescales. <heading>CRM (Customer relationship management)</heading>CRM is fundamentally about the ongoing relationship between the business and its customers (Chaffey, 2004). It helps the company improve profitability and sustain customer relationships through online channels. To succeed with CRM, this small delivery company needs to match its services to customer expectations by integrating both on-line and off-line customer management. Attracting new customers and retaining existing customers are equally important for business. Therefore, the CRM should runs through the whole process of customer acquisition, customer retention and customer extension (Jones 2005). <heading>(1). Customer Acquisition. </heading>Customer profiling: This details each customer's delivery service requirement and needs. Profiling is also important for identifying potential customers. Using cookies or asking the customer to log on to the web site is the common method for identification (Chaffey, 2004). Communications: Both online and offline communication techniques can be used to acquire new customers and promote repeat visits. Interactive communications may shorten the distance between the business and customers and help the company clarify what kind of delivery services customers expect. <heading>(2). Customer Retention: </heading>Maintaining online customer relationship is difficult, quality of services is quite crucial in determining satisfaction and loyalty (Chaffey, 2004). Various e-marketing tools can be applied to maximize customers' satisfaction. Personalization and mass customization: Personalization and mass customization can be used to tailor information (Chaffey, 2004). Company can track those customers who have similar interests or buying behavior by collecting users' reference and content stored in databases, and send them similar e-mail about the particular service updates or special shipments and promotions. Online communities: The key to successful community is customer-centered communication. In X's Online Delivery Community, customers can discuss their experience of using delivery system. Those unsatisfied customers who complain in the community alert the company to the problems which need prompt attention and correction. This platform assist the company personalize the response and resolution to individuals to minimizing their dissatisfaction and keeping their loyalty. <heading>(3). Customer Extension: </heading>It aims at increasing the lifetime value of the customer to the company by encouraging cross-sales, for example, this delivery company can offer certain amount of loyal customers the option of a loan or a deposit account. Direct e-mail is also useful in encouraging repeat visits by publicizing new content or promotions (Chaffey, 2004). <heading>4. Buy-side</heading><heading>4.1 E-Procurement</heading>Procurement refers to the complete action or process of obtaining items from supplier. This includes purchasing, contracting, negotiating and logistics. As Chaffey (2004) pointed out that e-procurement could achieve significant savings and other benefits which directly impact on the customer. Annually, this delivery company pays bills on indirect goods and services such as office supplies, delivery carrier supplies, vehicle parts and others. It used to rely on inefficient paper-based procurement to manage indirect purchase requisitions, ordering and fulfillment. This process was manual and labor-intensive. While e-procurement solutions will automate and streamline the whole paper-based procurement process. Its advantages are as follows (Edelstein, 2001): (1). Time saving: As the suppliers have the access to this delivery company's website, they can check the updating information, the sales record, and provide the delivery company with timely support. (2). Achieving more competitive pricing from suppliers and giving better service to employees. (3). Achieving full return on investment (ROI). (4). Reducing the spending on commodities and services such as PCs, office supplies, temporary services (Kenner, 2000). <heading>4.2 E-collaboration</heading>The globalization and severe competition both result in the need for companies to collaborate and improve their effectiveness and efficiency. E-collaboration is about sharing information within organizations, planning, coordinating, decision making, optimizing resources utilization and maximizing their advantages. The application of e-collaboration in this delivery company is the B2B (business to business) collaboration. This strategy is aiming at meeting or exceeding customer expectations (Oracle, 2001). Firstly, there are three aspects that need to be considered before E-collaboration: 1) The roles of different participants: It is important to define each participant's role in the partnership and make rules for resolving conflict during the collaborative procedure. For this small delivery company, the truck or other transport companies, petrol company, office suppliers, computer company, software and hardware company and packaging company are the main suppliers who play different roles during the whole collaborating process. 2) The understanding of the complexity of the task: Before collaboration, each participant should well understand the common task, and make an effective and feasible collaboration plan. Both the independence and dependence are involved in the business activities. Suppliers and this small delivery company should corporate with each other and fulfill their own tasks respectively. 3) The importance of good partnership to the success of the collaboration: Pressures from the external or internal environment on the collaborative process should also be considered. The previous collaborative experiences including positive and negative aspects, a series of recommendations should be included in the collaboration. As the barriers and boundaries do exist among the partners, the premise of smooth collaboration is that every participant should trust and understand each other and communicate efficiently. 4) Allow time for trust and understanding to grow. Building up confidence and trust are not easy for a new partnership, therefore it is necessary to spend time on communication before co-operative action. 5) Develop a range of channels for partners to communicate and share information online. Online community makes it more convenient for participants to exchange knowledge and information timely. 6) Recruit a group of staff to be responsible for collaborative activities and organize online training courses. 7) Apply e-tools for the messages to be transmitted during the collaboration, such as real-time message and forum. 8) Organize electronic conferences and use online discussion areas. Secondly, as this small delivery company is at its earliest stage running its website, the task is becoming more complex and interdependent. Therefore, the quality and efficiency of the collaborative network are quite crucial and need to be improved urgently. To do this, organizations need to (McKenzie and Winkelen, 2001): Ensure that the technology is suitable for the task and every partner has common access. Ensure that each participant uses the agreed methods of communication and the rules for regulating business behavior. Establish standards, such as glossaries for common terms and templates for critical modules Thirdly, as the knowledge that shared by partners is increasingly important to the success of e-collaboration, participants need to: 1) Each participant should be motivated in contributing knowledge and sharing information. 2) Ensure there is no blame on each other, but constructive comments. 3) Celebrate for each success. 4) Use diagrams or pictures to help partners understand its ideas. Finally, the outcomes of an e-collaboration activity can be used to improve the future performance. Review the experiences, explore what went wrong, and discuss ways to improve or avoid the same mistake in the future. Re-enforce the positive part of the project. Analyze the reasons and key factors for success Demonstrate the benefits and value of doing these projects. Clarify the responsibility from the top management to actual work. <heading>4.3 E-supply chain integration</heading>Today, tighter supply chain management is viewed as a competitive imperative rather than a strategic advantage. Hence, to e-enable this small delivery company, it is crucial to determine the appropriate e-tools for tightening the supply chain. By integrating the services within selling and supply chains of its customers, the delivery company can increase customer loyalty and raise the competitive strength. <heading>4.3.1 Demand management</heading>In this fast-growing industry, the efficient demand management is the key factor to achieve good customer satisfaction. The demand information should be reliable as much as possible as it will determine how much supplies the company needs to buy. For this small delivery company, it is a must to well understand the customer situation and needs, balance the customer satisfaction and supply chain efficiency. The primary issue is to know how much petrol is needed to support the daily transport, how many envelopes and boxes the company needs to purchase from its suppliers and how many computer hardware and software should be ready at its start-up period. All these factors should be considered based on the customer demands. <heading>4.3.2 Supplier development</heading>The number of suppliers: Reducing the number of suppliers and increasing the number of items from each supplier can be an effective strategy for this small delivery company. It aims at achieving full-truck-load efficiency and reducing the cost of purchasing. This will eventually help the company provide its customer with lower price. The supplier performance: The quality performance should be the first priority when selecting suppliers. The standard to identify a supplier is as follows (Hojung and David, 1999): <list>(1). The ability to meet quality requirements (2). The ability to delivery supplies on time(3). The performance history and reputation</list><heading>5. In-side </heading><heading>5.1 Human resources</heading>The increasing competitiveness of global business requires more efficient operations, efficient supply chains, and customized service. To e-enable this small delivery company, more qualified employees are urgently needed. The quality of human resources and the quality of the application of human capital will determine the business competitiveness (Lake, 2002). Internet makes it possible to optimize the human resources. <heading>5.1.1 Online posting of jobs. </heading>Various vacancies can be posted on the web site. It can be categorized such as Hourly Jobs by Location and Salaried Jobs by Location. Online application form and basic skill test are also required. All the recruitment process can be conducted online. Additionally, recruitment events and the requirement for each position should be put on the website as well. The internet based recruitment process would save the company more time and money compared to traditional process. <heading>5.1.2 E-employee training. </heading>Online employee training is more efficient than traditional training processes. Its advantages fall into three aspects: Learning fast: It is more efficient than traditional classroom training. Retaining more: Online training process is a more efficient way for employees to obtain knowledge. They may retain what they have learned over a longer period of time. <list><heading>Reducing cost:</heading>Less expensive than traditional training proce ss Affordable program also saves money by reducing the expense on organizing training courses.</list><heading>5.2 Administration</heading><heading>5.2.1 Review customer and handle complaints</heading>By answering the customers question and replying e-mail, this delivery company can get valuable information. Customers who have problems and complaints give companies chances to keep their business. Surveys show that firms can win back between fifty-four and seventy percent of these complainers by resolving their complaints, and up to ninety-five percent of this group will become loyal customers again if their complaints are handled well and promptly (Zetocha, 1983). <heading>5.2.2 Real-time sales and procurement budget forecasts</heading>By collecting and analyzing the data from the previous years, months, weeks, the market trends can be forecasted and determined. Based on the forecasts, the training group decides how many new employees are to be hired and how many online training courses need to be scheduled. The technology group can use the forecasts to analyze and determine the impact of the new technology. Finance can utilize the forecast for budget planning purposes (Xu, 2000). <heading>5.3 Knowledge management</heading>There is certainly a lot of knowledge around and the world is in a knowledge economy era. An essential activity of any successful organization is the management of this valuable asset. This knowledge management process consists of four main elements: Generation of knowledge New explicit knowledge can be created from research and from the conversion of tacit into explicit knowledge (Sandars, 2004). This can then be stored and distributed. New tacit knowledge is developed by the daily experiences of individuals. That means ideas and methods can be collected from everyone within company from top-managers to the low level workers. The knowledge in marketing, supply chain management, web site maintenance and other aspects can be obtained during the business process. 2. Storage of knowledge. By putting the knowledge into a database and organizing it, this asset can be used in the future decision making. 3. Distribution of knowledge. Knowledge needs to be managed carefully so that it can be shared among employees to assist them with strategic operations. Another effective way of knowledge distribution is to allow new staff observing 'experts' at work. Intranet is regarded as a good tool for managing and sharing knowledge within an organization (Sandars, 2004). It effectively connects the employees and top-managers in an online, real-time mode. In this way, it allows staff to exchange knowledge with customers, vendors, suppliers and trade partners (Ali and Pauline, 2003). Staff can share knowledge such as legislations, procedures, skills, expert knowledge and discuss the realities of their daily work. Application of knowledge. This is the most essential task of knowledge management. Knowledge is worthless unless it is used in problem solving and informing decisions (Sandars, 2004). Knowledge generation and use are at the heart of this delivery company as it links the marketing, sales, customer services and information technology together (Ali and Pauline, 2003). On one hand, the rich knowledge base helps the business to achieve its shipping, logistics, supply chain, and e-business objectives. On the other hand, it makes the company more accessible to customers. Regardless of the choice of services, customers can benefit from an integrated information platform. Whether contact this company in person, by phone, or online, customers are directed to one "touch point". Front line staff has access to the central database on each existing customer. By accessing this information, the staff can customize the service and suggest effective solutions to their colleagues. Customers can access up-to-the-minute information on package or consignment delivery status regardless the mode of transportation, the type of service chosen and geographic location. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The various elements and techniques to building and setting up an e-buisness, outlined above, are essential for creating and succeeding this progressive step for company X. The importance of the strategy that takes place is paramount to the successful integration of companies moving forward with their e-buisness. It should be carried out in a staged format whilst keeping to the strategy objectives of the company. During this time it is important that factors of risk and possible changes in management and workforce should be taken into account. With constant feedback during the whole process, whether it is positive or negative, should help evaluate if the implementation is living up to the expectation of the companies road to becoming a successful e-business. This will also help improve the core and support process needed for e-transformation. There is no easy way round succeeding in this venture to become an e-buisness. It is life changing and can be hard at first. However it is the logical step in today's new digital age and is an essential ingredient for the development of companies today.  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL <heading>Question 2: Dawn of the Internet Age</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>Under 25years ago the Internet consisted of researchers who were connecting to large computers that were unknown to most people. During its various stages of improvement and development it has traveled through many phases and creations to become what it is today. We can only envisage what the Internet and computer technology will become in the next twenty years but the picture is getting clearer. This report will break down and explain the various historic, futuristic aspects of where the Internet age could go next and how it affects our lives <heading>Internet development</heading>The Internet is constantly improving, and international organizations are making efforts to widen Internet access as much as possible worldwide (Vallee, 1999). In order to know the expected future of Internet, it is necessary to analyze what has happened in the past, to see how the Internet has changed the world. <heading>Background</heading>Internet originally started in 1969. It linked four computers from different universities' departments and a few private companies with U.S. In the following decades, more research organizations were encouraged to link up to the existing network. This structure enabled the information reach not only to a unique location but a wide geographical area. The Internet development can by divided into four stages (Barry, 1997): 1. Early 1980s, the Internet was mainly used for exchanging computer files. From the mid 1980s to the early 1990s, the Internet was used to store information for consultation purposes. 2. From the early to mid 1990s, Internet was developing in passive interrogation. Yahoo for example, was one of the first tools for such a purpose. 3. From the mid 1990s to the year 2000, search engines allow people to search specific information by using keywords. <heading>Changes</heading>The Internet is a dramatic success as it is used by many millions of people nowadays and changes the way that people live, work and learn. It is noteworthy not only because of itself but rather because of the new world it present. Internet is not only a combination of networks, software, computers, and technologies but also a stimulus of changes that never before imagined. The Internet is more important in what it enables than what it is (Robert, 1997). <heading>The impact of Internet on individuals</heading><heading>The changes in people's live</heading>The Internet has revolutionized the computer and communication world. It has removed geographical and physical boundaries and enabled people from different countries to communicate with each other and share information conveniently (Gattiker, 2000). It makes people more closer. People can contact their friends or family around the world by using internet communication tools, MSN and Yahoo messenger for instance, and which is much cheaper than telephone or mobile. Moreover, it makes the communication more living and interactive, as users can use web camera to see each other or use icons to show their emotions. This is impossible before Internet. Alternatively, they can keep in touch with others by sending e-mail or instant message. The more attractive tool is online community. It can be a chatting room or forum, where individuals can make new friends and discuss a specific topic. Even some e-tools make it possible for those disabilities to access to the Internet. Internet makes people's live much more convenient and enjoyable. By using Internet, people can entertain themselves at a Disney site, check career opportunities, get real-time stock quotes at Quote.com, track a FedEx package, search travel information, book a restaurant or a hotel, make purchases on E-bay and check personal bank account. These breakthroughs benefit the Internet users with greater customer involvement and satisfaction. <heading>The revolution in working</heading>The internet is dramatically changing the way that people work. More and more employees are using Internet in their daily work. Using Internet, staff can attend online meeting and internet based training, communicate with colleagues, access to company's database, negotiate with clients. Additionally, Internet based Home Office and Paperless Office largely promotes the working efficiency and save resources. <heading>Internet based learning</heading>The Internet provides users a wide variety of content and mega database where they can search and obtain knowledge. The application of high technologies such as TCP/IP, HTML, makes the internet more open to worldwide users. People who speak different languages all have the access to the Internet. The World Wide Web was introduced in the late 1980s, it simplified the process that people search, access and share information on the Internet and made it more convenient to a non-technical user (Gates, 2000). For example, by using Google people can search specific knowledge by using keywords and store it in their PCs. Online examination is also one of the best ways for learning, it is more interactive and efficient than the traditional test. Also, people can have school at home and submit their homework online. <heading>The effect of the Internet on business and government</heading>The Internet is affecting the way that people work and do business. Publishing, banking, government, mass media, employment, retailing and the medical industry have seen a great change in the Internet era. The publishing industry can sell its content over the internet in many cases. Government has the ability to censor information and tax-undermined by the Internet. Artists or software programmers can sell their works online. Radio stations have their own websites which provides their audience with the live listening program. The Internet is stimulating wholesale changes in essentially every industry and every business (Robert, 1997). Online transaction is dominating the worldwide business. Today, the Internet is transforming the traditional businesses and government into a global concept. Since the language barrier has been removed by Internet, any business all over the world can sell their products or deliver services online. However, this openness makes the market more competitive. As customers can make comparisons much easier than before, any business has to provide products or services more attractive than its competitors. The advantages of Internet encouraged more companies to e-enable their business. Moreover, many new industries emerged to create software and content for the Web. In other words, the internet enabled more businesses to participate in the new economy (Gates, 2000). The high-speed Internet, powerful computers, advanced software make these businesses work together and provides customers with the competitive precuts and services. Internet can be used to connect companies, their customers, employees, suppliers and partners together. Companies can post jobs online and hire staff with knowledge regardless of their location. Meanwhile, more job opportunities are available for people. In addition, the Internet simplified the business processes and offered more opportunities for business collaboration. It shortened the distance between companies and largely saved their time. For large companies, they can corporate with other international companies on the Internet. Small firms can enhance their marketplace to worldwide. For employees, they can improve their working skill, promote working efficiency and share information by using Internet technology. For customers, provided with the wide options, they can make comparisons online and find better products or services with lower prices. Business applications will expand in order to fulfill educational, training, communication and commercial requirements and objectives. For instance, as machinery is increasingly computerized, specific training needs will attain a very refined state. The internet may make it possible to operate equipment from a distance by remote access. Robots will occupy an important place in both heavy work and precision tasks. Applications for the internet will cover earthly tasks as well as increasing space exploration and applications (Vallee, 1999). <heading>Restrain and challenge</heading>Restrain: As the online transaction is rapidly increasing, e-security is becoming a severe issue. Many new users are worrying about security and privacy of sending credit card information when they shopping online. Although many customers have experienced fraud on the Internet of all kinds, the convenience and other benefits of online shopping outweigh the cost of credit card theft. If this issue is resolved, the commerce will dramatically take off in the future (John, 2000). The internet is becoming more intense than in the past decades. Many internet companies cannot respond timely to all their customers due to the network congestion. Opportunities-jammed switchboards may be the best symbol of the white-hot intensity of the internet (Robert, 1997). Therefore, the Internet needs new advanced or powerful tool to overcome this technological restrain. <heading>Internet Future</heading><heading>3.1 Possibility</heading>The development of the Internet depends on not only the technical aspect but also people's imagination. Today most people access the Internet by using a desktop or laptop at home and at the office. Assuming that more powerful and intelligent devices are available, people may be able to get online across tablet-sized PCs or smart cellular phones and even household appliances. Internet will be seamlessly accessed everywhere through a wide range of smart devices (Gates, 2000). Although people can use internet at home, at work or on the move, the speed of Internet access needs to be accelerated in the near future. Along with the increasing Internet technologies, many more advanced e-tools will be available to enhance the Internet connectivity. People can open a webpage immediately after the mouse click, download free software in a second. The wireless technology has already brought more convenience to Internet users. However, it is still restrained by distance. Imagining that people can remote control their PCs through another computer interface by using Internet, advanced technologies will make it come true. According to Bill Gates (2000), to enable seamless communication and commerce around the world from almost any device, the technology will be one of the key forces of the early 21st century. The new Internet standard, such as XML, will greatly enhance online communication (Gates, 2000). Data will be shared by a wider range of computers, servers, handheld devices, and appliances. However, as the current Internet consists of isolated data, it is a challenge to edit and share it. This barrier will be resolved in the future and makes it possible for people to share information by using other devices. In the coming years, a combination of cheap and advanced devices will make the Internet more fast and convenient. In addition, more powerful software will enable Internet as functional as people imagine it to be. <heading>What is next? </heading>Many people may regard new Internet technology emerging is a potential threat. It is common that any new technology will be debated by some people at its early stage. Many organizations may be concerned about the impact of Internet on its traditional industry. As Gates (2000) pointed out, this situation is similar to when the telephone was first introduced. Many critics viewed it as a threat to society, personal privacy and individual behavior. While others thought the telephone would create more business opportunities and bring people closer together. The Internet has been regarded as the greatest invention, as it did benefit many organizations and individuals and accelerated the world economy. However, from others point of view, Internet will result in economic and cultural exploitation, the death of privacy. Everything has its two sides. For example, although more and more people are turning to use e-mail to contact others, the traditional express companies still hold its market share and make profit. On the other hand, many express companies have already had their own websites and expanded their marketplace worldwide by using Internet. The important thing is that the Internet is impacting on the society and economy in a positive way, and it will not shake the fundamental aspects of business and social framework. However, the current argument on how widely the Internet should be adopted does raise some serious issues that must be addressed to make the most of the Internet's vast potential (Gates, 2000). Protecting intellectual property: Nowadays, Internet users can download the latest software, digital books, music, movies and update their computer systems at no cost. Piracy is becoming a serious issue. The software industry, publishing industry, and the audio-visual industry have been struggling with this issue in recent years. Therefore, strong legislation such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and Secure Digital Music Initiative (SDMI) has been issued to prevent or deter piracy. However, as the digital information is easy to distribute over the Internet, the government and organizations should work together and protect the intellectual property in appropriate ways (Gates, 2000). Regulating global commerce: As the Internet offers businesses and individuals an easy way to transactions, it is accelerating economic growth in the world. However, it brings more challenges to tax and price regulation. To avoid vicious competition and regulate the online transaction, government and businesses must cooperate to find effective ways to resolve this issue. Protecting individual privacy: E-security, as it is mentioned in the above section, is arousing more and more attention. Along with the developing of Internet, people will increasingly rely on it to share information like making a purchase and payment online and checking medical history. The financial risk does exist in online transaction and it is a threat to individual privacy. As many people are required by retailers to submit their personal account information when making purchasing online, some of them may concern about the safety of their account details, and will be reluctant to trust the Internet. This will eventually lead to the decline of sales. Therefore, more e-technology should be applied in the future to avoid online transaction fraud and protect individual privacy. Keeping the Internet secure: Web site hacking, credit card fraud and identity theft have affected the Internets reputation. In order to keep the Internet a safe place to do business, e-security barrier must be overcome as soon as possible. Software companies should take the responsibility to offer high-tech products for keeping the Internet secure. Protecting children: The Internet is transforming the traditional education system, which gives children more opportunity to know the world. However, it can also expose them to obscene, violent or inappropriate content. In reality, it is difficult to censor this unregulated global medium. While parents and teachers can block access to objectionable Web sites through advanced software. Meanwhile, government should encourage software companies to produce more child-safety e-tools. Law enforcement also plays an important role in prosecuting online predators (Gates, 2000). <heading>Conclusion</heading>In conclusion, our vision and imagination are limited to the internet and all the positive options are laid before consumers. Companies are continuously transforming themselves and the successful ones are the ones that have transformed their existing business. Despite the structure of the economy the industry find the rationale for huge investment needed for its growth. Vallee(1999) identifies that there is no guarantee of permanence attached to the world wide web because it is a growing and constantly evolving entity. It is clear that, although Internet has been constantly changing the global network, there is still plenty of work to be done in the future. In some remote rural areas and undeveloped countries they are still without adequate electrical power, telephone service, or even healthcare and education, while in the near future, the Internet will cover these area and keep expanding. . 