<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>The whole world is undergoing what is now an unavoidable change in climate and how and the extent to which this will affect people will range substantially from region to region. How the water supplies and water-related disease in semi-arid areas such as the grasslands of Africa, North East China, The Mediterranean and parts of Australia will be affected by the changes is investigated in this report. The water supply in these areas will be diminished by changes in precipitation, evaporation and soil moisture, river flows and groundwater re-charge which occur due to the rising temperature. Food production will be greatly affected by the unpredictable nature of the weather with changing seasons, high rainfall, floods, and droughts all featuring. These factors also greatly influence the spread of disease. Water-borne disease can be brought about either by contamination brought on by flooding or the use of poor quality, contaminated freshwater during a drought. Flooding and the temperate nature of semi-arid countries will facilitate mosquitoes which aids the spread of malaria, yellow fever and dengue. Through flooding malaria could be transmitted to areas to dryer areas where it did not figure before as conditions were not favourable to mosquitoes, which creates the risk of a malaria epidemic. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The Earth's climate is a major factor in the way that people across the world live their lives. Due to man's activities, particularly with respect to carbon pollution, a mean global temperature rise of 2ยบ is now almost a certainty and this will impact hugely on everyone in the world. Particularly crucial to human survival is how the temperature increase will affect the water supply as fresh water will become scarce. Semi-arid areas such as the grasslands of Africa, North East China, The Mediterranean and parts of Australia are very susceptible due to their very nature and as these areas cover one-third of the Earth's surface, accommodating 900 million people, it is a very important issue. Global warming will affect the water supply by altering precipitation, evaporation and soil moisture, river flows and groundwater re-charge which will in turn affect diseases for which water is involved. Specifically how these will be affected is detailed below. <heading>Precipitation</heading>Precipitation is the main cause of variability in water balance over space and time and in semi-arid countries it is generally low already and highly seasonal. The change in climate is predicted, according to simulation studies to reduce precipitation in the African monsoon, reduce precipitation all year round in the Mediterranean and increase rainfall in the Asian monsoon. In all of these areas, the variability of the rainfall is set to increase. Different areas have varying rainy seasons and different levels of rainfall but the people are all well adapted to this and base their agricultural methods upon it. For the success of farming, factors such as the timing of the first rains (when affects when the crops are planted), distribution of the rains within the growing season and the effectiveness of the rains are all very important. However, due to global warming, rainfall will become more erratic and rainy seasons will tend to become shorter and less predictable without trend and this uncertainty will in turn affect crop yields. Drought is another element that people have come to cope with, as in many instances it is predictable and they can therefore work around them, however with the changes in the climate, there will be little or no trend. On the other extreme, due to the erratic nature of the rainfall, there is risk of flooding. Risk of flood damage is particularly great in small settlements in semi-arid regions due to the rarity of extreme rainfall and in a warmer world the frequency of these storms would increase. During extreme rainfall, houses, roads, irrigation systems, and other constructions are destroyed and human settlements in oases are isolated because telecommunication and traffic connections are broken. As settlements have become adapted to the dry conditions, the total numbers of deaths and the total amount of damages caused by drought and other impacts of dry conditions often are smaller than those caused by heavy rainfall. Damages to the water supply caused by flooding can be disastrous; it can damage water treatment works, flood wells, septic tanks and waste disposal areas and sometimes overwhelm treatment systems, contaminating water supplies. In the case of drought, reduced water availability could force people to use polluted water sources in settlements at the same time that reduced flow rates reduce the rate of dilution of water contaminants. The quality of the water supply can also be affected with the growth of algae and other plants being much more prolific in higher temperatures, leaving behind nutrients when they decompose. These changes and unpredictability of the rains will impact on the welfare of the people with increased hunger, tiredness and sickness. Massive impacts will also be felt on natural resource based livelihoods, which are very common, generally in terms of crops dying, less feed for animals, less or poorer quality grass which all compound to have financial implications. <enote>Climate Change 2001: Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Page 164. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001 </enote><enote>Changes of Precipitation Characteristics by Global Warming Simulated by the MRI CGCM, Akio Kitoh, MRI, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan; and M. Hosaka, Y. Adachi, and Y. Murata. Taken from 15th Symposium on Global Change and Climate Variations. Tuesday, 13 January 2004 </enote><enote>Africa - Up in smoke? Page 14. Andrew Simms. nef, June 2005 </enote><heading>Evaporation and Soil Moisture</heading>Climate change has the potential to affect all aspects of evaporation from the land's surface, which encompasses evaporation from open water, soil, groundwater and water stored on vegetation. Evaporation will be enhanced by an increase in the land's surface temperature, which combined with a saturated vapour pressure increase will lead to a decrease in soil moisture. In semi-arid regions, the soil moisture will be decreased to a greater extent than most other areas due to the relative humidity of the lower troposphere decreasing with global warming and the precipitation rate not increasing enough to replenish this. Semi-arid regions lack water in the first place, so scarcity of water becomes an even greater possibility. The amount of water stored in the soil is of fundamental importance to agriculture and influences the amount of evaporation, groundwater recharge and generation of run off. The increase in temperature will increase the demands for evaporation and the soil moisture will therefore be reduced for most of the year. Irrigated water will also be subject to greater evaporative demands, which puts further strain on the water supply. As the majority of semi-arid regions are surrounded by desert, it is thought that the reduction of soil moisture will result in a worsening of desertification. River flows and other areas of open water will be subjected to heightened evaporation which will decrease their size and could lead to conflicts over water management. Hydroelectric power plants will be affected as levels in dams in these regions become lower which will impact upon electricity supplies. <enote>Prediction of Dryness in the Semi-Arid regions By the Greenhouse Warming Model. Dr. Shukuro Manabe. NASDA. March 2000. </enote><enote> URL . Global Warming Research Program. Program Director: Syukuro Manabe </enote><heading>Groundwater Recharge</heading>Groundwater is the major source of water across the world, but particularly so in semi-arid regions. Due to the aforementioned increase in evaporative demands and the resulting decrease in soil moisture and the drying out that this causes, the amount of water available for overland runoff and groundwater recharge will decrease. Changes in the frequency and the magnitude of the rainfall caused by global warming will affect how often recharge events can occur as it is often the case that such events occurred after flooding. <enote>Climate Change 2001: Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Page 166. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001 </enote>Some of the more lowland semi-arid areas will experience a salt contamination of groundwater resources caused by seawater intruding into freshwater aquifers brought about by the rising sea level owing to the melting of glaciers. <heading>Water-related diseases</heading><heading>Water-borne diseases</heading>Human exposure to water borne infections occurs by contact with contaminated drinking water, recreational water, or food. This may result from human actions such as improper disposal of sewage wastes or could be due to weather events. Rainfall can influence the transport and spreading of infectious agents, while temperature affects their growth and survival. Semi-arid countries are set to experience rising temperatures as well as changes in rain patterns and seasons. These changes are certain to have an effect on diseases that are already known in the areas and could well introduce conditions that are suitable for lesser know diseases to the areas. <enote>Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. Page 16 of Summary, based on book Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. A.J. McMichael,al. (WHO, Geneva 2003). </enote>Many diarrhoeal diseases vary seasonally, showing that they are sensitive to climate, tending to peak during the rainy season and are especially prolific during droughts and floods. The erratic nature of the weather will mean that floods and droughts will become more common in semi-arid areas, which means that they will be particularly susceptible. Major causes of diarrhoea linked to heavy rainfall, flooding and the contamination of water supplies that this can bring are: cholera, cryptosporidium, E.coli infection, giardia, shigella, typhoid and viruses such as hepatitis A. It is therefore very important that handling of sewage is kept from separate from storm water defences that would be used in the event of a flood. In the other extreme, water scarcity, to which semi-arid regions will be subjected, can necessitate the use of poorer quality sources of freshwater, such as rivers which are often contaminated. Decreases in water supplies could also reduce the water available for drinking and washing, which would lead to increased concentration disease carrying organisms in water supplies through lowering of the efficiency of local sewage systems. Warming of open water areas, would also create favourable conditions for diseases such as cholera and increase the risk of transmission into surrounding countries. This could be especially prominent in the Great African Lakes. <enote>Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. Page 14 of Summary, based on book Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. A.J. McMichael,al. (WHO, Geneva 2003). </enote><enote>Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. Page 14 of Summary, based on book Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. A.J. McMichael,al. (WHO, Geneva 2003). </enote><enote>Climate Change 2001: Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Page 365. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001 </enote><enote>Climate Change 2001: Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Page 365. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001 </enote><heading>Vector-borne diseases</heading>Although not water-borne diseases, vector and rodent-borne diseases are water-related in that they are affected by the presence of water and will be affected by the changes in the water supply. Both temperature and surface water have important influences on the insects that transmit vector-borne infectious disease. Of particular relevance are mosquitoes which spread malaria and viral diseases such as dengue and yellow fever. Malaria varies seasonally and mosquitoes require warm and wet conditions, with stagnant water to breed. Through global warming and the increase in incidence of floods, warming and drought the conditions for disease transmission will be facilitated. There will also be greater need for irrigation of crops due to the temperature increase, which could again facilitate mosquitoes. Flooding in particular will provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes and this could result in the spreading of malaria to otherwise dry areas where the disease in fairly uncommon, as very hot dry conditions reduce mosquito survival, and this therefore renews the risk of a malaria epidemic. Populations that have been previously malaria free will also lack immunity to the disease which will increase its impact. <enote>Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. Page 14 of Summary, based on book Climate Change and Human Health - Risk and Responses. A.J. McMichael,al. (WHO, Geneva 2003). </enote><heading>Rodent-borne diseases</heading>Rodent-borne diseases are diseases that are transmitted to humans via contact with rodent urine, faeces or other body fluids and are also host to fleas and ticks. Rodent population is affected by unusually high rainfall and drought, which are becoming more common with global warming. Outbreaks of Leptospirosis, which is an acute fever that can also be carried by dogs, often occur after heavy rainfall and during floods, and incidence of the disease could therefore be affected. Outbreaks of Hantaviruses, capable of causing severe and often fatal illnesses in humans, are associated with conditions favourable for the rapid increases in rodent populations, which are detailed above and again look set to increase with global warming. <enote>Climate Change 2001: Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Page 365. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001 </enote><heading>Malnutrition </heading>Diseases caused by malnutrition could become very common if poor yields become factors of the unpredictable nature of the weather. This will result in again less productivity agriculturally as people would not be able to work to their full capacity. Also, it would be more difficult to fight off the aforementioned diseases if an individual was suffering from malnutrition. <heading>Conclusions</heading>At the centre of the water supply problem is the threat to food production. By 2025, the amount of water needed for food production across the world will rise by 50%, due to population increase and higher standards of living but the amount of available water is declining. People will have to make difficult choices between dedicating water for crop irrigation, domestic or industrial uses which may force imports of food, which for poorer people may be too expensive and may mean starvation. It will be difficult to adapt to the erratic rains and changing seasons, but it is imperative that efforts are made, through good water management, to obtain maximum usage from the precipitation that does occur. <enote> URL . Global water crisis by 2025. Charles Welch. </enote>Not only does the unpredictability of the weather affect food production but heavy rainfall, floods and drought are all factors in the spreading of disease as the majority are climate sensitive. Water-borne disease can be brought about either by contamination brought on by flooding or the use of poor quality, contaminated freshwater during a drought. Flooding and the temperate nature of semi-arid countries will facilitate mosquitoes which aids the spread of malaria, yellow fever and dengue. Through flooding malaria could be transmitted to areas to dryer areas where it did not figure before as conditions were not favourable to mosquitoes, which creates the risk of a malaria epidemic. Conditions that are inherent with global warming are favourable for rodent-borne diseases so this looks set to increase and malnutrition seems inevitable unless farming methods are adapted to meet with the changing climate. 