<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>Renold Plc is a multi-national precision engineering group producing amongst others industrial chains and related power transmission systems. Like all limited companies Renold Plc is required to produce an annual financial report that provides a 'true and fair view' of the company's performance. In the case of Renold Plc the report produced complies with this belief, in the opinion of the Auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, the financial report provides a 'true and fair view' along with complying with all the relevant financial accounting standards such as those within the 1985 Companies Act. The implementation of the International Accounting Standards will mean there is an improvement in the stated profit before tax for the 2004/2005 annual financial report and this will affect the next financial report in several ways. A variety of performance indictors can be used to evaluate the performance of Renold Plc over the past financial years along with an insight into the possible future performance. From the 2004/2005 annual financial report it is clearly seen that the company had a difficult year mainly due to the increase in steel prices of approximately 40% and the weakness of the United States Dollar. The future prospects for the company outlined in the narrative of the annual financial report 2005 and the interim report published 12 th December 2005 show that there could be an increase in performance of the company over the next financial year and it is suggested that ordinary shareholders keep hold of their shares over the next financial year. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading><heading>Assessment question</heading>All limited companies have to produce an annual financial report. Does this annual financial report provide a 'true and fair view' of the company's performance? How reliable is this report to an ordinary shareholder as an indicator of both past and future performance? To evaluate the performance of Renold Plc over the past financial year it is necessary to consider a selection of performance indicators, these are selected to show the overall performance of Renold Plc. These indictors consist of ratios calculated from data contained within the annual financial report 2005 and the FAME database, along with other indicators such as turnover, share price and peer analysis. These indicators will demonstrate the past performance of Renold Plc and give an insight into the possible performance in the next financial year. From this a recommendation to an ordinary shareholder can be made whether they should sell their shares, hold them or buy more shares. The indicators chosen are listed below: <list>Peer analysisTurnover Return on shareholders' fundsNet profit ratioShare priceAcid test ratioDividend yieldEarnings per shareTrade creditor collection periodPerformance compared to exchange rate and steel prices</list>For the report to provide a 'true and fair view' the annual financial report needs to comply with the relevant financial accounting standards, which will be transferred to International Accounting Standards after the publication of the 2005 annual financial report. A series of accounting adjustments are applied to the financial report and these need to be considered and their impact on the reported profit in order to decide the reliability of the annual report. <heading>Analysis and discussions</heading>An important indictor of the performance of Renold Plc over the past financial year is to compare it to that of its peers. The peer group report according to FAME (Table 1 ), shows how Renold Plc has behaved compared to similar companies (according to FAME) which are not necessary Renold Plc direct competitors. From Table 1 it is possible to see that Renold Plc was placed forth within the peer report according to turnover. Graph 1 illustrates that the turnover for Renold Plc (shown by the red line) is within the upper quartile of the peer group, which could indicate that the company is performing well. It is although hard to compare companies within the peer group directly as the financial year ends are different for each company so the market forces, such as steel price, may not have affected the other companies when they produced their last financial report from which the data for the FAME peer report is taken. <table/><figure/>The turnover for Renold Plc over the past 5 years as shown in graph 2 decreased since 2001, but increased slightly since 2003 to a turnover of 197million during the past financial year. Considering the upward trend for turnover over the past 2 years it suggests that Renold Plc could potential increase the turnover once again next financial year. <figure/>This initial peer review is simplistic as it singularly considers turnover as a comparative, to discover the performance of Renold Plc compared to its peers it would be necessary to consider other performance indications. Table 1 shows that Renold Plc had a profit before taxation of -£6,800,000 which is ranked twentieth out of the twenty-one companies considered within the peer report. This shows that out of this group Renold Plc made a large loss before taxation. As the peer report considers similar companies, not necessary competitors, the increases in steel prices that affected Renold Plc during the last financial year may not have affected them to such an extent therefore these companies may have made a profit before taxation. Within the FAME peer report for Renold Plc there are a large number of various performance indictors that can be used to compare the companies within the report. The last peer report indictor that will be considered here will be the Return on Shareholders Funds. The definition from J. R. Dyson is that return on shareholders funds is a measure of pre-tax profit against what the shareholders have invested in the entity. This performance indictor is extremely useful as it shows how profitable the entity is as an entirety and represents the efficiency that capital is being utilised within the entity to generate revenue. From Graph 3 it can be seen that Renold Plc has had a difficult financial year during 2004/2005 with a negative return on shareholders funds. <enote>J. R. Dyson, 'Accounting for Non-Accounting Students', Sixth Edition, Prentice Hall, 2004, p254 </enote><figure/>Using the FAME peer report (Table 1) to evaluate the return on shareholders funds of Renold Plc compared to the other 18 companies (3 of the companies do not state a return on shareholders funds), Renold Plc is ranked 15th. Only four of the other companies within the report showed a negative return on shareholders funds, which suggests that the other entities within the peer group are finding the market situation adequate to utilise the capital within the entity to generate sufficient revenue. The return on shareholders funds is the most appropriate profitability ratio to consider when comparing a selection of different entities as it uses the net profit after interest but before taxation when calculating the ratio. J.R. Dyson warns that the taxation charge in the accounts of different entities can be subject to a variety of accounting adjustments and is therefore hard to compare one entity to another, so calculating the ratio before taxation allows comparison. <enote>J. R. Dyson, 'Accounting for Non-Accounting Students', Sixth Edition, Prentice Hall, 2004, p254 </enote>Another profitability ratio like the return on shareholders funds that can be considered to evaluate the performance of Renold Plc is the net profit or profit margin ratio. This ratio shows the amount of profit for each pound of turnover that the entity generates. As with the return on shareholders funds the net profit ratio for Renold Plc (Graph 4) shows that the company had a non-profitable year during the last financial year. <figure/>The group profit and loss account within the annual financial report for 2005 of Renold Plc states that the company made a loss before tax of £6.8 million. Within the narrative section of the annual financial report various reasons are explained for the performance of the company. Robert Davies, Chief Executive explains that commodity prices, in particular the price of steel, along with exchange rate movements have caused significant increases in input costs within the entity.  <enote>'Renold Plc, Annual Financial Report 2005', p6, Renold website, available at:  URL  </enote>As the majority of operation of Renold Plc requires steel for manufacture of various components especially within the power transmission - gears and chains division, the increases in steel prices globally affected the company greatly. Graph 5 illustrates the large increase in global steel prices during the first half of the year. Roger Leverton, Chairman, explains that the increase in steel prices had a major effect in the second half of the year; there was an average increase in costs of approximately 40% within the Group. <enote>'Renold Plc, Annual Financial Report 2005', p5, Renold website, available at:  URL  </enote><figure/>The increase in steel prices has meant that the profit for the company over the past financial year has been negative. Although the company has increased sales over the last financial year it has found it hard to recover the costs, particularly from original equipment manufacturers. Looking ahead from the end of the last financial year, 31 st March 2005, the global steel prices have decreased and are currently (December 2005) below those at the start of the last financial year before the increase, but these steel prices are still significantly higher than the prices during 2003 (Graph 5). The slight decrease in the price of steel along with other operating cost reductions that are being implemented by Renold Plc aim to provide a profit before taxation for the next financial year. It can not be relied on that steel prices will decrease any further or that the will not increase within the next financial year so various other methods of operating cost reduction will need to recover the increase in the cost of steel. According to the Annual Financial Report 2005 the company is outsourcing production to lower cost countries and implementing lean manufacturing techniques within its divisions. <figure/>Another large impact on Renold Plc over the last financial year was the weakness of the United States Dollar against the Pound. Graph 6 shows the weakness of the Dollar for the last three months of the last financial year up to January 2006. <figure/>Robert Davis, Chief Executive, explained that the strength of the Euro had "aggravated" problems that the chain division had faced as the majority of the production for the division was in Europe whereas the sales growth had derived from dollar-based economies.8 It was hoped that the Euro would weaken against the Dollar during the next financial year, and considering graph 7, the Euro has weakened against the Dollar. This is extremely beneficial for Renold Plc as the exchange rate will not affect them to such an extent as it did during the 2004/2005 financial year. Renold Plc also reduces the risk to currency exposure by employing foreign exchange contracts, so the fluctuation does no affect them so heavily of the contract time. <figure/>Another indicator of the performance of Renold Plc is the value of the share price which as you would have expected has fluctuated over the past 5 years (Graph 8). <figure/>The share price for Renold Plc decreased over the last financial year, April 1 st 2004 to March 31 st 2005 as shown in graph 9. This is un-beneficial to shareholders as they may not recoup all their initial investment if they sell their shares. <figure/>After the end of the last financial year of 2004/2005 the share price for Renold Plc decreased again to a low in mid May 2004 (Graph 9), but since then it has steadily increased until present (January 2006) which is a good sign for shareholders. The trend of increasing share price is extremely beneficial to shareholders as if they require to sell their shares they will get a higher price than they would have at the end of the previous financial year. It is also important to consider the liquidation state of Renold Plc. The acid test ratio is a liquidity ratio; which according to J.R Dyson measures the extent to which assets can be quickly turned into cash. The acid test ratio takes into consideration that it is perhaps difficult to dispose of stocks quickly and is therefore a good indicator of the entity's liquidation position. A ratio of 1:1 means that the company is using its assets effectively and is able to meet its short term debts. As shown in graph 10 the acid test ratio for Renold Plc has increased over the past 5 years and tended towards 1.0. This suggests that Renold Plc has enough cash available to cover its' current liabilities if necessary. <enote>J. R. Dyson, 'Accounting for Non-Accounting Students', Sixth Edition, Prentice Hall, 2004, p256 </enote><figure/>The acid test is a beneficial value for share holders to consider as it shows that Renold Plc has enough funds to pay off current liabilities which is beneficial to the company and indicates that the company will not be going into immediate liquidation. Over the next financial year, Renold Plc needs to ensure that the acid test ratio continues to have a value around 1.0, which demonstrates that it is using its resources effectively. Shareholders will be particularly interested in the dividend yield of Renold Plc, as according to Jones the dividend yield ratio shows how much dividend an ordinary share earns as a proportion of their market price. This ratio is a good indication of how Renold believes it is performing. If the entity believes that it is not performing well then it will not pay out dividends or they will be small. Roger Leverton, Chairman, states that there will be no final dividend payout for the 2004/2005 financial year, so the interim dividend of 1.5 pence per share will be the total dividend paid for the year.8 This is not favourable for the shareholders as they are getting a low dividend yield for their investment. <enote>M. Jones, 'Accounting for Non-Specialists', Sixth Edition, First Edition, John Wiley and Sons, 2002, p196 </enote><figure/>Graph 11 shows that there has been a steady decrease in the dividend yield ratio for Renold over the past 5 years. The decreasing towards a low dividend yield could have occurred if the share price had risen in value considerably and the paid dividends remained constant. This is not the case for Renold Plc as from graph 9; the share price has in fact decreased over the past financial year. To complete the analysis of investment ratios of Renold Plc the earnings per share will also be considered along with the investment ratio of dividend yield as discussed above. This ratio puts the profit of the company in context by relating it to the number of shares in use. The fluctuating behaviour of Renold Plc is un-beneficial for shareholders as they would prefer to see a growth in earnings per share over the past 5 years (graph 12). <figure/>To consider the overall performance of Renold Plc it is necessary to consider an efficiency ratio. Trade creditor collection period has been chosen as it represents the average time taken for an entity to pay for its credit purchases. Graph 13 shows the upward trend of trade creditor collection period over the past 5 years for Renold Plc. <enote>J. R. Dyson, 'Accounting for Non-Accounting Students', Sixth Edition, Prentice Hall, 2004, p260 </enote><figure/>As there is an upward trend over the past 5 years in the trade creditor collection period it suggests that Renold Plc does not have enough cash to pay its creditors. An upward trend indicates that the entity might be having some financial difficulties as it is taking longer to pay its creditors. The sharp increase in 2005 could be alarming as it could indicate that there is a problem within the entity, if this trend continues over the next few years, it could be a sign that Renold is in financial trouble. <heading>Future Prospects</heading>]The future prospects of Renold Plc have already been discussed above regarding the performance indicators; but other data gathered from public sources, for example, CRU steel price index and Reuters UK provide useful sources of information regarding the future prospects of Renold Plc. The Annual financial review also offers beneficial information regarding the future prospects of the company especially within the narrative (although the narrative could potentially provide a bias view). The narrative outlines the future plans for the company regarding operations, relocations and future plans for acquisitions; these can be used in conjunction with the public data sources to evaluate the future performance of Renold Plc. Although Renold Plc did not have a particularly good last financial year last year, the Directors believe that the next financial year will hopefully be improved on this year's performance. With steel prices reaching a plateau and the strength of the Euro against the Dollar weakening (as discussed above), along with lean manufacturing just to mention one of the methods they are implementing to reduce operating costs; the financial outlook for the company should be improved next year. If Renold Plc can hold its place within its peer group (ranked 4 th for turnover) then it is likely to win more contracts. The company is currently establishing a wholly owned manufacturing facility in China, which will open up the market in the Far East. Also establishing a manufacturing facility in Tennessee in December 2004 will reduce the exposure to the exchange rate fluctuations by producing all Cam Drive Systems for Dollar based economies. The interim results for the half year ended 30 th September 2005 for Renold Plc were released on 12 th December 2005 and were in line with the expectations of the Board. The interim turnover had increased by 12% from £95.3 million in 2004 to £106.9 million in 2005. Roger Leverton, Chairman, said "with the order book substantially higher than at the commencement of the year, and with the actions taken to mitigate cost increases, the second half performance should see an improvement. " But if there was an increase in the cost of raw materials or fuel this could significantly influence the profit of the company in the second half of the current financial year. The interim report does show that Renold Plc has made a pre-tax loss before tax and exceptional items of £1.8 million, and has therefore decided not to pay an interim dividend to shareholders. <enote>FACTIVA- 'Renold Plc, Interim Report 2005' available from FACTIVA website:  URL  </enote>When considering the past performance of Renold Plc it was compared to its' FAME peer group. The Interim Report for the highest ranked peer (according to turnover), Wood Group Engineering (North Sea) Limited is available and shows a profit before tax of $56.2 million up 212% from $18.0 million in 2004 ( URL ). Wood Group Engineering (North Sea) Limited is considered in the same peer group as Renold Plc as it is a similar company. Wood Group Engineering (North Sea) Limited are an engineering design and project management services company so are not direct competitors to Renold Plc, but it is still useful to compare the interim reports as it shows that a peer to Renold is able to make a profit within the current market conditions. <heading>Conclusion</heading><heading>Effect of Adjustments</heading>All limited companies are required to produce an annual financial report that provides a 'true and fair view' of the company's performance. Within the Annual Report several accounting adjustments are made which can affect the reported profit within the report. One such adjustment that is made within the annual financial report is to the tangible assets, the report explains that, where appropriate, adjustments are made to the remaining effective usefulness of the lives of the assets. These should be in-line with the circumstances, by could be adjusted to provide a larger value for the tangible assets by increasing the period of time it takes for the item to depreciate. In-turn this will show the profit for this year to be higher than the actual value. If the accounts are to give a true and fair view of the performance of Renold, the adjustments made should be in-line with the circumstances and provide an accurate picture of the performance of the entity. <enote>Renold Plc, Annual Financial Report 2005', p27, Renold website, available at:  URL  </enote>Financial instruments are also used to perform adjustments on the accounts, to provide a more accurate view of them. It is necessary to make adjustments for the various exchange rates that the company encounters throughout the financial year. The accounting policy notes within the annual report state that the "amounts payable or receivable in respect of the interest rate swaps are recognised as adjustments." 23 These exchange adjustments are shown in the notes for the accounts of the annual financial report 2005, for the intangible and tangible assets. Goodwill adjustments have also been made in the annual report concerning the acquisition of Jones & Shipman, and exceptional impairment charge of -£2.4 million (negative goodwill) has been added to the group profit and loss account. Without this adjustment the retained profit for the year would have been higher than that stated, but would have still been a negative loss. <heading>Financial Accounting Standards</heading>By law companies are required to publish annual financial reports. The 1985 Companies Act requires all companies to publish profit and loss accounts and a balance sheet; they are also required to disclose the auditors' report, a cash flow statement and a statement of total recognised gains and losses of the company. All five of these requirements are found with the annual financial report. The auditors' report explains that in the opinion of the Auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of Renold Plc for that financial year. It also states that the accounts are in accordance with the Companies Act 1985. Although it is not possible for the Auditors (and not their job) not to find any mistakes within the report, the auditors' report confirms that the relevant financial accounting standards have been applied to produce a true and fair view. I believe the annual financial report 2005 to be a reliable indicator for Renold Plc, and provide a 'true and fair view' of the performance of the company. <enote>Renold Plc, Annual Financial Report 2005', p26, Renold website, available at:  URL  </enote>Renold Plc is required to move from UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and adopt International Accounting Standards. The International Accounting Standards will be first implemented during the Interim Report published 12 th December 2005. Renold Plc will also restate prior financial information before this date so that comparisons can be made between the various financial years of the company. There will be several changes within the next annual report due to the transference to International Accounting Standards. Some of the basic changes implemented by the International Accounting Standards are the titles of various figures within the report will have to be renamed, and some existing balances will be under different captions, for example Tony Brown (Finance Director) explains that "Deferred tax assets" will be "transferred from current assets to deferred tax - non-current assets"  <enote>Reuters UK website, (as accessed 03/01/06)  URL  Bibliography C.P. Stickney & R.L. Weil, 'Financial Accounting: An Introduction to Concepts, Methods, and Uses,' Seventh Edition, The Dryden Press,1994. C. Nobes, 'Introduction to Financial Accounting', Forth Edition, Thomson Business Press, 1997. </enote>A major influence of the implementation of the International Accounting Standards will be on the reinstated result for the year end 31 st March 2005. "IFRS 3 requires the immediate recognition of negative goodwill as a credit to the income statement."25 This will mean there is an improvement in the stated profit before tax from a loss of £6.8 million to be reinstated on the interim report  (25) as a loss of £1.6 million. Under the UK GAAP Renold Plc adopted FRS 17 regarding pensions. When adopting the International Accounting Standards, IAS 19 will replace FRS 17. There are a number of large similarities between the two standards, so the impact on the pension section of the annual financial report will not be as significant as the changes regarding goodwill. <heading>Shareholder Position</heading>As I believe the annual financial report 2005 to be a 'true and fair view' of the performance of Renold Plc over the past financial year it is possible to make recommendations to an ordinary share holder about the past and future performance of the company based on the 10 performance analysed and discussed above. Looking back to the beginning of the last financial year (1 st April 2004) I would have advised an ordinary shareholder to sell their shares as the share price decreased during the last financial year. The 2003/2004 financial year had shown a positive net profit ratio and earnings per share whereas the 2004/2005 financial year had provide negative values for these ratios and the share price is lower than that of the year before. Selling at the beginning of the 2004/2005 financial year would have meant that the shareholder would not have been involved in the difficult year (shown by the majority of the performance indictors) Renold Plc had for that financial year. Although the reinstated figures due to the implementation of the International Accounting Standards mean that the return on shareholders funds ratio for the last financial year will not have been such a large negative number if recalculated. At the end of year 31 st March 2005 I would advise ordinary shareholders to hold their shares as Renold Plc is implementing plenty of measures to counteract the high steel prices, by lowering operating costs and subsequently increasing the net profit. Although the interim report published on 12 th December 2005 states that no interim dividends will be paid out, it is likely that there will be some final year dividends that can be collected by the shareholders. The share price of Renold Plc is also on an upward trend so if trend continues they will be able to realise the maximum amount from their shares. From the performance indictors analysed above and narrative within the 2004/2005 annual financial report I believe that the performance of Renold Plc will improve over the next financial year. 