<heading>Introduction</heading>The link between trade and poverty has been the subject of wide research because of the ambition to reduce poverty in developing countries. The issue is topical because of its connection to the loan conditions given by international financial organisations. A requirement for open trade is common because of the benefits of increased trade in terms of income. However, the question remains whether the gains are visible in reduced poverty and inequality. The research on macro level about the benefits of increased trade for the poor has provided ambiguous results. The results range from little/no effect to adverse effects like in Lundberg and Squire (2003), who find that trade actually increases inequality. The effect on poverty also depends on the growth effect of trade which is considered mostly positive empirically. Ravallion also states that the model specification remains unclear with several control variables and assumptions about the error term. The analysis across countries is difficult because of survey differences and other disturbing characteristics even when country dummies are included. <fnote>Lundberg, M. and Squire, L. (2003) "The simultanous evolution of growth and inequality", Economic Journal, 113, 326-344 </fnote><fnote>Ravallion, M. (2006) "Looking Beyond Averages in Trade and Poverty Debate" World Development , 34, 8 </fnote>The aim of this study is to partly repeat the analysis in Ravallion. The paper does a time-series regression analysis to explain the reduced poverty in China in terms of opening the trade. Trade is not found to be a significant factor and there must be underlying factors like agricultural policies that explain the reduced poverty. <fnote>Ravallion, M. (2006) "Looking Beyond Averages in Trade and Poverty Debate" World Development , 34, 8 </fnote>I will repeat the time series analysis for India to see if the results are the same. India has experienced a drastic increase in trade in the last few years of the sample 1980-2005. Trade has had an increasing trend since 1986 and simultaneously, poverty has gone down. It needs to be determined if these two are related. Data is collected for India, then the stationarity of the variables is analysed and an appropriate estimation technique is decided on. <heading>Model Estimation</heading>The variables included and their descriptions are shown in the table below. They are all in logs. <table/>Poverty gap is used as the dependent variable and the rest as explanatory variables. It can be questioned if percentage variables should be logged but this specification is taken from Ravallion. First, I will look at the graphs, correlograms and unit root tests for each series to determine stationarity and the order of integration. These are presented below for poverty gap and the rest are in the Appendix 1 for reference, observations summarised in table 2 below. <figure/><table/><table/><table/>Poverty gap has gone down but with a decade of fluctuation mid-sample. A correlogram for the levels is non-stationary, the autocorrelation function goes to zero very slowly with a lot of persistence and the partial correlation function is at first close to one, then zero suggesting an I(1) variable (integrated to order 1). For the first difference the correlogram looks stationary and indeed, when testing for a unit root we cannot reject for the levels whereas reject for the first difference, meaning the series is I(1). Akaike Information Criterion is used because it is better for small samples. <table/>The inclusion of a possible I(2) variable complicates the analysis. Its presence, being the highest order of integration will dominate and with no other I(2) variables this will prevent co-integration to make the combination stationary to allow estimation. However, because not rejecting the unit root for LCPI was borderline and depended on the significance level, I will proceed with the analysis assuming that it is I(1) since the estimation of higher orders of co-integration is not in the scope of this study. Ravallion does not find co-integrating relationships between poverty and trade, stating that there is no stable long run connection between the two, and then uses a shortcut, to estimate the equation by simply differencing each series until it is stationary. Therefore I will comment on the estimation and results of a similar differenced model first and then proceed with investigating the existence of co-integrating relationships in the long run for India's case. The population model from Ravallion is as follows (all variables in logs) and the estimation results for the sample coefficients are shown below, standard errors in parenthesis and bold print meaning significantly different from 0 at 5% level.  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  (1) R-squared 0.489214 Adjusted R-squared 0.250847 From now, the "t" under script is dropped unless there are lags. Looking at the results, the model does not seem to explain the data well in terms of significance. Even at 10% significance level, only one more coefficient becomes significant (the lag of d(d(lcpi)) and the goodness of fit measures are low, especially when adjusted for the number of explanatory variables. There is a positive relationship between inflation and poverty gap which was not expected and only the lagged effect is negative. The coefficients are a measure of elasticities between the dependent and the explanatory variable because both are in logs. For example 2.54 is the inflation elasticity of poverty gap, but it must be noted that these are differenced variables. What the analysis confirms is that using a similar method to Ravallion we found similar results. Trade does not enter to significantly explain movements in poverty. Only LCPI had a statistically significant effect. I will test this for misspecification using a Ramsey RESET including the squares and cubes of the residual from the original model. <table/>We cannot reject the null of the model being correctly specified. There is nothing further to comment on this model. The variable of interest does not help to explain poverty gap. We cannot investigate the relationships because we are dealing with differenced variables instead of levels. To verify these relationships in the long run and to find further information, I will proceed assuming that all variables are I(1) and test for co-integrating relationships among the variables that could make the combination stationary. <heading>Long run dynamics</heading><heading>Engle-Granger</heading>The first step of the Engle-Granger method is estimated where all the lagged values disappear, leaving only the levels. This gives us the estimated values of the long run elasticity coefficients, given below (standard errors not reported because biased):  FORMULA  (2) The coefficient of trade is not statistically different from zero, others are but the signs are opposite to the expected. Other long run specifications can be calculated to see if deviating results are repeated. <heading>Cointegrating relationship (Johansen test)</heading>I am estimating the long run co-integrating relationship. From this, I need to check if the residuals are stationary to ensure it is not a spurious regression where two variables are related only through a common time trend without an actual correlation. In the unit root test for the residuals the critical values need to be calculated from McKinnon tables because the estimation software does not allow for estimating n=3. Calculating critical values from McKinnon tables:  FORMULA  for  FORMULA  we have  FORMULA  The test statistic -4.163401 is just below the critical value so at 5% we reject the null of unit root. The co-integrating relationship exists, it is not a spurious regression. The co-integrating equation implied is (the coefficient on the dependent variable is normalised):  FORMULA  (3) These results, when compared to Engle-Granger, are reasonably close in magnitude but they have opposite signs. The reasons for this could be investigated further. <heading>Error Correction Model</heading>Next, I will estimate the Vector Error Correction model to see if the variables are weakly exogenous. This is done by testing if their corresponding alpha coefficients are zero. <table/>The chi-squared test rejects the restrictions, meaning that the adjustment coefficients are not equal to zero and variables are exogenous to the model. I will now turn to the short run again, using a different specification to Ravallion. The error correction model looks at the short run elasticities of the model. I will regress the differenced variables on each other and their lagged values, also the lagged residual from the co-integrating regression.  FORMULA  (4) The inside of the square brackets represents the long run error and the β coefficient measures the short run effect. The results show that the lagged residual term (its coefficient represents the adjustment coefficient) is significant only at 10 % level which is borderline, meaning that the error could be non-stationary. However, the residuals were tested for a unit root before and it was rejected, so I would not be too concerned about this. The coefficient -0.772631 is good because it is negative and less than 1, meaning that 77% of the equilibrium error is closed every period. The residual plot (see Appendix 3) looks random, with 1989 being a possible outlier. This could be investigated further by a shift dummy variable. It needs to be confirmed that the error term is not serially correlated. This will be done by the Breusch-Godfrey LM test, which regresses the residuals as a dependent variable on the lagged differences of the explanatory variables plus lagged values of the residual term to see if they are significant. <table/>The test statistic leads us to not reject in both, F and chi-squared versions of the test by being smaller than the critical value. Therefore we cannot reject the null of no autocorrelation here. Next, I will test for normality of the error. The distribution needs to be normal with no skewness and only slight kurtosis (value of 3). Jarque-Bera 0.072507 Probability 0.964396 The Jarque-Bera test measures these together and the test statistic is smaller than the critical value, therefore the test cannot reject the null that errors are normally distributed. Also the histogram looks normal, with one outlier that could be generating some of the problems encountered with significance of the variables. Heteroscedasticity is normally a cross-section problem so it is not expected here. Finally, the model is tested for being correctly specified by the Ramsey RESET. This is done to see if another functional form would perform better. <table/>The test statistics provided by the software are smaller than critical values at any level so we cannot reject the null of the model being correctly specified. <heading>Long and short run</heading>For the last part of the analysis, the long run and the short run will be estimated together. Again tests are performed to ensure no autocorrelation and the correct specification of the model as before. The test for serial correlation rejects the null in F-test but shows serial correlation in the other. These are usually similar so it might be that the low number of observations is driving the rejection decision, this will be ignored for now. The same problem occurs with the RESET test. Using the output coefficients for the combined model, a third equation for the long-run can be written using the specification in (4):  FORMULA  dividing through by -1.141984 to normalise lpgap(-1), the effect gets picked by the adjustment coefficient:  FORMULA  (5) Inside the square brackets represents the long run autoregressive distributed lag model. When (5) is compared to (2) and (3), the previous results for estimating the long run, the ADL is more similar to the Johansen version, with at least corresponding signs and roughly not too big differences in each coefficient. It can be assumed that this has to do with Engle-Granger assuming only one co-integrating relationship when there could be more, allowed for by Johansen and ADL. A possible solution is to go back to the Johansen test for the number of co-integrating relationships and see if the result is different when we use a different specification for the long run for example. The estimated coefficients show that (ignoring the Engle-Granger deviating result) the signs of the coefficients on trade and inflation are as expected. More trade means a decreasing poverty gap whereas higher price level penalises the poor by increasing poverty. However, food prices have a coefficient not corresponding to intuition because it shows a negative relationship. What we have here is that price of food has gone down in the same period as poverty has reduced as well. A possible explanation is government policies targeting the price of food, subsidies to control prices, low-cost imports, more efficient agriculture.. As food is less expensive people can afford more of it and have money to buy intermediate goods as well. On the other hand, the proportion of people who are net producers, not consumers of food will suffer because their income is reduced. This result might imply a sum of these effects, which in this sample ended up as negative although not statistically significantly different from zero. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The aim of the paper was to see if trade is significant or not in explaining reductions in poverty. This was not the case with China and now it has been confirmed for India as well. The recent years especially have seen a great increase in trade share but this has not been met by decreased poverty. It remains to be seen if the effect takes longer to realise, as our observation period is quite short it cannot be fully verified. This also causes small sample problems when OLS is only consistent under very specific assumptions. The quantitative results are therefore not very predictive but they correspond to theory with respect to coefficient signs implying that the signals from the data are interpreted correctly. What could be included in this study is a more thorough analysis of the model and the co-integrating relationships between the variables which remains unclear. Inflation is generally an I(2) variable but also trade here demonstrates similar effects. As the estimation of a mixed model containing I(2) and I(1) variables is out of the scope of this study, but could be done in an extended piece of research. Also relevant would be to refine the model to actually capture the variables that affect poverty in India, as shown the same variables that worked with China were not significant here and include some dummies to correct for breaks. This requires investigation of the economic, political and social conditions during the time period to understand the variables in question. This has been attempted in several studies but as in the developing world in general, specific sources of poverty are difficult to pin down. The policy implications of this study are not straightforward because as Ravallion states, trade volume is not a policy variable. It is also not certain whether it is endogenous to the model. What we can say is that by showing that trade volume does not explain changes in poverty it means that gains from trade are filtered to the higher income levels. This implies a case for increased redistribution, government might need to be more bullish in taxing the profits gained by companies from increased trade to alleviate the increased inequality observed in other papers as well. At the same time, if the price of food is kept artificially low through government intervention it can harm the domestic producers. This study has confirmed once again that there is no clear cut Pareto efficient way out of poverty. <fnote>Ravallion, M. (2006) "Looking Beyond Averages in Trade and Poverty Debate" World Development , 34, 8 </fnote>