Human body was not designed perfectly. People would always look for a golden mean for elderly and terminal diseases for beauty, fatness and others. Medicine is developing; many researches are provided widening our knowledge with this fundamental purpose- to first save people live. Moreover, organs transplantation is now recognized as an established part of medical practice, while a century ago nobody could even imagine removing parts from one body to another as a saving life treatment. Scientists are crossing mile stones in half of decade while some time ago in centuries; during The First World War first blood transfusions were provided for the first time, while now we are considering face transplants. United Kingdom set few first regulations on this subject after the Second World War; the last one came into force in April 2006. However it is expected, that because of a need to give the legal body for new medical discoveries- number of legislation would be still increasing. Therefore, medicine development in organs transplant area is in my opinion -not over-regulated in UK, and will not be probably over-regulated in next few decades. If government proposes a new legislation, need to achieve social support for his draft. The purpose of this behavior is simply to make it obeyed by citizens when it became enforceable. To achieve it, the respect for religious statements is necessary. Otherwise it would be senseless to discuss if some issue is over-regulated, when only small amount of people would follow it, for example because of conflict with their faith. Religion has a great impact on people's behavior; in fact it is not unusual, that some of faithful keep religious principles before their duties and responsibility as citizens. In my opinion, this "spiritual" influence has not been appreciated. Thus, it is important to take into consideration how it determines our every day live, point of view etc. That's why I have decided to spend more words on this subject in my essay. It is governments' duty to have regard for social support for regulation drafts, otherwise it would be senseless to create the rules which people does not approve. <fnote>As Abraham Lincoln said once that "government of, by and for the people" </fnote>Thus, it is very important to look how different religions deal with organs transplant, to know what kind of behaviors it is possible to face with. Accordingly to Jewish beliefs it might be shocking, that although they have one of the most modern health care, the amount of transplantation is one of the lowest in the world. It is a result of as Rabbi Daniel Sperber says that "many families refused to allow organs to be removed because the Bible prohibits the desecration of bodies and delay of burial". However this point of view is changing, as a result of The Halachic Organ Donation Society and other's pro donation campaign- only during the last year 10 percent of potential recipients died, waiting for donation. The idea is to convince the Jewish Orthodox Community hoping that when the religious leaders accept the concept, the faithful will follow them. It is in every individual's right to agree or disagree for donating/receiving organs. Thus it is not acceptable to force anybody to become a donor in the name of "civilization's need". Explaining the advantages of this concept to its skeptics can give us a chance to make the legislation more efficient. As a result, making it really debatable whether this issue is over-regulated or not. First thing, would be to stop identifying donation with religion on issues of death, prohibition of desecration of body etc. and start showing merci, compassion, saved life- purposes of this treatment. To persuade that organs transplantation should be recognized more as a more social, than spiritual problem. Only in these circumstances the clauses about "volunteer donation" that we can find in legal deeds, for example in British Human Tissue Act 2004 Code of Practice on this matter may have been "enforceable" and effective. Resuming, there is still a rising need to convince more and more people about reasonableness of organs transplant. It becomes obvious that, it is a task not only for the Member State to pass new regulation on this subject, but a great challenge for leaders (for ex. priests, politicians, philosophers) to answer the most fundamental ethical and moral questions. What happens with the soul after donation is it possible to have an eternal life? Then, from recipient's point of view- whose body is it? Is it me still? In conclusion, it has to be highlighted that, the cooperation between the Member State and social leaders, as mentioned above, can help to increase a number of transplantation in future. "Saving a life is the most important thing. You don't have to be a rabbi to see that." <fnote>"Although Israel has an advanced health care system and is a world leader in medical advancement, only 260 organ transplants were conducted in 2005. In the United States, about 73 are carried out per day. " cited from:  "Organ donation raises religious doubts in Israel "; By Ari Rabinovitch ; 8 November 2006; Reuters Health E-Line </fnote><fnote>President of the Institute for Advanced Jewish Studies at Bar Ilan University. </fnote><fnote>cited from:  "Organ donation raises religious doubts in Israel "; By Ari Rabinovitch ; 8 November 2006; Reuters Health E-Line </fnote><fnote>Similar problem arises in China where the traditional definition of death is the cardiac death. As a consequence of heartbeat and breathing stop, organ "suffers from" the blood loss and then they are impropriate for transplants. Despite modifications, which occurs in this area in favor of the "death definition" as a brain steam death, the Chinese lawyers are thinking to put both definitions as a co- existing one in the country and probably then allow public to choose, all- in respect of the tradition. It is well shown in the article: "Organ transplant regulation drafted"; By Xing Zhigang ; 13 March 2006; China Daily </fnote><fnote>"Medicine Meets Religion in Organ Donation Debate", Anthony Ramirez; 18 November 2006; Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company </fnote><fnote>In the meaning -live donors volunteer donation, signing donors card etc. </fnote><fnote>"Said a mother, an Orthodox Jew from Jerusalem, that her religion might get in the way of donating her daughter's organs after she was crushed to death by an automatic gate while attending an orientation session at a seminary in 2002. " cited from: "Organ donation raises religious doubts in Israel "; By Ari Rabinovitch ; 8 November 2006; Reuters Health E-Line </fnote>The other key area is the medicine development. When one issue is deeply discussed, has the social acceptance and support, another arises. During the XX century, there was always a "new purpose" to regulate this subject. At first, a need to create a legal framework for transplantations universally, then defining fundamental medical terms connected with this subject on legal grounds- death, donation, consent, patient interest etc. For this reason the UK's Human Tissue Act 1961-in general-was passed for; then to provide system of consent, preventing from abuse (especially from dead bodies). Every year the demand of organs is getting higher, but the amount of donors does not increase. Therefore it is important to still work on legislation by making it more adequate to citizens' expectation. Looking for other solution the new difficulties arises; is it ethical to clone embryos for therapeutically purposes? Whatsoever should organs sale have to be legalize, now completely banned by The Human Tissue Act 2004 s 32 in Great Britain, but - in other countries not ? Increasingly important would be setting rules of commercial exploitation of human body. Moreover, to decide whether it should be allowed only for the "research purposes" or maybe- some others?  <fnote>It is possible even to say, that this number would decrease, because medicine can save more lives now, than before and probably would be still able to resuscitate next? </fnote><fnote>"Textbook on Medical Law"; Michael Davies, Blackstone Press Limited, Second Edition 1996 </fnote>It is always possible to look at the Iran's example were it is lawful to sell organs. However it might be unacceptable by Western World countries, it is not treated as an immoral or unethical in Iran. Indeed, it might be shocking that when the potential recipients' dialyze starts to fail, he starts looking for the suitable live donor. "I put an advertisement in the paper for a kidney, and a donor came straight to me. We reached an agreement on the price quite quickly. In these cases, the recipient usually takes care of the donor afterwards. So I still visit my donor and help him out." says Gholamreza, a 44-year-old man from northern Iran .Accordingly, maybe if there is no way to stop this increasing demand and furthermore, we still did not provide any alternative methods, is it reasonable to legalize it? "Big question", somebody can say, that should be discussed not only by special institution as The International Forum for Transplant Ethics is for example, but also by Member States. <fnote>"Your part or mine?" Organ transplants ;18 November 2006; The Economist </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote>In the UK the section 32 of Human Tissue Act 2004 prohibits the"commercial dealings in human material for transplantation". In fact, it would be reasonable to say, that the sale of human body is regulated completely and understandable, but is it fully obeyed and acceptable by citizens? Organs sale is bounded in many countries; therefore black market occurs in most of them. Moreover, probably would exist because still the organs demand is higher than the available amount of them. A person, who is aware of inevitable death in short time, would try to do everything to survive, even commit an offence, but- stay alive. Some people say's, that what the western world care about is nothing more than "mere dollars". Maybe, but in my opinion many people do not realize how far they would be able to go to saving their own or love's life. From another side it is still possible to find people who would be able to sell organs- because of extremely poverty or just to make more money. Unfortunately, often "commercial donors" came from poor countries, are bad educated and just do not understand the risk and consequences of this donation. Concluding, it is perhaps the Member State duty to take into account "legislative compromise" and very strictly but indeed, legalize the sale of organs in nearest future? <fnote>"Psst, wanna buy a kidney? Organ transplants"; 18 November 2006; The Economist Newspaper Limited, London 2006. </fnote><fnote>"Commerce in transplantation: how does it affect European legislation?"; Bernard Cohen, Guido G Persijn & Yves Vanrenterghem; ClinicalTransplantation; Volume 14 Page 28 - February 2000 </fnote><fnote>They are not able to think prospectively in the 10- 20 years period time. People, who arrange this "commercial transplantation", abuse this lack of knowledge in very cruel way. </fnote>From time to time newspaper' s headlines "scream" about another scandals over the sale of organs as for example it was found in one of the private hospitals of London and then hurried up passing Human Organ Transplant Act 1989. "In purpose" -it is not a desirable way of setting any regulation, that's why it is so important to carefully look at this issue before cases as mentioned above, occurs. It might cause some benefits for both parties of those agreements, at first to provide better care for live donors after removing organ. Now, very often it looks like a journey "into the unknown", black market donors are transported to hospital were their organs are transferred to "paying customers". There are no evidences for how long they live after removal, but in addition to problems which occur in cases of legal live donations (for example between family members) it is quite obvious that they suffer from health problems. On the other hand it is not so uncommon that patients may receive organs that are unsuitable or diseased and thus may cause very serious problems including even rejection of an organ. Setting regulation probably decrease number of abuses on this matter. That's why it is vital to draft reasonable regulation on this subject also to be sure that live donors would receive sufficient explanation about the organ removal procedure, its consequences and risk. What's more, really and fully understand it. Furthermore, maybe that's the reasonable solution- to establish organs transplantation as a very last way of saving life, define it as a normal contractual agreement with large part concerning donors consent and both side health consequences. In addition, besides money, maybe live donors should obtain live health care or other privileges from recipients? <fnote>"Ottawa urged to run legal kidney trade: Bioethicist's proposal: Would discourage black market, end waiting list"; Tom Blackwell; 3 November 2006; National Post </fnote><fnote>Doctors transplanted damaged kidneys ; 4 November 2006; Daily Yomiuri Newspaper </fnote>For some reasons mentioned above, organ sales would be unethical, but on the other hand to let people die, should be treated as moral behavior? The problem of commercial trade in organs will not disappear by itself. In my opinion the solution is to regulate this matter very carefully, extremely strictly but indeed, making it legal. Looking at the Iran's example it should be admitted that the sale of organs is not very common. It is more treated as an exceptional solution, concerned only where other possibilities had failed. In addition it has to be said, that Iran eliminated completely the potential recipients waiting list. Possibly, drawing conclusion from its experience in comparison with British one this matter would be the most effective. Probably better way of solving this problem would be to establish one institution as "legal buyer"- created by National Health System? Thus, redistributing organs to donors and then within the live insurance providing to potential recipients. Probably the amount of suitable organs would increase. Citation from the transplants' surgeon speech would summarize this problem the best: "If it's happening, and you're unable to stop it and you are unable to provide alternatives, it is unethical not to try to regulate it in some way"  <fnote>"Ottawa urged to run legal kidney trade: Bioethicist's proposal: Would discourage black market, end waiting list"; Tom Blackwell; 3 November 2006; National Post </fnote><fnote>said Dr. Daar, a member of the international forum for transplant ethics, citation copied from an article : " Your part or mine? Organ transplants; 18 November 2006; The Economist Newspaper Limited, London 2006. </fnote>Now there are few organizations established for coordinating transplantation services. The United Kingdom Support Service Authority as a British example provides organ and tissue matching, transportation in very reasonable time and fit in directly- potential donors and recipients. Broadly, the Euro-Transplant is operating on European range. Both institutions are created for better and faster organ matching. Looking from the European Community Member point of view it would be debatable if The European Parliament should take steps to put some binding regulation on this matter. <fnote>Not only by passing resolution which are of course, important from the ethical viewpoint, but are not" enforceable as the "Resolution on prohibiting trade in transplant organs"; 14 September, 1993 was passed. </fnote>Despite this proposal, it should be discussed is it fair to give some exclusive rights to part of recipients' group? For example if somebody have signed a donor card and then because of some disease (which usually happens on random) became potential recipient- maybe it would be fair to match him with potential donor as a first? In addition, what about setting privileges for, for example conduct of life- healthy living, eating well, doing sports? On the contrary, should a men who was smoking whole his life and as a consequence suffers from a lung cancer, be considered as the last one, because has contributed to? This chain of causation might be possible but still, not certainly sure, that if he would not smoke, he wouldn't got sick. It is difficult to match donor and recipient, but there would be probably more than one pair of them in the discussed group. Another difficulty appears when talking about children. It certainly would be more effective, to first match children - probably they would live longer than adults. Is it possible to look at this matter only from the economical perspective? Of course, it would be understandable questioning this current of thoughts, but still it is possible to establish similar rules. Despite discussing potential legalization of commercial transplantations of establishing privileges for some groups it would be worth to look at the present situation. In last decade waiting list of recipients is getting longer. Whatsoever it is not unusual to wait for 4-5 years for organ transplant. Therefore it might be helpful to pass the "opting out system" also known as a "required request law", which establish the rule that, if potential donor had no objection to remove his organs after his dead ( for example religious as it was mentioned at the beginning of this essay), it is presumption that he had agreed for donation. Debating about "is the organ transplantation issue over regulated" can be recognized by some people as outtalked, always balancing between ethical and unethical matters, elaborate, more difficult even because of so many possible points of view. However it is vital to regulate such fundamental and problematic issues as organ sale, establishing privileges for some group of recipients etc. Scientists- doctors still give us new ideas to help people- always keeping in mind Latin sentences "Primum non nocere" and "Salus aegori sumprema est". Therapeutically use of embryos, xeno -transplantations and others, few years ago only hypothetical solutions, now become our normality. As long as everybody are well and healthy, they do not find this subject really so important. However diseases happen at random and it is not possible to foresee if it not afflict us. <fnote>Translation Firstly, not hurt (anybody). </fnote><fnote>Translation: The good of the patient is supreme to others </fnote><fnote>In the way, if they should be set or not. </fnote>