Communication is important within a large company such as AstraZeneca. It is needed to share information, ideas, and opinions, which are required to organise individuals, teams and ultimately the company. There are many types of communication as well as many skills that depend on it. All communication, whatever the form, has the same objectives. These begin with receiving the information presented, which sees that everyone has the information or data required for them to carry out their tasks. The information then needs to be understood, so it can be used effectively. Next is for the information to be accepted, ensuring that the information will not be discarded and will be considered useful. Then finally for action on the information to be undertaken, which is the ultimate aim of communicating. Effective use of communication skills will guarantee that these main objectives are achieved. Communication can be either verbal or non-verbal. Verbal communication involves the skills of speaking and listening. Good speaking skills require a clear voice, correct tone and smooth delivery. A speaker must connect with their audience to encourage mutual interest in their topic. Some of the key qualities a good speaker should have are alertness, pleasantness, distinctiveness and expressiveness. Alertness shows interest in the audience, making the audience more inclined to listen. Pleasantness will encourage cooperation and distinctiveness will ensure that the speaker's message is understood. Finally expressiveness conveys personal interest in the topic, which will stir interest from the audience. <enote>N. Stanton, Mastering Communication, Palgrave Macmillan, London, 4th edn., 2004, ch. 2, pp. 12-20. </enote>Listening is a key communication skill, "Unless somebody listens to the message and understands it, there is no communication, only noise". 50% of all communication is listening, which places receiving information just as important as delivering it. Good listening can also impart the listener with understanding of the information received. Listening well to a person will initiate listening in return, allowing one's own ideas to be registered with others. Ultimately good listening provides cooperation. <enote>N. Stanton, Mastering Communication, Palgrave Macmillan, London, 4th edn., 2004, ch. 3, pp. 23. </enote><enote>L. Smith, Effective Internal Communication, ed. P. Mounter, Kogan Page, London, 2005, ch. 9, pp. 89. </enote>Non-verbal communication mostly consists of body language. This includes many things, such as facial expressions, hand gestures and eye contact. These factors can be useful in adding depth to what is already being spoken, however, they must be used appropriately. For example, good eye contact can show interest in the audience, which can increase participation. However, too much eye contact can be unsettling and make the audience uncomfortable. Many communicating skills rely on good verbal or non-verbal communication, such as influencing, diplomacy, networking, and presenting. <enote>L. Smith, Effective Internal Communication, ed. P. Mounter, Kogan Page, London, 2005, ch. 2, pp. 18. </enote>Meetings are a forum for communication within groups and require the use of many communication skills, including the speaking and listening skills described above. A meeting is "a gathering of three or more people sharing common objectives where communication (oral and/or written), is the primary means of achieving those objectives." Meetings are required to pool information, which in turn allows for informed decision-making. Within AstraZeneca meetings occur regularly, each with its own aim and agenda. These occur throughout the hierarchy of the company, from one-to-one meetings between an employee and their manager to executive board meetings. Some meetings provide information, some provide decisions and some provide both. For example, departmental meetings involve whole departments to deliver information about company and departmental performance and future targets. Project presentation meetings present the work of a team on a certain project, providing useful tips and points that can be applied to other projects. These information-providing meetings are important in maintaining workforce morale, as they incite a feeling of being included. Meetings also occur at periodic intervals throughout the project to discuss its future. This usually involves senior management as it can have major implications for the company. These meetings share some information but are primarily for decision-making. They can decide whether a project should proceed to the next stage of development, or if it has reached the end of its lifespan. These decisions rely on many different pieces of information from various departments, so a well-informed decision can only be made by the group in collaboration, rather than by an individual. <enote>M. E. Hayne, Effective Meeting Skills, Crisp Publication Inc., Menlo Park, 1997, ch. 1, pp. 2. </enote>A regular key meeting in my work at AstraZeneca is the Technical Team Meeting. This brings together members of the project from different departments, including Process Chemistry, Analytical Chemistry, Process Engineering and Analytical Development. Key pieces of information from each department are shared so everyone is kept up-to-date and the progress of the project can be viewed as a whole, not just from the particular viewpoint of one department. From the information given actions can then be decided upon and distributed to suitable individuals. Before each meeting an agenda is distributed which contains the layout for the meeting. This provides the schedule for the meeting, with the topics that will be discussed, who will present the topics and how long each topic should take. This is important to the meeting's success as it lets the members of the meeting prepare any information they may need, so they can give a full and accurate account of their work. For each of the meetings mentioned success depends on their ability to achieve targets, use the minimum time required and satisfy all of its participants.5 For these to be accomplished the meeting must have a reliable chair who will ensure that the agenda is adhered to throughout the meeting, but also have an open atmosphere to encourage people to participate. A good meeting can inform, solve problems, inspire, motivate, persuade or instigate change. <enote>P. Forsyth, The Meetings Pocketbook, Management Pocketbooks Ltd., Alresford, 1994, ch. 1, pp. 4-7 </enote>However, meetings can also be run ineffectively, and only 1 in 10 meetings do work effectively. An ineffective meeting can be the result of poor time keeping, people not listening to each other or one person being too domineering, as well as many other factors. A bad meeting can waste time, result in missed opportunity, cause conflict and waste money.6 All of these factors can leave people feeling bored, frustrated and ignored. This in turn can affect team morale and slow the progress of the project. To avoid a poorly run meeting effective planning must be carried out. This includes the consideration of whether the meeting is actually needed, as well as the venue, who should attend and a detailed agenda. <enote>N. Stanton, Mastering Communication, Palgrave Macmillan, London, 4th edn., 2004, ch. 8, pp. 98-99. </enote>In general meetings can be an effective way to communicate from the lowest ranks of a company to the highest. Meetings facilitate the flow of information between colleagues as well as improving the decision making process. Meetings are also an excellent forum for people to hone their speaking and listening, as well non-verbal, communicative skills. However, unless carefully planned a meeting can have the opposite of its desired effect. It is the responsibility of every attendant of a meeting to ensure its success by communicating effectively. 