Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) is a rapidly growing analytical technique. The combination of two analytical techniques provides far more information than using each separately. LCMS can provide a chromatographic trace of a sample, on par with HPLC, along with the mass spectra of each fraction of the sample. This can provide essential structural information on compounds in the sample without having to isolate them and analyse them separately. One of the most important aspects of LCMS is the interface between the liquid chromatograph and the mass spectrometer. Mass analysis requires the analyte to be in the form of gaseous ions within a vacuum. However, liquid chromatography requires the analyte to be neutral and in solution at atmospheric pressure. Therefore, there are three main aspects important to each type of LCMS interface: evaporation, pressure reduction and ionisation. The evaporation of the eluent from the LC is required to convert the analyte from the liquid to the gas phase. The pressure reduction is required to create the low pressures or vacuum needed. Ionisation converts the neutral analyte molecules to ions. Different interfaces deal with these three issues in different ways and in different orders, with each with its own advantages and disadvantages, such as atmospheric pressure chemical ionisation (APCI), particle beam (PB) and thermospray (TS). <enote>R. Willoughby, E. Sheehan, S. Mitrovich, A Global View of LCMS, Global View Publishing, Pittsburgh, 2nd edn., 2002, ch. 2, pp. 60 </enote><figure/>In Process Chemistry at AstraZeneca the LCMS instruments use the electrospray (ES) interface. Work by John Fenn and colleagues developed ES for commercial use 16 years ago, and it has increased in popularity ever since due to its ability to ionise a wide range of compounds. Its low energy ionisation technique means that most organic molecules can be ionised by it without causing major fragmentation, so a mass ion can be detected. It also has the ability to vaporise large involatile molecules that would decompose through vaporisation by heat. <enote>J. B. Fenn, M. Mann, C. K. Meng, S. F. Wong, Mass Spectrometry Reviews, 1990, 9, 37-70 </enote>ES ionises the analyte molecules whilst still in solution, vaporises the ions and then submits them to a pressure gradient. Ionisation occurs by passing the analyte solution through a fine needle with a high electrical potential. The potential is concentrated at the tip of the needle, causing the positively charged ions to accumulate there, creating a cone-like meniscus, called a "Taylor cone". Droplets of the solution are formed when the electrostatic forces exceed the surface tension. As the droplets travel down the pressure gradient solvent evaporates from the droplet, causing the electrical field strength of the droplet surface to increase. Eventually the field strength will reach the Rayleigh instability limit, causing the droplet to explode into microdroplets. This process is repeated over and over until the ions are completely desolvated and in the gaseous phase. However, at a critical field strength of the microdroplets direct desorption of ions from the droplet's surface can occur. The gaseous ions are then sampled into the mass analyser. <enote>S. J. Gaskell, Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 1997, 32, 677-688 </enote><enote>W. M. A. Niessen, A. P. Tinke, Journal of Chromtography A, 1995, 703, 37-57 </enote><figure/>As with interfaces there are many different types of mass analysers, such as section mass analysers, time-of-flight analysers (TOF) and ion trap mass analysers (IT). The Process Chemistry LCMS instruments generally use quadrupole mass analysers. A quadrupole mass analyser consists of four poles that run parallel down a central axis. Controlled voltages are applied to opposite sets of poles, which interact with the charges on the ions that pass down the central axis. The voltages are used to distinguish a certain mass - to-charge ratio (m/z) range, which creates a mass filter. Ions of a too low m/z will be attracted to one set of poles & collide with them. Ions of too high an m/z will be attracted to the opposite set of poles. Ions of the selected m/z will pass down the axis to the detector. Although the voltages of the poles can be changed to analyse different m/z range, only one range can be analysed at a time. <enote>R. Willoughby, E. Sheehan, S. Mitrovich, A Global View of LCMS, Global View Publishing, Pittsburgh, 2nd edn., 2002, ch. 2, pp. 50 </enote>LCMS plays an important role when characterising impurities in a reaction. Isolating the impurities to acquire NMR spectra would require a lot of resource, compared to running a reaction sample on an LCMS instrument to obtain its retention time and mass. The mass spectrum can also be used to determine other structural information, such the presence of heteroatoms and certain functional groups. This information allows for a preliminary chemical structure of the impurity to be deduced. LCMS has also been instrumental in my work in the synthesis of impurities. Using LCMS to monitor the reaction I was able to determine if I was producing the correct compound. It is more useful than HPLC alone, as the reaction could have been producing an undesired compound with the same retention time as the desired one, which would lead to the wrong conclusion about the synthesis. However, using LCMS the mass spectrum of the relevant peak can be scrutinised, and the compound correctly identified. LCMS is also useful for actually determining the retention times of compounds, when using a new LC method. When a reaction sample is submitted to a new method the peaks on the chromatogram cannot be conclusively assigned to any compounds without knowledge of the retention times. This requires running standards of the compounds on the LC method, which can require a lot of time. However, with LCMS the mass ions of each peak are available so the compounds can be assigned by their molecular masses, without need for standards. This is also useful when no standard has been produced of a compound. In this way LCMS saves time and resource. <figure/>Throughout this report the advantages of the dual analysis by LCMS have been detailed. However, this analytical method is not infallible. It cannot analyse all organic compounds and has the same disadvantages as the two individual methods. As the LC generally uses a UV detector a without a UV chromaphore will not appear on the chromatogram. Therefore its retention time is unknown, along with the location of its mass spectrum on the chromatogram. Also not all organic compounds ionise, so they may appear on the chromatogram but only have background noise for the corresponding mass spectrum. Also mass analysis measures m/z, so multiply charged compounds will have a mass ion at an m/z a fraction of its actual mass, which can be misleading if not considered. However, these disadvantages only cover a small percentage of compounds that may require analysis. Therefore, in general LCMS is an extremely useful analytical tool, which will no doubt continue to increase in popularity. 