On Saturday 31 st March 1990 in excess of 25,000 people began a protest leading to Trafalgar Square against the poll tax. This protest had an initially peaceful intent but ended in one of the worst riots the capital city has seen in the last century. To truly understand the feelings behind the riot I will give a brief background as to the events of the day based on multiple accounts, as well as a short introduction as to what the anti poll tax movement stood for and its position within British politics throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s until it's replacement in 1993. Poll tax was introduced by the conservative government in April 1990 to replace the rates system and was later replaced y council tax. Unlike the former rates system which consisted of a single payment for a household, the poll tax or community charge was charged for each adult individual. This meant it hit hard those with large families, with adult children living at home, as well as the poorer members of society. The introduction of the poll tax was to replace the previous rates which were charged per household. Many people refused to pay the new poll tax and an active campaign against it including posters and leaflets was soon mobile. Many local demonstrations were held across the country against this charge, the culmination of this activity was the march on London in March. The march itself was to take place meeting in Kennington Park, then marching up Parliament Street into Whitehall and culminating into Trafalgar Square. In the morning protesters met in the park, estimates at the numbers attending the rally differ. The police estimates say there were around 25,000 protesters in the park rising to 29,700 in the square. However other estimates based on people there and video footage suggests it was more like 75,000. Trafalgar square has a capacity of 70,000 and was certainly full. When the march reached Downing Street some protesters chose to start a sit down protest, this meant the crowd coming up from behind began to get congested, and police claim two smoke bombs and missiles were thrown from the crowd. Whilst the area remained congested it was still relatively peaceful. The police formed a cordon on Parliament Street and Parliament Square forcing the protesters down Whitehall. A large number of police then entered the crowd and attempted to push the demonstration towards Trafalgar Square, at this stage they were met with resistance and many placards were thrown at the police. The crowd itself became more focused on the police and tried to push the police lines, as well as chanting anti-police slogans. <fnote>Stott and Drury 2000 </fnote>The police responded by cordoning off Whitehall and positioning mounted police at the rear of the crowd. Large numbers of Police than ran into the crowd and widespread fighting between the police and protesters occurred. Mounted officers then began charging at the crowd causing one protester to be run down by a horse. The police then entered riot police and began attempting to dispel the crowd. Within Trafalgar square large fights and protests were occurring against the police who included people climbing scaffolding and a fire was started on some nearby Scaffolding. The police also sent in Police vans and cars at some high speeds into certain areas of the crowd to attempt to disperse them. Missiles were thrown at the cars which sustained heavy damage. Patterns of charging and fighting between police and protesters continued until around 5.30 pm when Police cleared the South area of Trafalgar Square and pushed the protesters through the west end where widespread looting occurred. The police also chose to close the train and tube stations in the area so protesters where unable to get home. <fnote>Stott and Drury 2000 </fnote><fnote>The Battle of Trafalgar 1990 </fnote>The riot itself was heavily filmed but on much of the footage afterward the rioters were portrayed as deliberately causing trouble. This contrasts with what those attending the march claimed. One of the key reasons this march proves to be so interesting to Sociologists is bound up in this. Classical group theory of Le Bonn and Allport view the behaviour of crowds as coming from within. This is the view portrayed by the media after the Trafalgar square riot. The crowd becomes irrational and itself develops from a group into a riot. This view of the crowd as a single heterogeneous unit was also closely connected to the policing of crowds at the time, and follows the actions of the police. If the crowd is thinking in the collective the only way to control it is through increased repression it removes all responsibility from social order to the behaviour of the crowd. In the case of the London riots the police acted to disperse and regain control of the crowd to contain it. This is also evident in the actions of the Police at the beginning of the march in Parliament Street where a few members of the crowd not following the prescribed behaviour of continuing marching threatened the validity of the entire march. Other similarities between the march and the works of Le Bonn can be found in the crowd's emotions, many people within the march explain how the day started with a 'carnival' atmosphere collectively against the poll tax but developed throughout the day into being collectively against the police. Le Bonn believed rioting was a beast submersed into crowds merely waiting to get out. <fnote>Reicher 1998 </fnote><fnote>Waddington 1994 </fnote>The sequence of events which happened in 1990 fit closely with the 'social identity model' of crowds as developed by Drury and Reicher. This theory of social mobilization emphasis the collective behaviour of crowds without ignoring the importance of the individual. An individual on their own adopts their individual values, when within a crowd the individual will adopt the collective behaviour and values of the crowd, but will still remain rational. Many protesters after the event explained that they looted because at that time it was normative, they were aware of what they were doing but knew it was the only time they could do it. <fnote>Drury and Reicher 1984 </fnote>Reicher and Drury believed that conflict does not erupt from within the crowd itself but from outside sources in the case of the poll tax riots the police. If we look at the actions of the Police on the day it appears they are treating the group homogenously. There is clear evidence in the footage from the day that conflict arose collectively towards the police after the police had themselves come into the crowd and tried to disperse it. Prior to this the emphasis was on anti-poll tax and there were only isolated incidents against the police. The conflict became normalised as a legitimate response to the police brutality this was particularly evident in Trafalgar square when widespread fights broke out between police and protesters. <fnote>Stott and Drury 2000 </fnote>If we look at the strategies for policing the crowd evident on the day they appear to focus on the crowd as a homogenous unit, this leads to the whole crowd being seen as a source of violence and potentially dangerous even before any violence has occurred. It can also lead to an intensity of violence as crowd members become caught up in the actions of the police. This strategy of policing almost always leads to more incidents of violence on the crowd than on the police. As one protester claimed the fights broke out between the protesters and the police except the police had weapons protesters grabbed whatever they could. Since the black - police riots of the 1980s the police had received considerable training on treating crowds as common units. The riots of the 1980s also had a clear effect on the concerns of the police, in particular the murder of PC Keith Blakelock In 1985, was seen by many police as what could occur when a riot went wrong. <fnote>Battle of Trafalgar 1990 </fnote>However police interviewed after the event stress the heterogeneous nature of crowds, many police officers agreed the crowd was not out to cause trouble but it was the skilled nature of a few agitators which led the crowd to violence. This fits with Le Bonns view that the crowd develops violence from within. However Reicher believed that it was the actions of the police which caused the violence and if this is true then police tactics themselves could have a devastating difference between a peaceful march and riot. On the day the police themselves suffered many problems one of the obvious being the size of the crowd which meant traditional dispersing methods such as walking into the crowd did not work and led to the introduction of the riot police, horseback and vehicles. These only served to agitate the crowd further. One of the police shortfalls which was most picked up on by the crowd was the lack of communication between the crowd and the police in the confusion few protesters knew what was expected of them and this led to confrontation with the police officers, which the police viewed as direct disobedience. The police also had communication problems amongst themselves transmition interruptions and radio battery life meant there was little communication between officers, some police also directly disobeyed control for example by driving cars into the crowd with their sirens on. If the police had treated the crowd as less of a homogenous unit and followed the structure of Reiter instead of Le Bonn's view of the crowd there is a possibility the march could have continued peacefully without the direct confrontation between the two groups. <fnote>The Battle on Trafalgar 1990 </fnote>