<heading>Introduction</heading>The aim of this essay is to explore the roles these stratifications play within the women's movement, and would argue that it is possible for women's movement to work with these intersections, if identified, to fight women's subordination and promote women's empowerment. To do this, the essay will discuss the global women's movement, and explore women's movements in a national context. It will then discuss the differences within the women's movements, applying global arguments to Uganda. The essay will examine the key concepts of ethnicity and class, and analyse their roles within women's movements using case studies from Uganda. Furthermore, it will attempt to identify the factors that led to successful mobilization and draw lessons from relevant strategies adopted. Finally, it will recommend strategies for future engagements leading to successful mobilization towards women's empowerment. <heading>Definition of key concepts</heading>To answer the question effectively, it is important to define the key concepts, which are, class, ethnicity, women's movement and social change. Although these concepts have been widely used by scholars, their definition is always contested and problematic. This essay will however not address these issues in detail, due to constraints on number of words. Class: Early socialist defined class as a relationship that happens when people in one group claim an identity with each other and assert their opposition to those outside (Thompson, 1968 cited in Philips, 1992). On the other hand Marxist socialist see class divisions as grounded in the different relations of groups to the means of production, which provides a group's class determination (Anthias and Yuval-Davis, 1992). For Philip(1992) classifying women, proved a difficult task, as 'middle' and 'working' came into focus, because of roles allotted to women; gender roles therefore play a significant role in determining class allocation for women. Thompson's definition seems relevant for discussions on women's movement as it affirms that class defines people of the same social and economic level, this is in line with Maggie Humm's definition (1989/1995:39). Ethnicity: In theorising ethnic phenomenon Anthias and Yuval-Davis (1992) suggested that ethnic phenomenon have various forms of ideological construct which divide people into different communities. Where group membership is natural although there may be other ways of joining, for instance ethnicity can be constructed outside the group by material condition and social representation by other groups. Fenton (1999:10) however, argues that ethnicity is a social process that involves moving boundaries and identities, which people, collectively or individually draw around themselves in their social lives. Central to this process is the production and reproduction of culture. Both definitions are relevant to discussions in this essay as group membership can be natural or socially constructed. Women's movement: Wieringa recognises that women's movements have never spoken with one voice and so suggest that women's movement can be defined as a network of conscious and unconscious individuals, groups or organisations concerned with eliminating gender subordination, which is understood as intersecting with ethnicity, race and class oppressions (Wieringa, 1995:7). This definition implies that women's movement is multifaceted. Basu (1995:1) argues that while women's movements share certain commonalities, they differ along many dimensions. They have always been arguments among feminist scholars of what really constitutes a women's movement and what criteria to use to judge if a certain movement is successful or not. This essay will however not address the various debates, but will acknowledge that women's movements exist in most countries mentioned in the essay, though their forms and issues may differ depending on the context within which they operate. Social change: Within equal-rights feminism, social change refers to a narrow agenda, which promotes the recruitment of women, over a period, into areas of power from which they had been previously excluded; for example, by increasing political representation (Humm, 1995:269). Hernes (2001:14,223), however defines social change under two sets of assumptions that change can consist of either the actors changing (cognitive or attitudinal change) or the structures changing (change of states, their relationship or distributional aspects). Both definitions are relevant to the essay as they both address issues of change in women's interaction with power and the state. <heading>Women's Movements</heading>In discussing women's movements, this essay will draw on literature from across the globe in order to understand the trend in various women's movements, but will focus on women's movements in Uganda. The choice of Uganda is because historically, the country has been intensely politicised along ethnic and religious divide, learning from the past, women's movements sought to build bridges across ethnic, religious and class divide (Tripp 2000b), thus these differences have not deterred women in Uganda from organizing collectively to promote women's rights issues. <heading>Women's Movements: Global context</heading>The concept of sisterhood has drawn various arguments in contemporary women's movements. Robin Morgan in her book 'Sisterhood is Global' acknowledges that women all over the world suffer from one form of discrimination or the other, and that virtually all countries of the world are structured by patriarchal mentality (Morgan 1984:1). Many feminists, who claim that the idea of global sisterhood is not feasible, as women are divided by nationality, race, class, religion, language and sexual orientation (Basu, 1995:3; Simmonds, 1997:21), have contested this position. These divisions are evident in many women's movements globally. There are vast disjunctions between western feminist discourses of differences and how the idea has been articulated in women's movements in countries where difference has mattered 'too much'. In countries like Uganda, Sudan and South Africa, where the politicization of difference has resulted in civil war or violent conflict based on ethnic, racial and religious differences, the challenge for women's movements has been to find ways to focus on commonalities among women to minimise differences. Tripp argues that western feminist discussion of difference need to be contextualised and situated in a broader comparative and historical perspective (Tripp, 2000:649) Internationally, a good example of these differences could be illustrated with conflict of interest between 'Western women' and 'Third World women' at the 1980 women's Mid-Decade Meeting in Copenhagen; during the meeting, there were arguments about what should be part of women's agenda, this led to divisions between women from the 'North' and 'South' (Gilliam, 1991: 218). A follow up meeting in Nairobi 1985 showed a recognition and acceptance that women's issues and priorities were diverse, the realization of these differences helped to resolve the conflict (Cagatay, et al, 1986:403-4). The idea of adopting Western women's concept of feminism and strategy for mobilizing women in Third World is not feasible, as the realities of women's lives in the two worlds are different (Margolis, 1993:383). Western Feminist have been accused for assuming a homogenous notion of the oppression of women as a group, which in turn produces the image of "an average third world woman", and portrays the "third world women" as powerless and helpless, and the "western women" as educated, modern and in control of their sexuality (Mohanty, 1991:56). Gilliam (1991) argues that for women's movements to adopt a global perspective there is need to integrate sensitivity to global issues with awareness that women around the world have different priorities. As rightly identified, various women's movements across countries may share common concerns such as economic independence, labour exploitation and inequality, childbirth, childcare, violence in the home, globalisation and so on. These similarities do not diminish the importance of political, economic and cultural difference between women all over the world. The position of second wave feminists is that women share basic experiences of oppression, but are differentiated based on race, class, ethnicity and nation (Rupp, 2001: 5471-2). Women's movements around the world have developed within different historical and political context. At the global level, while it is true that the oppression of impoverished and marginalised Euro-American women is linked to gender and class relations, that of Third World women is linked also to race relations and imperialism, these added dimensions produce a different context in which Third World women's struggle must be understood (Johnson-Odim, 1991:314). <heading>2.2 Women's Movement: National Context</heading>Women's movements in different countries follow a distinctive course, developing structures and agendas in response to local circumstances. Chafetz and Dworkin(1986:65-66, cited in Margolis, 1993:368) studied women's revolts globally, focusing especially on the self-conscious collective form they classify as a movement, to develop a set of generalizations about factors that affect the size and ideology of women's movements. They hypothesised that urbanization and industrialisation led to increased education for women as well as role expansion in the public sphere, which in turn helped to enhance the formation and spread of gender consciousness and the amassing of personal and collective resources necessary to mount a movement (Chafetz and Dworkin, 1986 cited in Margolis 1993: 368). Chaftez and Dworkin (1986:65-66 cited in Margolis 1993: 368) also postulated that the economic structure of a nation can be used to explain both the size and ideological scope of women's movements. Katzenstein and Mueller (1987) identified three factors that can help explain differences among women's movements, 1. the degree of overall feminist consciousness 2. the opportunity to influence policy through existing political parties and 3. the nature of the state (Katzenstein and Mueller,1987 cited in Margolis 1993:386). Papanek (1993:597) in her comments on Margolis research, disagrees with her use of the hypothesis that "women's movements tend to be larger where industrialization and urbanisation lead to increased education and role expansion for women" because Margolis did not provide data to prove the hypothesis. Secondly, she found the generalization that women's movement are organised by educated women unacceptable, saying that literatures attest to the existence of grassroots women's organisations led by uneducated women, and that these groups qualify as women's movements. I would argue that the hypothesis is true for Uganda. As observed by Tripp (2002:1), the expansion of women's organisations in Uganda is attributed to the growth in educational opportunities for women, which gave rise to strong female leadership as well as exposure to United Nations conferences that provided opportunities for networking and communication with women around the world. Educational opportunities for women in Uganda have resulted in the creation of educated elites that has both leadership and technical skills to mobilise more constructively towards achieving women's rights (Tripp, 2002:5). Attributing the success of women's movements to their education gives evidence that Margolis hypothesis is true. Similarly, to validate how the nature of the state influences women's movement, the history of women's movement in Uganda lays claim to the opening of political space in the mid-1980s and the support of Museveni's regime to have influenced the women's movement positively. However, this positive environment did not translate to gender equality or change in gender subordination and oppression in Uganda (Tripp, 2002:1). As earlier discussed state support contributed significantly to the growth of women's movement in Uganda. Colonial experience in Uganda had implications for women, as indigenous forms of women's subordination intersected with the new colonial ideology, which further entrenched women in a domesticated, sexually subservient position. Literature shows that colonialism promoted activities that limited women to the private sphere depoliticised them passively in ways that did not challenge the status quo (Tripp, 2002:24). The women's movement in Uganda today has its roots in women's organisations that started in the early part of the twentieth century and especially with the one that emerged after World War II. Later effort by women to mobilize was influenced by the government in power at any particular time (Tripp, 2002:23). Thus, the nature of politics defined the type of women's activism. Nationally and at the local levels, women's movement in Uganda were pluralistic in approach and in make up (Tripp, 2000a). Within these movements, there exist differences; the next section will discuss differences within women's movements. <heading>Differences within the women's movement</heading><heading>3.1 Structure, ideologies and leadership </heading>In many countries, the nature and style of activism defines the structure, style of leadership and activities carried out by women's movements, to address perceived problems of women (Margolis, 1993:389). In the United States and Western Europe, women's movements began as small sensitization groups, challenging issues of justice, patriarchy and the exclusion of women from positions of power. Many of the issues addressed by these groups were political and called for change at the governmental level; these groups therefore used demonstrations and public actions, which brought them to national fame (Margolis, 1993:390). Usually a recurring pattern of coordinating and diffusion may emerge, were groups corporate on specific issues, but after a while the coalition loses momentum and internal differentiation increases, leading to the collapse of the network (Papanek and Mazumda 1991:1, cited in Margolis 1993:390). Similarly in Uganda, the nature of women's movement is diverse. At the national level groups were formed along professional lines, while some are issue based reflecting conflicting national issues, such as peace and political participation. Sometimes, networks were formed around gender-specific issues like domestic violence, rape, the common property amendment of the 1998 Land Act and the Domestic Relations Bill. In 1993 a network was formed in Kampala in preparation for the 1995 United Nations Conference in Beijing, this network later formalised into the Uganda Women's Network. At the local level, women formed multi-purpose organisations mostly engaged in savings and income-generating projects (Tripp, 2002:4-5); my view is that the nature of organising reflects their socio-economic conditions, as seen in the nature of women's organisations at the local level, most focused on the issue of economic empowerment reflecting the level of poverty at the grassroots. The structure of networks in Uganda is either sustained or ad hoc, some networks disbanded after they achieved their goals, an example of such a network was formed to bring to justice Sharma Kooky who murdered his wife in 1997(Tripp, 2002:7). After three years of pressure from women activist Sharma was convicted for the offence. The Uganda Women's Network (UWONET) is an example of a network of women's groups that has addressed different women's right issues, membership is open to all women in Uganda, though it has been successful with most of its advocacy activities, it has also had problems internally due to ideological differences between the groups. This was very evident in the disagreement between UWONET and members of the Uganda's Women Lawyers Organisation (FIDA(U)). FIDA(U) disagreed with some of the recommendations made to the Parliamentary Committee on Land, arguing that more research was needed to explore the legal implications of co-ownership property clause, and the practicability of enforcing the law (Kawamara-Mishambi and Ovonji-Odida, 2003: 177). The Parliamentary Committee on Land took advantage of this difference and accused UWONET of not representing the views of all women, it can therefore be said that ideological differences has the potential of being counter productive on advocacy efforts for women's rights issues. The development of structures of women's movements depends on the style of activism, so also the goals and activities are structured based on the style of activism , nature of government and how a particular issue is defined by women from different national and class background (Margolis, 1993: 393). In terms of leadership, in the United States for instance women's movements are controlled by elites, thus leading to the argument that such movements are not representing the views of the poor and marginalised women (Margolis, 1993:380). The same thing applies to the women's movement in Uganda where educated women usually occupy leadership positions within the women's movement, especially at the national level. Because of the nature and style of organising, which mainly focuses on national issues, without linking with rural women, there is a gap between the educated women involved in national organisations and rural women in local groups (Tripp, 2002:5). My view is that the gap between local and national women's movements has led to the inability of national advocacy efforts to incorporate the concerns of all women. As in the case of the Land Act Co-ownership clause, the committee rightly accused feminist activist of not representing the views of majority of the women in Uganda (Kawamara-Mishambi and Ovonji-Odida, 2003: 178). Within the leadership of women's movements there is conflict of interest due to political difference, this lack of corporation between leaders of women's organisations results to women not supporting other women politically (Tripp, 2002:19). I would argue that the conflict between leaders of women's organisation has a direct relationship to ethnic and religious divisions, which dominate party politics in Uganda (Tripp, 2000:662), thus reflecting in all aspects of mobilization. Another challenge in coordinating effort for the women's movement in Uganda has been competition amongst organisations, some organisations take ideas from the networks meetings and implement such ideas on their own, thus weakening the network and coalition building, rather than working together to achieve better results as well as strengthening the network (Tripp, 2002:19). <heading>4.0 Class, ethnicity and women's movements</heading>Gender, class and ethnic divisions are interrelated as each division presents ideological and organisational principles within which the others operate, although in different historical contexts and different social arenas their roles will differ. The combination of gender and class, and ethnicity and class will operate in the relationship between gender and ethnic divisions (Anthias and Yuval-Davis 1992:111). As noted by Hooks (1997:486) women are divided by class and ethnicity, sustained woman bonding can only be achieved when these divisions are confronted and the necessary steps are taken to eliminate them. The question here is, can women's movement transcend these differences and work together as a group with common problems? Proceeding sections will attempt to answer this question and would argue that, women's groups can rise above all differences, because only then can they fight against discrimination and gain the much anticipated equality in all development processes. The combination of gender and class, and ethnicity and class, will operate in the relationship between gender and ethnic divisions. As noted by Hooks (1997) women are divided by class and ethnicity, sustained woman bonding can only be achieved when these divisions are confronted and the necessary steps are taken to eliminate them. The question here is, can women's movement transcend these differences and work together as a group with common problems? Proceeding sections will attempt to answer this question and would argue that, women's groups can rise above all differences, because only then can they fight against discrimination and gain the much anticipated recognition in all development processes. The intersecting factors of class and ethnicity play a major role in determining the success or failure of women's movements (Wieringa, 1995:2). <heading>4.1 The role of class and ethnicity in women's movements</heading>The aim of this section is to explore to what extent class and ethnicity plays a critical role within women's movements, the analysis will draw on case studies from Uganda and other countries of the world. The section will explore the different campaigns carried out by women, and discuss the reason for its success or failure. As discussed earlier, gender, class and ethnicity play a key role in the activities of women's movements, and it varies depending on their different ideologies (Margolis, 1993:389). The history of women's movements in the Unites States has shown that the relationship between middle- and upper-class white women on one hand and women of colour and working-class women on the other hand has been highly variable and complex (Poster, 1995:661). In the United States, the women's movements have been criticized for focusing too heavily on issues that concern only white middle-class women, not adequately representing the majority of North American women and needing to be structured beyond sexual egalitarianism (Cagatay et al, 1986:405 cited in Margolis, 1993:386). Tripp (2000:649) argues that the way in which gender is conceptually related to other identities such as race, ethnicity and religion differ from place to place and across time, and these constructions vary according to divergent political social and economic conditions and histories. I would argue that difference within movements has a close relationship with the social, economic and political context of their countries. Historically, Uganda has been intensely politicised along ethnic and religious divide, learning from the past, women's movements sought to build bridges across ethnic, religious and class divide. Inter ethnic marriages helped women integrate into other ethnic groupings, forming associations that cut across ethnic, clan and kinship ties (Tripp 2000:662). The effort made by women's movements in Uganda to bridge the gap across ethnic divides within the internal structure of the organisation was not successful. An example is the internal democracy within a prominent women's movement in Uganda - Action for Development (ACFODE). ACFODE sees itself as a model for other organisations in its avoidance of sectarianism, due to its rich mix of members, which it claims, help to unite Ugandan women (Tripp, 2000:666). Members accused leadership of being sectarian, as only a particular tribe has led the group since inception. During elections to change the leadership, members had ethnic attachments to voting for the president, as a particular faction of the group felt marginalised (Tripp, 2000:669). I will observe that such attitude will affect the group activities, as decisions taken will also reflect ethnic divisions, thus hampering the main objective of women's emancipation set by the organisation. This also confirms the claim that women are divided on the bases of community, class, ethnicity and religion. Another example is the alliance between the Uganda Land Alliance (ULA) and Uganda Women's Network (UWONET), to ensure gender equity in the Ugandan Land Law Reform, through the establishment of married women's rights to co-own part of their husband's land. Not withstanding its broad membership of women's organisation, the proposal was rejected as it had much opposition, especially within the Parliament (Kawamara-Mishambi and Ovonji-Odida, 2003:180). Resistance could be explained from the perspective that the co-ownership proposal directly threatened the exclusive property rights of individual men. Opposition which came from policy makers, technocrats in line ministries, including members of the executive and the President, was expressed through attacks on the credibility of a research carried out by UWONET to show women's lack of land ownership, and on their right to represent poor rural women. The proposal was ridiculed as impractical and they were accused of being elitist (Kawamara-Mishambi and Ovonji-Odida, 2003:180). UWONET rejected the accusation of elitism, but acknowledged that many advocates of the co-ownership clause were young educated working-women activists, and most organisations involved were urban based. The narrow social base fuelled opponents' arguments that the women's lobby did not represent the majority of countries women, other factors include, treating women as a homogenous group, this negates the fact that as a group, women could have conflicting interest and position based on class, clan and marital status. Some groups who felt threatened by the co-ownership clause include, propertied women, some rural women using customary land, who feared that their user rights could be threatened, second wives who felt that the cause would give an advantage to the first wives, and above all, women in informal unions (Kawamara-Mishambi and Ovonji-Odida, 2003:181). I would argue that the experiences above show lack of inclusiveness and not building advocacy around issues of concern to majority of women. In contracts, however the following examples demonstrate a more inclusive approach to mobilising for the emancipation of women. In Uganda there were efforts to empower women in agriculture. This group is an important sector of Ugandan economic growth, as agriculture accounts for 90 percent of foreign exchange earnings in the country. Women produce over 70 percent of the countries food (Ministry of Agriculture, Animal husbandry and Fisheries cited in Karuhanga-Beraho, 2002:92). This contribution, however does not match their control over the use of resources generated from their efforts. A number of factors are responsible for women's lack of participation in agriculture, such as, limited access to control over land, limited access to financial and agricultural extension services, constraints associated with labour, limited access to education and appropriate technology (Karuhanga-Beraho, 2002:93-96). One association working to help women overcome these limitations is the National Association of Women's Organisations in Uganda. The mission of the organisation is to promote a coordinated network of organisations, to improve the living condition of women in Uganda, through training, advocacy, research, information dissemination and extension of access to markets and credit services to its membership of over seventy women's organisations (Karuhanga-Beraho, 2002:96). Though with a clear mission, the activities of this network has not changed the lives of women farmers in Uganda, as they remain poor and do not have access to land. A major challenge was the inability of the organisation to focus on the needs of the invisible female farmers, whose image ironically, continued to evade those who would have put them at the centre of the women's movement agenda (Karuhanga-Beraho, 2002:101). There was also lack of recognition of gender inequalities that keep women at the vicious cycle of poverty and lack of adequate strategies to address these inequalities (Karuhanga-Beraho, 2002:101). Using Beneria and Sen's (1982:157) theoretical concept of capital accumulation and reproduction, we could explain the impact of class processes on women's subordination. Their argument is that, most development programmes being implemented in the Third World by donor agencies, through some women's organisations (like the one discussed above), is based on the premise that industrialization schemes from foreign aid, private capital and Green Revolution in agriculture would automatically benefit the masses through employment and lead to improved standard of living. This strategy failed in terms of women's development, as they do not address feminist concern with gender-based inequalities. The impact being implementation of programmes that strengthened women's roles as home keepers, invariably adding more burden on women. Thus, capital accumulation creates class divisions among women, leading to women of different class having opposing interest in social organisations and programmes for social change (Benria and Sen, 1982:162). The impact of capital accumulation leads to divergent interests among women (Benria and Sen, 1982:163), and explains the problem encountered by women farmers'. It was obvious that leaders of the group mobilized poor women, using women's source of income, but neglecting to tackle the underlying causes of their poverty, as such the programme failed to alleviate women's poverty. <heading>4.2 Women working across class and ethnic boundaries</heading>Having highlighted some of the challenges women's groups in Uganda are experiencing, there are some organisations in Uganda, who have been successful in empowering women, working across ethnic and class boundaries. An example of such a group is the Savings Club of Women in Kampala. The group was formed by thirteen women from different ethnic and religious groups, with a wide range of occupations and wage levels. Members of the group have additional sources of income, mostly informal. The guiding principle of the group is economic survival and mutual support. These women learnt to accommodate their differences, to succeed. Strategies adopted include, catering for non-religious holidays, so no one feels marginalised and because they were of different ethnic groups, meetings were conducted in English language, and translated into Luganda language(Tripp, 2000:671). I will suggest that this group succeeded because their guiding principle cuts across all classes, recognising issues that affect most members, and strategising to address them will not only adhere members to achieving set objectives, but they will also feel the satisfaction that comes with belonging to the group. Postmodernist discourse identifies that women are not a homogenous group, but belong to diverse socio-economic groupings based on class, ethnic and racial identities and so experience subordination differently (Nzomo, 1995:136). Nzomo(195:137) agrees that class and other forms of identity can limit the scope of participatory action, but her position is that African women have proved that when they work in unison they become a power to reckon with, solidarity among women seem to be the only viable strategy to bring about social justice. Politically, women in the Third World are faced with varying degree of governance, which presents opportunities for women to work together; this is what Nzomo had to say about Kenyan women. <quote>'The experiences in Kenya shows that African women, regardless of their class or ethnic background, do not need much convincing about their subordinate status and the need to seize the opportunity presented by multiparty democracy to change their status' (Nzomo, 1995:132). </quote>This is because the postmodernist approach to development is not in harmony with democratic ideals and strategies guiding women in their quest for gender-sensitive democratization in Kenya. While most critiques believe this will not translate into more votes for women and will suppress the voice of women with opposing views. It seems to be the only viable strategy for women in Kenya and the whole of Africa. For African women there is need for collective action to ensure inclusiveness (Nzomo, 1995:135). The postmodernist critique would dismiss the current strategies used by Kenyan women, whose struggle for gender-sensitive democratization hinges upon universalist feminist ideals (Nzomo, 1995:141). I would argue that based on examples discussed in this essay the importance of collective action could not be over emphasised. There is need therefore for women to understand the historical, cultural and social context within which they operate in order for them to develop strategies that would translate into better living conditions for women. <heading>5.0 Conclusion</heading>From the above discussions, it is obvious that women's movements in Uganda and Africa will have to negotiate on issues where there is sufficient unity of interest due to gender, despite other causes of division (Johnson-Odim, 1991:322). As in the case of the Savings Club of Women in Kampala, the group was able to work across class and ethnic divides, to improve the lives of women. What were some of the factors that enabled these groups to transcend class and ethnicity? First, the recognition that there was diversity, and taking this into consideration in the groups activities towards achieving set objectives. Secondly, the realisation of the different needs of members of the group, and interest of women of different ages and religions helped the group develop strategies that were sensitive to the needs of all. In order for women's groups to work across class and ethnic boundaries, they need to be aware that women are not only victims of patriarchy, but they perpetuate patriarchy and subordinate other women (Murthy, 2004:15). I would say that, this is very true in most African societies. Where mothers-in-law controls the activities of daughters-in-law, in case of participation in women's movement, some young women are not involved, and so will not benefit from such programmes, either as a result of instructions by the mother-in-law to stay behind and prepare food, or due to the burden of household chores. To ensure success in mobilization groups need to deal with issues experienced by poor and non-poor women to ensure inclusiveness. To encourage poor women to participate in group activities, such as micro credit schemes, implementing organisations need to modify the rules, so as to allow women who cannot save at all or who can save only small amounts to join and introduce additional savings for the better-off women (Murthy, 2004:15), as in the case of women farmers in Uganda. Examples from Uganda shows that women have sought linkages that transcend differences like class and ethnicity in order to build broad-based movements to achieve popular goals (Tripp, 2000:672), but these examples are few compared to many other groups that have not been able to live above these differences. The examples, however proves that it is possible for women's groups to work across class and ethnic boundaries, in doing so, they will be building a strong movement that will work in unity to promote the rights of women and challenge patriarchy, leading to gender equality. 