Women's human rights and religious freedoms have a long history of contentious relations and general antagonism. This essay endeavours to trace the relation between women's rights and right to religious freedom through the medium of two international instruments i.e. the UN Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) (1979) and the UN Declaration on the Elimination of All forms of Intolerance and Discrimination based on Religion or Belief (1981). The question is whether one can envisage a right to religion without being gender discriminatory, given the history of most religions being patriarchal and opposed to women's rights and freedoms. Certain case studies from India are used to highlight the extremely polarised positions of religious ideologues and feminists that arise in relation to women's rights. The international human rights law has often neglected issues of discrimination and violence against women in the garb of distinction between public and private sphere being applicable only to abuses committed in the public sphere by the State actors while completely ignoring the domestic arena of family that normally witnessed gross forms of human rights violations against women. According to Ursula A. O'Hare, "the exclusion of women's voices from defining the content of human rights discourse has in turn meant that human rights law has evolved along a gendered "fault-line" that distinguishes between the public and private spheres for the purpose of legal regulation. The essence of the feminist critique of human rights law lies in the way in which it mediates the public and private spheres". Though the Universal Declaration of Human Rights(1948) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR) and International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights(ICESCR) (1966) promoted gender equality and elimination of discrimination against women, nothing much had changed in women's lives and struggles thereby proving a need to come up with a comprehensive international instrument dealing with all aspects of women's lives which eventually resulted in the emergence of the CEDAW in 1979. <fnote>Ursula A. O'Hare, "Realizing Human Rights for Women" (1999) 21.2 Human Rights Quarterly at p.365 </fnote><heading>Emergence of CEDAW</heading>The CEDAW signifies an important milestone in the strengthening of the international women's human rights movement and its growing recognition by the State as well as by the international institutions. It encompasses civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of women and presents the principle of non-discrimination as a non-negotiable right underpinning the entire instrument while at the same time giving equal importance to diversity and difference amongst women. Andrew Byrnes opines that "the CEDAW is a political manifesto, clearly declaring the right of women to equality and non-discrimination; it is also an international legal instrument (a treaty) as well as providing a framework or point of reference for policy-making, lobbying and social activism". Further, it prohibits discrimination not just by the States but also committed by the private actors like individuals thereby going beyond the public/private dichotomy as is evident from Article 1 of the CEDAW: <fnote>Andrew Byrnes, "The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women" in Wolfgang Benedek, Esther M. Kisaakye and Gerd Oberleitner (eds.,) The Human Rights of Women : International Instruments and African Experiences (2002) Zed Books London at p. 120 </fnote><quote>"For the purpose of the present Convention, the term 'discrimination against women' shall mean any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field". </quote>Hence the Convention attempts to create a comprehensive bill of rights for women providing the conditions for full enjoyment of rights of women and focusing on eliminating not just sex discrimination per se but specific disadvantages faced by women due to the prevalence of conventional modes and practises based on religion or culture that have permeated the entire social and political structures of most countries. Throughout the sixteen substantive articles, the CEDAW tries to put in place an egalitarian social order based on equality between men and women and giving equal opportunities to women to realise their potential though it does leave out some kinds of discrimination from its purview and has been criticised for embodying a male-based model of equality in guaranteeing women things to which men are entitled under existing andro-centric human rights guarantees and may fail to reflect the particularities of women's experiences. <fnote>Ibid at p. 124 </fnote><fnote>Ibid at p. 125 </fnote><heading>Question of Reservations</heading>Still, the CEDAW does embody an idea of granting women equal rights and freedoms especially in family matters like marriage, divorce, inheritance, reproductive rights etc under Article 16 of the Convention which has been the most serious obstacle in the way of ratification by the State parties. Till now, around 174 States have ratified the Convention but at least 30% of them have entered reservations relating to substantive articles especially Articles 2, 9, 15 and 16 which would reduce their obligations with respect to those provisions. Though Article 28(2) of the Convention prohibits reservations which are incompatible with the object and purpose of the CEDAW, a number of Muslim countries have made reservations regarding the substantive provisions on the ground of religion or have made their ratifications subject to their domestic jurisdictions which clearly go against the underlying principle of the treaty. Though some Islamic States like Pakistan, Bangladesh, Egypt etc have expressed their objections based on Islam and Sharia', others like Nigeria, Senegal, Uzbekistan, etc have ratified without any reservations thus exposing the contradictions within the Islamic States relating to women's rights. Also, this aspect of entering reservations is not limited to theocratic States but also to the developed nations of United Kingdom, Norway, etc which have reserved in favour of the rule of primogeniture in relation to their monarchy. The fact that the CEDAW is the most reserved convention of all time speaks of the volume of prejudice and bias that exists in favour of men in the international legal order and also nullifies the gender equality claims of most countries since reservations which are even incompatible with the essence of the Convention have been tolerated and in fact condoned. Further, the weak enforcement mechanism of CEDAW is again reflective of its less significance in relation to other international conventions like the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) etc that are being strictly enforced. The Committee established for its implementation is under-staffed, under-resourced and devoid of much powers over the States to make the CEDAW enforceable in the respective jurisdictions. Though with the passing of the Optional Protocol to the CEDAW in 1999, individuals complaints could be made to the Committee, in the last 6 years only 3 decisions have been made and out of which two have been declared as inadmissible thus proving its limitations in making effective intervention against violence committed on women. <heading>]UN Declaration against Religious Intolerance</heading>Meanwhile, the United Nations General Assembly have passed a Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and Discrimination based on Religion or Belief in 1981 after years of negotiation guaranteeing freedom to practise one's own religion without fear or discrimination. This is particularly relevant in the context of minority communities' right to maintain and preserve their religion and beliefs. Under Article 1, <quote>Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have a religion or whatever belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching.  No one shall be subject to coercion .......................................... freedoms of others.</quote><fnote>Refer to the full text of the Article 1 in www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/d4deidrb.htm </fnote>Consisting of eight articles, the Declaration purports to create a right to religious freedom in the international fora prohibiting discrimination based on religion or belief and is inclusive enough to imply even non-believers within its ambit. However, this blanket right to practise one's religious customs becomes problematic in the context of women's rights since most religions are extremely gender biased and premised on patriarchal domination resulting in the conflict between two competing rights. Donna J. Sullivan notes that "the conflicts between the norms contained in the Declaration and those appearing in the Discrimination against Women Declaration and Convention are inevitable. The formal requirements of religious law, interpretations of that law, and social custom derived from it may all infringe women's rights. Religious tenets governing rights associated with the life of the family, particularly those pertaining to marriage and divorce, inheritance and personal status, frequently set religious law in opposition to the prohibition of discrimination against women". For example, Article 2 of the CEDAW talks about non-discrimination in favour of women in all aspects of their lives whereas Articles 5 & 6 of the Religious Declaration give a right to the parents and legal guardians to impart religious education to their children and also religious communities are allowed to preserve their discriminatory rituals and customs under the broad right of religious freedom. Further, Article 15 of CEDAW provides equality in civil law matters but certain religious practises provide for judicial decisions based on the inferior position of women thereby not granting them equality in law. <fnote>Donna J. Sullivan, "Advancing the Freedom of Religion or Belief Through the UN Declaration on the Elimination of Religious Intolerance and Discrimination" (1998) 82(3 ) The American Journal of International Law at p. 30 </fnote><heading>Clash between women's rights and religious freedom</heading>In most States, whether secular republics, constitutional monarchies or religious ones, because of the inherent patriarchal nature of the State structure, even the so-called gender neutral laws are in fact grounded on the stereotypical notions of 'masculinity' and 'feminity' and tend to perpetuate and strengthen the oppression of women. Moreover, with the recent rise in religious fundamentalist movements in Iran, India, North Africa, USA, etc, efforts to curtail even limited rights of women and their mobility and access to economic resources have ensued since women are supposed to be the bearers of their cultural and religious identity and purity. In Hanna Papanek's view, "the definition of 'purity' is constructed as dependent on female sexuality and reproduction so that these aspects of women's lives become central not only to the definition of female personhood but also to group boundaries and group identity. Control over female sexuality and reproduction requires male power, and enhances it, in kinship systems preoccupied with the purity of descent". <fnote>Hanna Papanek, " The Ideal Woman and the Ideal Society: Control and Autonomy in the Construction of Identity" in Valentine M. Moghadam (ed.,) Identity Politics and Women (1994) Westview Press at p. 46-47 </fnote>With the integration of most countries into the global political economy and with the emergence of 'free markets' with easy capital flows, transnational corporations, the charges of 'cultural hegemonisation' and the western assault on non-western cultural systems have flown thick and fast resulting in the growth of reactionary movements in many developing countries with its focus on the 'women's place' in the family. Thus, the contest between women's rights and religious freedom is being played out not just in religious institutions, national jurisdictions but also at the global economic level since globalisation has been realised as an extremely gendered occurrence with its deep-rooted impact on women and their ever changing identities in the spheres of family, employment, etc. This dichotomous relation between two competing rights in fact underscores the inadequacy of the 'rights' strategy that has been the hallmark of any progressive movement in general and the feminist movement in particular since the granting of rights has been hailed as the panacea of all problems. According to Rachel Lorna Johnstone, "the critique of rights as meaningful tools of change was also engaged in by feminists, including in their reflections on international law. Arguments for human welfare, equality, and social justice may not translate well into the language of rights. Insisting that everyone enjoys human rights may even backfire by individualizing responsibility. If one endures an exploited or impoverished position, then the failure is personal. As such, it ceases to be the responsibility of society as a whole". <fnote>Rachel Lorna Johnstone, "Feminist Influences on the United Nations Human Rights Treaty Bodies" (2006) 28.1 Human Rights Quarterly at p. 151 </fnote><heading>#Case Studies from India</heading>In India, despite having a constitutional secular framework, religious rights and freedoms have been given more priority over the women's rights which were no more evident than the Shahbano case in 1986. Shahbano, a 65 years old Muslim woman was divorced by her husband after years of marriage and even stopped her maintenance, thereafter she filed a petition under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for maintenance which was granted by the Madhya Pradesh High Court. But the husband appealed to the Supreme Court of India on the ground that being a Muslim, he was bound by the Islamic law of Sharia and not the criminal codes of India. The Court upheld "Shahbano's right to maintenance from her husband, both under Section 125 and under Muslim personal law and also stressed that section 125 cuts across all religious barriers, i.e. it transcends the personal laws of all religious communities in order to be applicable to all citizens". This was perceived as an assault on Islam amongst the conservative Muslims factions who created a mass hysteria thereby frightening the then government led by Rajiv Gandhi who fearing a backlash from the Muslims and the concomitant 'loss of vote banks' hurriedly passed the Muslim Women's (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 which excluded divorced Muslim women from the ambit of Section 125, stating that " the obligation of their husbands to maintain them ended with the three month period, after which their natal families would have to support them, or failing this, their local Wakf Boards. <fnote>Mohammad Ahmed Khan vs. Shah Bano Begum (1985) AIR SC 945 </fnote><fnote>Radha Kumar, "Identity Politics and the Contemporary Indian Feminist Movement" in Valentine M. Moghadam (ed.,) Identity Politics and Women (1994) Westview Press at p. 277 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., pp. 279 </fnote>Further, even the judiciary cannot escape from the responsibility of neglecting women's rights and reinforcing the age-old stereotypes of women's roles as only 'good mothers and good wives'. In Ahmedabad Women's Action Forum case, a number of women organisations filed a petition in the Supreme Court asking the court to abolish all gender discriminatory laws in both codified and uncodified Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Parsi laws etc since gender equality is one of the basic tenets of the Constitution and a gender discriminatory law would be deemed to be unconstitutional. However, the Court shied away from declaring them unconstitutional on the ground that amendment of religious personal laws was a matter of State policy and the judiciary could not interfere in the legislative sphere. Also, the petitions challenging the widely criticized provision of "restitution of conjugal rights" in Sec.9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 have been dismissed by the Court on the ground that "the family is beyond the reach of the law". <fnote>Ahmedabad Women's Action Group vs. Union of India [(1997) 3 SCC 575], </fnote>Since the Shahbano controversy, the issue of the Muslim women's rights in India still equally contentious as the minority women suffer from double discrimination: first, being part of the minority community and second, being women and any attempt to do justice to both identities is fraught with difficulties. In 2005 in Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, Imrana, a young Muslim woman who was allegedly raped by her father-in-law was not allowed to stay with her husband by the local Maulvis since "such conduct of the husband's relatives would create `hurmat-e-musharat' (legal bar of affinity under rules of prohibited degrees) between him and the wife," which was affirmed by the All India Muslim Personal Law Board (ALMPLB) resulting in an outcry amongst the women's groups and progressive Muslims who perceived this as an assault on the basic constitutional and human rights of women. However, too much attention on the Muslim women's oppression becomes problematic in an already communal atmosphere wherein the Muslim community is trying to maintain and assert its own identity in a Hindu dominated country of India. Thus feminist activists in both religions have for long faced dilemmas of negotiating minority rights with women's interests and privileges. <fnote>"Fatwa in Imrana case should not be enforced", The Hindu, June 29, 2005 </fnote><heading>]Feminist Dilemmas</heading>In grappling with this predicament, Martha C. Nussbaum opines that "the protection of the basic human rights should have a very strong degree of priority, even when this interferes with some elements of traditional religious discourse and practice and a strong claim to be recognised politically as basic in a pluralistic society, whatever the commitments of its constitutive religious groups since the fundamental bearer of rights is the individual human being". Though the women's enjoyment of rights is also subject to their class, religion, race, language, sexual orientation, etc, a determined political will to implement the basic human rights of women is extremely imperative in today's emerging polarised religious political order. Hence, an alternative approach is necessary to understand the vital role that religion plays in the lives of millions of women for whom religion and belief in God provide a much-needed escape from their daily experiences of domestic drudgery and violence. According to Nayereh Tohidi and Jane H. Bayes, "the position of women in religious systems is often a reflection, however oblique, of women's status in society. Religion, in its turn, shapes and mediates women's status. Appreciation for ideological, cultural, racial, sexual and class diversity is critical for both local and global feminist movements". <fnote>Martha C. Nussbaum, Sex and Social Justice (1999) Oxford University Press at p. 102, 114 </fnote><fnote>Nayereh Tohidi and Jane H. Bayes, "Women Redefining Modernity and Religion in the Globalized Context" in Jane H. Bayes and Nayereh Tohidi (eds.,) Globalization, Gender, and Religion: The Politics of Women's Rights in Catholic and Muslim Contexts (2001) Palgrave at p. 44-48 </fnote>In my view, nearly all religions are based on patriarchal beliefs and norms and are not only gender discriminatory but also legitimize caste/class discrimination especially in Hinduism. Others like Christianity, Islam etc have strict injunctions against non-believers, idol worshippers etc. Also, the hegemony of the religious clergy is significant factor to be noted since they occupy a powerful position as the interpreter of religious instructions and practises and have proclaimed themselves as the sole authority on religious texts, e.g. maulvis in Islam, pandits in Hinduism, priests in Christianity, etc who exercise disproportionate power over the common people especially uneducated, economically disadvantaged women who are unaware of the original religious texts and become completely dependent on the clergy for the conduct of religious rituals and customs. Instead of contextualising and historicising most religious texts like Bible, Quran, Vedas, etc at the time when they were written or conceived (which is centuries ago) and giving a liberal interpretation in tune with changing times, they still stick to the literal interpretation of the same thereby promoting antiquated values and ideals for women. Though religions have not remained static and have undergone reformist movements, the status of women in most religions is still quite low and subordinate to men and no substantial change bringing a transformation of the patriarchal nature of the religion has occurred in these reforms. Besides women, lower class and caste people are also oppressed under the tyranny of religious obligations and last but not the least, the homosexuals are the most vulnerable lot as most religions decry homosexuality as a sin and propose death penalty for the offenders thereby totally excluding gays and lesbians from the sphere of religious legitimacy which overlaps in most cases with State legitimacy, hence denying them the basic rights of equal dignity and respect in the society. <heading>#Conclusion</heading>Thus, I would argue that as was declared by the Vienna Conference on Human Rights (1993), "women's rights are human rights" and no amount of appeal to religious or cultural specificities can dilute their significance. In the international human rights law regime, the CEDAW symbolises the international bill of rights for women and should be at par with ICCPR, ICESCR, CERD etc in its legal enforceability. So any formulation of religious or cultural right should take into account the indivisibility and the non-negotiability of women's rights and the same political sensibility and sensitivity should inform any international instrument granting a right to religious freedom and protection against discrimination. Further, the State parties should be obliged to implement all the substantive provisions of the Convention irrespective of their religious impact or consequences. In fact, one should try to explore subversive religious movements i.e. Sufism, Bhakti etc countering the hegemonic ideology of Hinduism and Islam and the unjust dominance of clergy over religious affairs in order to propagate values of love and peace which seem extremely significant in today's conflict-ridden world. -------------------------------------------- 