Despite nearly two decades of the demand to legalise same-sex marriage in different countries, the issue still arouses intense passion and sometimes severe hostilities among the public and the political class. Infact, even within in the LGBT communities, the idea of same-sex marriage is an anathema to some while an aspiration among others. Though this issue concerns all the sexual minorities, the scope of the paper limits my concern only to gays and lesbians. This Paper tries to address the question whether the right to same-sex marriage would result in the elimination of discrimination against gays and lesbians or would it perpetuate and reinforce the oppressive heterosexual normative order through the institution of marriage while exploring the current discourse on gay rights in the US and India through certain case laws. In many countries like Sweden, Norway, Denmark, United Kingdom etc gays and lesbians have been given the right to form civil unions and domestic partnerships with all the rights and privileges which are allowed to married couples including the right to inheritance, pension benefits etc. while only Belgium, Netherlands and Canada have legalised same-sex marriage in recent years after long struggles. <heading>Evolution of the Homosexual Identity</heading>The campaign for non-discrimination and equal rights of gay and lesbians shot into the public light after the infamous Stonewall riots in New York in June 1969 wherein the Police raided a gay bar thereby killing many people. From the late nineteenth century to the mid-20 th century, homosexuality was considered a 'pathological illness' to be cured by psychiatry and counselling and an abnormality rooted in bad childhood experiences and abused relationships. Hence the Stonewall riots marked a watershed in the history of gay rights movement since it was the first time gays and lesbians came out openly in public to express their sexualities and to fight against discriminatory legal and social practises. According to Jeffrey Weeks, "the emergence of radical gay movements in the late 1960s and 1970s emphasised on reasserting the values of a lost experience, stressing the positive value of homosexuality and locating the sources of its social oppression. Since the attitudes toward homosexual behaviour are culturally specific, the concept of homosexuality should be historicized". Similarly, Jonathan Katz argues that "the existence of a heterosexual history needs to be recognised and explored rather than taken for granted. The term 'homosexual' was invented only in 1869 while 'heterosexual' can be traced back to 1892" since in England, till 1885 the only law dealing directly with homosexuality was buggery i.e. sodomy which failed to distinguish between man and man, man and animal, man and woman etc. <fnote>Jeffrey Weeks, "Discourse, Desire and Sexual Deviance: Some Problems in a History of Homosexuality" in Richard Parker and Peter Aggleton (eds.) Culture, Society and Sexuality: A Reader (1999) UCL Press at p. 120-121 </fnote><fnote>Jonathan Katz, the Invention of Heterosexuality (1995) Dutton Group at p. 10-12 </fnote><fnote>Jeffrey Weeks, "Discourse, Desire and Sexual Deviance: Some Problems in a History of Homosexuality" in Richard Parker and Peter Aggleton (eds.) Culture, Society and Sexuality: A Reader (1999) UCL Press at p. 122-123 </fnote>The distinction between 'heterosexual and homosexual' behaviour was a 19 th century scientific work in order to equate it with madness and abnormality. Michel Foucault proposes a radical historicization not only of madness or mental illness but also of homosexuality. What psychiatry will call homosexuality is a specific creation of the Age of Reason. Further, in The History of Sexuality, Foucault shows why the control of sexual behaviour of human beings is important on the part of the State legal system since "sex is situated at the pivot point of 'anatomo-politics and bio-politics' of body training and population management. At the juncture of the body and the population, sex became a crucial target of a power organised around the management of life rather than the menace of death".  <fnote>Didier Eribon, "Michel Foucault's Histories of Sexuality" (2001) 7:1 GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies at p. 42 </fnote><fnote>Ibid at p.45 </fnote><heading>Feminist Critique of the Heterosexist Social Order</heading>It was only in the 1970s and 1980s with the rise of radical left-feminist movements along with the student uprisings all over the world that gay and lesbian rights became an important issue of political mobilisation. However, most social movements whether the feminist or the labour unions had an ambiguous relation with the issue of homosexuality since it was still considered to be a sinful conduct rather an identity to assert. In the feminist discourse, the lesbian feminists felt that their issues were isolated or avoided within the heterosexist women's movement and believed that till the time, there exists binary distinctions like man/woman, heterosexuality/homosexuality, etc equality for women could not be achieved. According to Margaret Small, heterosexuality is not merely an act in relation to impregnation but the dominant ideology which defines women as 'appendages of men'. <fnote>Jonathan Katz, the Invention of Heterosexuality (1995) Dutton Group at p. 148 </fnote>Adrienne Rich in her influential essay "Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence" opines that "feminist theory can no longer afford to merely tolerate 'lesbianism' as an alternative lifestyle or make allusion to lesbians. The question is never raised whether, in a different context or other things being equal, women would choose heterosexual coupling and marriage since heterosexuality is presumed to be the 'sexual preference' of most women". Within the feminist movement, lesbian feminists urged women the possibility of exploring 'lesbian existence' since Chalotte Bunch contends that being a lesbian means ending identification with, allegiance to, dependent on, and support of heterosexuality. From the 'personal to political' to 'feminism is lesbianism', the feminist movement went through various, often conflicting phases, with the lesbian politics being labelled as 'divisive' and an undue distraction from the main goal of the overthrow of patriarchy. <fnote>Adrienne Rich, "Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence" in Richard Parker and Peter Aggleton (eds.) Culture, Society and Sexuality: A Reader (1999) UCL Press at p. 201 </fnote><fnote>Alison Jagger, Feminist Politics and Human Nature (1983) Rowman & Allanheld Publishers at p. 272 </fnote><heading>Status of the gay and lesbian rights movement in the US and India</heading>Apart from the feminist movement, other leftist social movements were also hesitant of raising issues of gay and lesbian rights resulting in the separation of gay rights activists from the former and call for an independent agenda through legal reforms, political mobilisation, lobbying etc. But they were accused of pursuing 'identity politics' based on their sexual orientations rather than being part of larger social movement of 'working class politics' which signified the shift of what Nancy Fraser calls "from redistribution to recognition" implying that apart from claiming redistributive justice in terms of equal access to economic resources, it is necessary to give recognition to hitherto neglected identities, e.g. religious minorities, 'despised sexualities etc. <fnote>Nancy Fraser, "Rethinking Recognition" (2000) 3 New Left Review at p. 110 </fnote>Despite limited legal reforms, the gays and lesbians are a harassed lot and victims of gross violence, unjust discrimination and enormous social prejudices. In most countries, they have no access to welfare policies and social security benefits or to housing facilities, employment schemes etc since they are supposed to be 'deviants' and perverts. The biggest evidence of discrimination emanates from the example of 2 biggest democracies of the world: USA and India wherein homosexuality is still considered a criminal offence. In US, the Defence of Marriage Act, 1996 was passed by the Congress which defines marriage as a relationship between a man and a woman thereby excluding same-sex marriages resulting in a race amongst the States to pass their versions of the said Act. While a Colorado law supporting discrimination against gays and lesbians was struck down by the Supreme Court in Romer vs. Evans, the same Court in Bowers vs. Hardwick upheld the constitutionality of a Georgia sodomy law, thereby criminalising homosexuality. This decision was overruled in Lawrence vs. Texas wherein two gay men were arrested by the police for violating a Texas sodomy law, the Supreme Court invalidated the said law on the ground that the convictions, under the Texas statute, violated the petitioners' due process liberty and privacy interests. Significantly, in Goodridge vs. Department of Public Health, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court upheld the right to marriage of the gays and lesbians under the Equal Protection clause of the Massachusetts' constitution. Thus, the US judicial trajectory has had a volatile relationship with the issue of gay rights but in the current conservative regime of G.W. Bush, serious attempts have been made to influence the judiciary to slower the process of legal reforms benefiting the gay rights campaign. <fnote>(1996) 517 US 620 </fnote><fnote>(1986) 478 US 186 </fnote><fnote>(2003) 539 US 558 </fnote><fnote>Patrick Paul Garlinger, "In All But Name: Marriage and the Meaning of Homosexuality" (2004) 26.3 Discourse at p. 45 </fnote><fnote>(2003) 798 N.E. 2d. 941 </fnote>Meanwhile, India still retains the colonial stricture against homosexuality by making it a penal offence under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code (1860) which provides: <quote>377. Unnatural offences: Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal shall be punished with transportation for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  Explanation- Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the offence described in this section. </quote>This in effect implies that except for sexual intercourse through penal-vaginal penetration, all other forms of sexual conduct even with in men and women would be construed as a criminal offence. In 2001, the Naz Foundation, a non-governmental organisation (NGO) involved in HIV/AIDS prevention, filed a petition in the Delhi High Court (Naz Foundation vs. Government of NCT, Delhi and others) asking for Section 377 to be read down, in order to decriminalise private consensual sexual activity. But the petition was dismissed on the grounds that there was no cause of action in the petition since there was no prosecution pending against the petitioner.. <fnote>Vol:22 Iss:10 URL:  URL  </fnote>Afterwards, the petitioners filed a special leave petition (SLP) before the Supreme Court on the limited question of whether the High Court could dismiss the petition on the grounds that there was no cause of action. The Court observed that the petition did not deal with an academic question and that this was a public interest issue that was being debated all over the world. Further, in February 2006 the Supreme Court set aside an earlier order of the High Court rejecting the PIL filed by NGO Naz Foundation and asked the central government to look into relation between legalization of homosexuality and prevention of AIDS which is an issue of public interest. Due to high incidence of AIDS amongst gays, there still exists the myth that it is a disease afflicting only the homosexuals thereby creating a false sense of security for straight couples and leading to rise in 'gay paranoia' wherein the homosexuals are blamed for the current AIDS menace. <fnote>Ibid </fnote><heading>Problematising the Institution of Marriage</heading>In 2005, the UK Parliament had passed the Civil Partnership Act, 2005 which allows same-sex couples to register a Civil Partnership, which gives legal recognition of their relationship and rights and obligations similar to those of married couples. But the right to marriage was not granted though it was said to be a question of semantics since most rights and privileges of a married couple were given to the same-sex couple. Still, the debate of right to same-sex marriage continues, notwithstanding creation of legal civil unions or domestic partnerships. This is due to what is called "linguistic tyranny" of the term 'marriage,' since the choice of language reflects a demonstratable assigning of same-sex couples to second class status. In this context, the question arises is why is the right to marriage so imperative for the same-sex couples when the institution of marriage is an integral part of the heterosexual normative order? "Is marriage the union between two committed persons? Is it a state-sanctioned partnership that offers benefits and demands obligations? Is it a 'sacred institution' that functions as the 'bedrock' by providing the optimum spectrum for reproduction and child-rearing?"  <fnote>Patrick Paul Garlinger, "In All But Name: Marriage and the Meaning of Homosexuality" (2004) 26.3 Discourse at p. 42 </fnote><fnote>Ibid at p.42 </fnote>The historical evolution of the institution of marriage can be traced to the need to define monogamous relationships and to determine the paternal lineage of a child in order to carry on family name of a particular clan/caste. In legal parlance, marriage is commonly defined as a union between a man and a woman. Further, it is perceived to be inherently related to the institution of heterosexuality; it is nothing more than a subcategory of heterosexuality, a more exalted version of heterosexual relationships. Accordingly, the concept of same-sex marriage is an oxymoron since the basis of marriage is a heterosexual union for procreation. Since a same-sex marriage would not lead to reproduction, it goes against the basic premise of the marital institution, though this logic fails to operate in the case of infertile couples, or those who do not want children etc. Thus, the argument of procreation as a ground for marriage has long been nullified. The US Supreme Court in Goodridge's case observed that "our laws of civil marriage do not privilege procreative heterosexual intercourse between married people above every other form of adult intimacy and every other means of creating a family. Fertility is not a condition of marriage nor is it a condition for divorce". <fnote>Ibid at 43 </fnote><fnote>Ibid at 58 </fnote><heading>Whether the right to same-sex marriage is a heterosexist ploy? </heading>However, the issue still confronting us is whether the right to same-sex marriage would bring about a change in the oppressive, gender-discriminatory nature of the institution of marriage or would infact co-opt the gays and lesbians in endorsing the values of a heterosexist society. This has been the most debatable issue between the more radical 'queers' and reformist 'gays and lesbians' who believe that the right to marriage is an important milestone in achieving the goal of complete equality between heterosexuals and homosexuals. According to Wendy Pearson, "same-sex marriage probably represents conservatives' best chance of imposing the kind of strict social regulation on queer sexuality that is normally imposed on marital heterosexuality and also might institute a distinction between monogamously married 'good' homosexual couples and un-married or promiscuous 'bad' gays and lesbians". Also, others argue that homosexuality is not just about conduct but is a distinct identity which is different from the dominant ideology of heterosexuality so demanding the right to marry is, in effect, embracing the values and ideas of the heterosexual order. In Tom Warner's opinion, "the belief that we need to be legally married to be equal to heterosexuals is simply another insidious form of internalised homophobia". <fnote>Wendy Pearson, "Interrogating the Epistemology of the Bedroom: Same-Sex Marriage and Sexual Citizenship in Canada" (2004) 26.3 Discourse at p. 143 </fnote><fnote>Ibid at p. 155 </fnote>Further, feminist critiques of the institution of marriage as an oppressive patriarchal order designed to suppress women and to keep them secluded in the four walls of the house are put forward by the queer activists who believe that marriage law is another way of domesticating and disciplining queer behaviour into the 'acceptable' norms of the society. Radical feminists have long opposed marriage on the ground that it is a significant means of controlling women's sexuality, reproductive choices and the construction of the 'womanhood as Ideal Mothers and Ideal Wives' thereby completely excluding them from the economic resources of the State and making them invisible from the public sphere in order to perpetuate the stereotype of them as complete dependents on men. Hence, marriage has been described by radical feminists as 'sexual slavery' and 'legalization of prostitution'. Emma Goldman notes that "marriage is only one step up from prostitution: whereas in marriage a woman is only dependent on one man, in prostitution she is dependent on many men." <fnote>Ann Ferguson, "Gay Marriage: An American & Feminist Dilemma" (Winter 2007) 22.1 Hypatia at p. 49 </fnote>Hence, the discourse on same-sex marriage is closely related to the feminist critiques of marriage and its relation to heterosexist patriarchal social order. Also, queer activists have problamatized the notion of same-sex marriage on the basis that it appeals to the State on behalf of a minority group thereby reifying and essentialising gay identity while at the same time, in demanding equal marriage rights, gays and lesbians are forced to assert their similarities with the heterosexuals creating a myth that the only distinction between homosexuals and heterosexuals is the sex of their chosen partner. This assumption runs through the assimilationist campaigns of many gay rights group in their demand for marriage and other family rights without subjecting them to a critical analysis of the heteronormative values. <fnote>Wendy Pearson, "Interrogating the Epistemology of the Bedroom: Same-Sex Marriage and Sexual Citizenship in Canada" (2004) 26.3 Discourse at p. 157 </fnote>In Pearson's opinion, "heteronormativity is not simply the salient presumption of heterosexuality but also promotes the norms of social life not just as heterosexual but even married, monogamous, white and upper middle class. Thus, racial and class norms are central to heteronormativity". Infact, the institution of marriage is critical to the formation of a sexual citizenship which is heterosexual, racist, sexist and class-biased. Through legislations that criminalise sexualities outside the purview of the heterosexual, monogamous family, the state has constructed heterosexuality as a pre-requisite to citizenship and as the unspoken norm of membership and belonging to a nation. Thus queer politics not only includes gays, lesbians, bisexuals, transsexuals, transgender, eunuchs etc but all other groups excluded from the mainstream normative order including blacks, women, disabled persons etc. <fnote>Amy L. Brandzel, "Queering Citizenship? Same-Sex Marriage and the State" (2005) 11:2 GLQ at p. 190 </fnote><fnote>Ibid at p. 174-175 </fnote>In contrast, other gays and lesbians argue in favour of equal marriage and other civil rights available to heterosexuals on the ground of non-discrimination and equality before law since the right to marry is intrinsic to forming long-term relationships and to create families. Moreover, legalizing same-sex marriages would eventually result in the development of a gender-just social system since the power equation and the tendency to dominate the weaker sex would not exist. George Lakeoff contends that "what is at stake in the gay marriage debate is the choice between two different models of marriage and the family: the traditional patriarchal model and the liberal feminist egalitarian model. So legalizing gay marriage does undermine the traditional patriarchal hegemony". However, this notion of a gay relationship as an equal one is not always true since the influence of the dominant patriarchy and its concomitant values of 'masculinity or feminity' is so entrenched that even within same-sex couples, one partner becomes dominant while the other becomes dependent either emotionally or financially thereby falling into the same trap of a heterosexual relation, for e.g. 'butch-femme' among lesbians where one woman behaves like the man/husband while the other pretends to be the wife. <fnote>Ann Ferguson, "Gay Marriage: An American & Feminist Dilemma" (Winter 2007) 22.1 Hypatia at p. 50 </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>In the end, I would like to say that the demand for the right to same-sex marriage should be subject to intense scrutiny and critical thinking. It is imperative to broaden our notion of 'family' in order to be open to all other kinds of families, e.g. same-sex couple adopting a baby without being married etc thereby creating a different definition of family apart from the heterosexual nuclear one. Also, it needs to be noted that unless an egalitarian and gender sensitive marriage is developed wherein the relationship is based on equal trust and respect, there is no purpose of claiming the right to same-sex marriage except to have access to the state sponsored marital benefits and privilege which are, not of course, unimportant. Still, the idea of gay marriage is rooted in an assumption of an equal relation which if legalized might even transform the heterosexist bias of the institution of marriage. However, there is a real danger of pronouncing a moral judgement on those who choose not to be married and also of regulating the sexual fluidity currently existing in homosexual discourse which permits gays and lesbians to experiment with their sexualities by having relationships with men, women, transsexual etc so as not to define their sexual orientation as purely heterosexual/homosexual. Thus, in effect, marriage law could be an instrument to domesticate and tame the so-called 'sexual promiscuity' of gays and lesbians by forcing them to look for monogamous relationships in order to be 'respected' by the society. But there also exists a constant demand among some gay couples to be legally married and to create an egalitarian relationship distinct from the patriarchal one. Hence, same-sex marriage should be legalized for those who choose to get married without creating a hierarchy of married and non-married couples. It might be a good strategy to organise political support and mobilisation to go beyond the categories of heterosexuality/homosexuality, and create a society where being a homosexual or a heterosexual makes no difference to one's rights and dignity. The gay and lesbian rights movement apart from fighting against heterosexism should also strive for the broader goal of establishing a just social order free from racism, economic deprivation and patriarchy. Thus, efforts should be made to create a world where marital status is no more important than one's driving license and the distinction between homosexuality and heterosexuality is no more than the colour of one's eyes and the former need then not to resort to 'pride marches' to proclaim its identity. --------------------------- 