It has been argued that culture in modern western society is increasingly constructed around and through the visual (Jay, 1993); indeed, the effects of visual images are of fundamental importance to the emerging field of visual culture and visual analysis (Rose, 2001). Central to this analysis has been an examination of the various sites of meaning surrounding visual imagery, in particular their production, consumption and intended audience(s). With these sites in mind, a still photograph taken from a published autobiography of Alison Lapper 'My Life in My Hands' (2005) will be examined. Alison Lapper was born without arms and with shortened legs, and the photograph to be examined was one taken of her at some point between the ages of three and five during which time she was institutionalised in a children's home for the disabled and subject to regular medical examinations and photography in order to assess and 'correct' her 'deformities'. Rose (2001) has argued that the production of images in many ways influences the effect they have, and in this case, the fact that the photograph was taken in the late 1960s accounts for the fact that the photograph is in black and white, and the overall dated look of the image. A further site of meaning for this photograph can be located in its composition, or in what Banks (2003) has termed, its 'internal narrative', which refers to the 'story' that can be derived from the photograph and its content. In this instance we are confronted by an image of a child strapped into what appears to be restrictive and cumbersome prostheses with hooks for hands and with her feet hanging or balanced above a pair of artificial feet. There is a general sense of uneasiness about the picture, firstly created by the seemingly awkward nature of the artificial limbs, the dramatic shadowing and also the twisted positioning of her feet. The fact that the child is looking down and not up at the camera, apparently concentrating on using the prosthetic arms, furthermore creates a sense of intrusion and voyeurism; the viewer is invited to look upon the child during a moment of personal struggle, reinforced by the accompanying text. There also seems to be an uncomfortable contrast between the child's flesh and the metal and plastic of the limbs, giving the image a cold and clinical feel, and one of overall restriction, tension and struggle. The social context in which this image is embedded, or its 'external narrative' (Banks, 2003) is equally important when analysing visual material, and can be linked to the intended audiences of the image. The fact that this picture was created to be viewed by medical professionals as a way of developing and extending Alison's treatment reinforces the sense of voyeurism as we are looking at Alison through the 'medical gaze'. Indeed, this image can be viewed as being deeply entrenched in power relations; the very fact that it exists points to the widespread use of 'corrective' devices for people with disabilities at this time in order to create or sustain, at the very minimum, an aesthetic appearance of 'normality', even if no practical benefits were derived (Oliver, 1990). However, as Rose (2001) reminds us, audiences have the power to resist or subvert dominant readings of images and to identify alternative perspectives. Indeed, the very presence of the image in Lapper's autobiography supports an alternative way of viewing, and invites alternative audiences. Clearly then, whilst images may encourage complicity with dominant readings, as this example shows, there is much scope to re-read or subvert visual material in ways which transform or transcend their meaning. 