Brewer (2000) has described the aim of participant observation as two fold; firstly, as a means to 'understand the world as it is seen by those acting within it' and secondly, to reveal the taken-for-granted nature of that world (Brewer, 2000: 60). With these aims in mind, I decided to undertake a participant observation which would help me to gain a greater understanding of what has come to be termed 'deaf culture'. 'Deaf culture' is a term used to describe shared sets of meanings, values and experiences inextricably tied to the experience of being deaf in a world predicated on verbal communication (Padden and Humphries, 2005) . One important expression of this culture has been the emergence of 'deaf clubs', usually organised as informal gatherings of (predominantly) deaf people, in which British Sign Language (BSL) becomes the principal means of communication. 'Deaf clubs' have become an important form of social support for people with various forms of hearing impairment, and offer an opportunity for the sharing of experiences and socialising. I intended to go into the field as an overt observer and to conduct informal interviews with the participants regarding their experiences of deaf club and the role it played in their lives. As I have basic training in BSL, I hoped that this would enable me to act not only as an 'observant-as- participant' (Bryman, 2004), in other words, an observer whose role as researcher is first and foremost, but also give me some ability to participate more fully in the club setting. The training I had received also provided me with the initial contacts through which to organise my entry into the field, which totalled a three hour session one evening at a deaf club in a local town. During my three hours in the field, my role as a participant/observer fluctuated, with one or the other role taking precedence at any given time, and with each impeding my ability to entirely commit to the other. It is widely recognised that the external socio-demographic characteristics of the researcher, together with their personal autobiography effects not only the acceptance of the researcher within the group (Brewer,2000), but also the way in which the research is recorded by the researcher. Indeed, I had a strong sense that my identity as a 'hearing person' created somewhat of a distance between myself and the group, exacerbated by my basic understanding of the language. This inevitably impacted on the form of data I was able to collect, as my inability to keep up with the flow of fast BSL meant that potentially useful data was lost. However, despite this, I was able to conduct several informal interviews with participants during which I jotted down notes. At points my status as a disabled person, and my ability to use BSL (even in a limited capacity) united me with certain members of the group. Indeed, my experiences of my disability together with my motivations for taking up sign language were frequently brought up by members of the group as 'conversation-starters', and this common ground enabled me to conduct reasonably in-depth interviews and build a sense of rapport with certain members. Paradoxically, my inability to integrate entirely within the deaf community in this setting could have provided me with a greater understanding, in some respects, of the lives of deaf people, and therefore the importance of such outlets as deaf clubs. The problems I experienced during my participant observation, for example, the language barrier, is exactly the sort of reality people with hearing impairments face on a daily basis in the 'hearing world', and in this way I gained a form of insight which I had not anticipated. 