This essay examines the policy debate, in the Guardian and The Times newspapers, surrounding proposals to tackle the problem of black male educational underachievement. The newspaper series involves six articles written from March till June 2005 including four articles from the Guardian and two from The Times. The newspaper stories reported on Trevor Phillips, the chairman of the Commission for Racial Equality, idea that separate classes for black boys may help them achieve better results at school. This policy debate deals with the perceived failure of black boys in education and involves an examination of the intertwining relations of gender, ethnicity and class. However, it must be noted that both masculinity and race are not uniform social categories thus one must be aware of multiple masculinities and the diversity of ethnicity. To answer this question, one must examine and compare the reasons given in the articles for the underachievement of black boys. These include the attitudes and procedures of teachers and schools; the lack of black male role models and peer group pressure. One must also consider masculinities, more specifically cultural notions of black masculinity; the reporting of class issues; the neglect of black girls' achievements and the complexity of the concept of race. This debate must be seen within the context of the wider moral panic surrounding the perceived underachievement of boys in schools. Every summer when exam results are announced there is media uproar concerning the educational 'failure' of boys in comparison with the success of girls. Feminist have critiqued this popular discourse as it sees the under-attainment of boys as unnatural and against the traditional division of labour. It is certainly questionable whether there would be such hysteria if girls were achieving lower results than boys. Archer (2003: 9) argues the 'crisis has been sensationalised and exaggerated' neglecting the under-representation of working class girls in higher education. Under-attainment in education is thus divided by gender in popular debates but usually associated with class division in academic texts. Nonetheless the racial and ethnic element must also be considered; even if it is 'mostly invisible at the level of theory' it still remains 'hyper-visible within popular thinking' (Archer, 2003: 24). Therefore this essay deals with the discussion surrounding black masculinity and education policy. Initially there will be an examination of the newspaper articles reasons for the 'failure' of black boys in education. Both the Guardian and The Times specifically link black culture and community with underachievement and failure. Phillips is quoted as saying 'many black boys were suffering from a culture...' and that there is a 'wall of attitude' (Guardian 7 th March 2005) that surrounds them. These cultural values involve the belief that it is not cool to be clever and traditions of resistance to schooling specific to black masculinity. The newspapers agree that black boys perform badly because they have low expectations and low aspirations. Nevertheless The Times takes this further associating black culture with crime and oppositional aspirations citing 'bling-bling and gangster rap culture' (The Times, 7 th March 2005) as reasons for educational failure. However, the media linking black culture with underachievement and criminality is a 'racist misrecognition of the diversity of black experience' (Marriott in Mac an Ghaill, 2000: 187). Arguably dominant representations of black masculinity reflect the moral panic surrounding the 'problem category of black youth... (as a) threat to civil order' (Marriot in Mac an Ghaill, 2000: 187). Therefore the popular discourses that define black youth as criminal and deviant can be seen to reinforce negative racist stereotypes. Cultural values are not the sole creator of low expectations; institutional racist attitudes and negative stereotyping also play a role in creating the low aspirations and underachievement of black youth. The Times nonetheless places emphasis on the role of peer group culture in shaping the attitudes of black young men. As an alternative to Phillips proposals' The Times interviews education consultant Tony Sewell who argues that 'we should be fostering peer pressure among them to succeed' (The Times, 13 th March 2005). Sewell's educational programme involves taking bright black boys to Jamaica for a month once a year to study science and medicine. Thus The Times is advocating competitive individualism to create aspirations; ensuring a number of high achievers become role models for the rest. However, this policy is not inclusive and does not tackle the problem of the boys left behind. Moreover, the over-emphasis on black masculinity and black culture overlooks the link between all masculinities, schooling and peer group pressure. Masculine cultures of resistance to schooling are present in all races and ethnic groups. Mac an Ghaill and Haywood (in Mac an Ghaill, 2000) argue that schools create masculinities through a process of negotiation, acceptance and rejection. Male peer groups police masculinity as they are 'one of the most oppressive arenas for the production and regulation of masculinity' (Mac an Ghaill and Haywood in Mac an Ghaill, 2000: 55). Mental work is seen as effeminate and homosexual (Epstein, 1998) thus the dominant forms of masculinity are in opposition to striving for academic success. Therefore it is not only black peer groups that castigate working hard at school as feminate and unmanly. Sewell's' (in Epstein, 1998) study of black boys in an inner-city comprehensive found that conformists had to deal with a conflict between the culture of the peer group and the values of the school. Sewell found the boys were unable to resolve this conflict as the 'power and pressure of the peer group demands anti-school hyper masculinity' (Sewell in Epstein, 1998: 117). However, this is not only an attribute of black masculinities at school as Epstein (1998: 106) argues 'the main demand on boys from within their peer culture... is to appear to do little or no work'. Thus hegemonic masculinity in schools discourages the pursuit of academic achievement as it considered effeminate and uncool. Nonetheless this rejection of school values is not solely a feature of black culture. Both newspapers focus on the black community and black cultural values as the problem highlighting faulty attitudes, low aspirations and behavioural problems. As John Head argues there is debate whether 'the problem lies in the Afro-Caribbean culture or with racial conflict in this country' (Head, 1999: 44).The underachievement of working-class white boys is seen as outside their control where as black boys 'failure' is due to their own faulty attitudes (Archer, 2003). Therefore these contemporary policy discourses 'largely dismiss the role of structural inequalities, instead focussing on problems within groups' (Archer, 2003: 23). Thus both newspapers neglect the structural causes of black youth underachievement and as Archer (2003: 24) argues popular discourses 'treat disadvantaged groups as the source of their own problems'. Peer group culture is not however the only reason given for the black male underachievement; teacher behaviour and school procedures also feature in the articles. Both newspapers cited 'low teacher expectation' (The Times, 7 th March 2005) and ''low expectations by schools' (Guardian, March 2005) as explanations for the lower achievement of black male youth. Mac an Ghaill and Haywood (in Mac an Ghaill, 2000) found that when schools sort students into academic hierarchies they formally identify some boys as failures; these boys have to find 'alternative resources to validate masculinity... (by) resisting school demands and expectations' (Mac an Ghaill and Haywood in Mac an Ghaill, 2000: 57). If schools have low expectations of black boys, they are placed in the lower sets and are more likely to reject the values of the school. Therefore creating a self-fulfilling prophecy whereby young black boys build a culture of resistance towards the teachers and schooling system. Nonetheless in the Guardian, Phillips argues that 'it is not good enough to blame their underperformance on "racist attitudes" of white teachers' (Guardian, 31 st May 2005). He contends that this is a simplistic argument as Indian and Chinese boys succeeded and achieve good results. However, Mac an Ghaill's (1988) study of relations between teachers and students in the schooling of black youth argues widespread racism has serious negative implications. His ethnographic study of an inner-city comprehensive found that the teachers were either overtly racist or worked implicitly in a racist framework. His work divided teachers into old disciplinarians and new realists who believed in strong hierarchy and opposed progressive development; and liberals who believed in child-centred learning and tended to be left-leaning. The new realists and old disciplinarians could be overtly racist and supported the structures of the school that discriminated against black students. Moreover, even the liberal teachers were implicitly racist by unknowingly accepting racial stereotypes and working within the racist institutional structure. He found evidence of this in the 'teachers' response to the black community and the system of racist stereotyping that operated within the school' (Mac an Ghaill, 1988: 61). The teachers were embedded with racist stereotypes from wider society from which they would generalise the particular behaviour of some black youths to the social group as a whole. Black boys were identified as low ability with discipline problems where as Asian boys were consider to be conformists who performed well. Therefore Mac an Ghaill (1988: 82) concludes that 'all teacher groups adopted the states conception, which perceives black youth rather than racism as the problem'. Moreover, Sewell (in Epstein, 1998: 115) argues that 'negative teacher expectation' created a difficult social image of black students and grouped them all together. This negative image was linked to the believed phallocentric subculture of black boys and caused the 'black male presence... (to be) perceived by some teachers as threatening' (Sewell in Epstein, 1998: 117). However, Sewell contends that this negative expectation and social image was overcome by most black students who he identifies as conformists. He also describes retreatist black students who avoid conflict with teachers and were perceived as non-threatening. Thus illustrating that there is no uniform black masculine experience in schools and we need to 'deconstruct stereotypes of black males' (Sewell in Epstein, 1998: 122) found in schools, society and the media. The lack of black male role models was also identified by both newspapers as a problem leading to the educational underachievement of black boys. Phillips argues we need more black male teachers as there is an 'absence of black male role models in British education' (The Times, 13 th March 2005). Both newspapers reported Phillips' call for 'tougher action against black fathers' (Guardian, 7 th March 2005) suggesting they be denied access to their sons if they refused to attend parent's evenings. These proposals contain the assumption that most black men live separately from their children and are incompetent fathers. It is also assumed that black mothers have no control or authority over their sons. Therefore the articles contain cultural notions of black fatherhood, black lifestyles and black masculinities. Moreover, both newspapers specifically highlight the race of their spokespeople on these proposals suggesting only black people can speak out on 'black' issues. The Times cites Baroness Rosalind Howells a black Labour peer and Simon Wooley 'another prominent black figure' (The Times, 7 th March 2005) and the Guardian quotes Diane Abbot 'another black voice' (Guardian, 8 th March 2005). However, 'black' is not a shared uniform culture as there is a 'bewildering diversity of subject positions, social experience and cultural identities which constitute "blackness" as a social category' (Marriott in Mac an Ghaill, 2000: 186). Louise Archer (2003: 18) argues that 'Asian' and 'Black' are problematic terms, finding that the 'interests of Asian groups were obscured and subsumed by those of Caribbean and African groups'. Marion FitzGerald in the Guardian (1 st June 2005) criticises Phillips for ignoring the complexity of the interplay between race and education. She argues Phillips is guilty of 'statistical racism' for neglecting the failure of Pakistani boys and grouping together all Africa and Caribbean pupils creating 'crude images' (Guardian, 1 st June 2005). FitzGerald argues that the educational under-attainment of some black boys is due to a complicated inter-relationship between class, gender and ethnicity; therefore one cannot 'reduce individuals to the single division of their ethnic classification' (Guardian, 1 st June 2005). Therefore Phillips emphasis on race is detrimental as these social groupings are interlinked and their effects are interdependent. Both newspapers highlight the race of their spokespeople and identify similar reasons for the underachievement of black boys including peer group pressure, teacher's attitudes and lack of black male role models. However, they do differ in their reporting styles and support for Phillips; The Times sensationalises the proposals and is critical of Phillips where as the Guardian is more in favour of his proposals. Trevor Phillips is alleged to be 'stirring up a hornet's nest... by proposing the "shock treatment"...' (The Times, 13 th March); this language suggests the proposals are of a radical nature and have caused a major row. In defence of Phillips the Guardian argued that the 'misleading front page splash in the Times' (8 th March 2005) insinuated that Phillips' suggestions were concrete and extreme; when in reality they were tentative ideas. The Times' reports that a 'row over whether black boys should be segregated at schools erupted last night' (7 th March) where as the Guardian defends Trevor Phillips' proposals arguing his 'complex proposals were reduced to segregation' (8 th March). The differing approaches to the news story in the Guardian and The Times are a reflection of their different political perspectives. With the Guardian as a left-leaning liberal paper more in favour of Phillips and the right-wing Times more critical of his progressive proposals. However, The Times' sensationalised and conflictual style of reporting also demonstrates earlier discussed theories of moral panics over 'boys in crisis' (Archer, 2003: 7) and the problem category of black youth (Marriott in Mac an Ghaill, 2000). The emphasis on conflict in The Times is a good example of the sensationalised underachieving boys debate and the fears of ungovernable young black boys that reinforcing racist stereotypes. These public debates surrounding the crisis in masculinity and underlying perceived threat of black masculinity have led to the neglect of black girls in popular discourse. This is reflected in these articles as the focus is almost totally on black boys in both newspapers thus massively overlooking the extent of academic achievement by black female pupils. The Times highlights that 'black Caribbean girls achieved far better results than boys' (7 th March 2005) and the Guardian notes that 'nearly half these boys' sisters make the grade, despite growing up in the same homes' (8 th March 2005). Therefore there is an acknowledgement of the gender gap in educational achievement between black boys and girls. Nonetheless there is no explanation of why black girls are able to achieve; the articles only ask why so many black boys fail not why black girls succeed. Black feminist academics have attempted to redress the neglect of black female experience. Heidi Mirza argues that black girls do relatively well at school but this is rarely discussed as 'the phenomenon of black female scholastic success has been consistently neglected' (1992: 10). There has been a 'marginalisation of the gender issue' (Mirza, 1992: 10) in research on gender and education whereby the underachievement of boys has become the overriding concern. Sewell (in Epstein 1998: 116) argues that black girls are better able to resolve the conflict between school value and peer culture by being 'pro-education and not pro-school'. Nonetheless to fully understand the causes of the underachievement of black boys in the education system; popular discourses and academic research must further address the negotiation of the schooling process by black girls. Only by understanding the complex interplay between the ethnicity, class and gender can the under-attainment of black boys be fully conceived. The Times articles do not mention class issues, inequality or social exclusion. However, the Guardian reports Phillips' ideas on the detrimental effects of an unequal society arguing black underachievement is 'costing the whole community' (7 th March 2005) leaving the boys unemployable and unable to participate in society. The alienation and social exclusion of black youth are alluded to; Phillips argues the educational systems intractable failures are 'detaching the African-Caribbean community from the rest of society' (Guardian, 31 st May 2005). He also argues 'accumulating inequalities' (Guardian, 31 st May 2005) are in danger of creating a permanent underclass thus illustrating the liberal ideal of the necessity of education as a social leveller and route out of poverty. However, Phillips' argue that 'the main cause of the performance differential is definitely not poverty' (Guardian, 31 st May 2005) as he argues more well-off blacks are still likely to fail. Therefore illustrating the changing political discourse from focussing on class issues to social exclusion; under New Labour structural inequalities like 'issues of race and ethnicity are more likely to be subsumed within current policy concerns about social exclusion' (Archer, 2003: 23). Nonetheless, Marion FitzGerald's article (1 st June 2005) in the Guardian asserts the class nature of the problem arguing the gender gap is greatest; not between black boys and girls as it is a 'yawning chasm' between poor boys and girls. FitzGerald argues Phillips focus on race is 'misleading and dangerously simplistic' (Guardian, 1 st June 2005) as it fails to contextualise the problem by prioritising race over class. She links male underachievement with deprivation arguing it is not just the black group that is disproportionally affected by the gender gap. The classic study of working class boys and underachievement in schools is by Paul Willis (1977) who explored why working class kids end up with working class jobs. His ethnographic study found that working class boys held a shared sense of community linked to their class that fostered an 'counter-school culture' (Willis, 1977: 11). Willis found that school for working class boys was for strengthening peer group networks and building up a culture of resistance to authority. Defiance of schooling and working class culture are intrinsically linked thus FitzGerald emphasis on the association between class and educational underachievement is important. However, arguably Willis arguments are somewhat outdated with the decline in the heavy industries and the correspondingly decline in traditional working class communities. Moreover, Willis has been criticized for a 'failure to conceptualize the range of masculinities' (Mac an Ghaill and Haywood in Mac an Ghaill 2000, p. 57) and does not take into account other forms of resistance to schooling such as retreatism. Therefore again social relations such as class cannot be analysed in isolation from other social categories. Nonetheless FitzGerald and the Guardian's reporting of the policy debate highlights class and inequality as a factor in the underachievement of black boys; that is neglected by the Times. In conclusion, articles in both newspapers associate the problems of black boys' educational underachievement with problems inherent in black cultural values and faulty attitudes. Therefore reinforcing negative racist stereotypes and contributing to the moral panic surrounding the crisis in masculinity and the perceived deviance of black youth. Nonetheless the low teacher and school expectation is also recognised as a major cause for the 'failure' of black boys; thus recognising that external factors also play a role. Marion FitzGerald in the Guardian highlights structural inequalities such as class as a major contributor to the poor educational standards of young black men. The issues of social exclusion, class and inequality are neglected by the more right-wing Times; it prioritises' an individualistic solution to the problem by fostering competition between black boys. However, to fully understand the reasons for the under-attainment of black boys in the education system; popular discourses and academic texts must analyse the complex interplay between relations of class, gender and ethnicity. 