This essay explores the questions and solutions triggered by the issue of reparations for slavery and the racist aspects of colonization on a global scale, taking arguments from the precedents of reparations cases in the United States, the ongoing debates in France and at the international scale. <fnote>I will use the term of 'reparations' </fnote>Until recently, the question of reparations has not been considered as a global one. Our task will be to question the possibilities of creating a global regime of reparations for slavery; the main obstacle in the establishment of a global regime of reparations is being the identification of the claimants as individuals or as a group, of the entity (government, state, corporation) or the people (individuals living in a society) who to be given reparations. This issue is not only about allocating financial reparations from one group to another; it also reveals the conception of justice we have today, the role of human rights in the shaping of a new idea of justice, the relation between law and justice and the importance of justice as the foundation of a sustainable development. How to build a global regime of reparations when the disparities in the treatment of different cases seem to be irreconcilable? For instance, Native American and Inuit claims of land ownership were accepted and legitimated while the interned Japanese Canadian during WWII received compensation; so did Israel from Germany for the suffering endured by the Jews under the Nazi regime. But the question of reparations not only for the African Americans but the Africans from the continent, who still suffer today from the injustice of slavery, slave trade and the racist aspect of colonization, is highly disputed. In France, the question of reparations is of another type. The French society faces conflicting memories, individual and collective, in relation to the colonial past and its present effects. The aim of the memorial laws which I will describe in the next sections is to acknowledge the injustice done in the name of colonization by the state. The recognition of slavery as a crime against humanity has only been used as a legal instrument to compel the French government to give compensation by the M.I.R (International Movement for Reparations), a movement based in Martinique. The reparations can be asked because of the official violation of rights undertaken by governments as a systematic policy in the past. At a global scale, the recognition of slavery and slave trade as a crime against humanity - which has no prescription - can ground a legal claim for reparations provided to the descendants of victims of severe violations of their basic human rights during the slave trade and colonization. The moral argument which has been debated by many scholars and justice theorists seems to be undisputable. Every moral agent today is aware that colonization and slavery were unjust and wrong. The political argument is present but questionable. Are the apologies or 'regrets' offered by the French President and the British Prime Minister sincere or fashionable? The question remains: What kind of reparations is due and to whom? Is a theory of reparations for ancient wrongs applicable in reality? If it is material, then this material gain for descendants of slaves who suffer from racial discrimination should not turn out to be a new type of injustice for other groups. This essay tries to encapsulate (I) the philosophical grounds of a fair and sustainable regime of reparations for descendants of victims of slavery and racist aspects of colonization and (II) the practicality and feasibility of a legal regime of reparations. <heading>I/ The philosophical grounds of a fair and sustainable regime of reparations for descendants of victims of slavery and racist aspects of colonization</heading><heading>A/ Moral obligations and practical difficulties</heading>The first argument is a very obvious and twofold one. On the one hand, the crime of slavery and trade, if committed today, would be punished by law and their perpetrators would be liable for them and prosecuted. Indeed, the first articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights state the unalienable rights which are freedom and equality (article 1), non-discrimination (article 2), the right to life (article 3), the prohibition of slavery (article 4), and the right to an equal protection of the law (article 7). The international criminal law, from the Nuremburg to the Iraq trials, seeks to punish the people responsible for crimes against humanity. On the other hand, the victims of these crimes would receive compensation and reparations. A Human Rights Watch report defines reparations as <quote>'not only compensation but also acknowledgment of past abuses, an end to ongoing abuses and, as much as possible, restoration of the state of affairs that would have prevailed had there been no abuses'</quote><fnote>Url:  URL  </fnote>Moreover, the right of someone who suffered abuses to claim reparations is not extinguished with his or her death and can be pursued by his or her heirs. But the longer the period between the wrong and the claim for reparation, the more contested this claim will be because of the nature of history and time. Other causal facts can enter into consideration when the present effects of a past wrong are being envisaged. In her paper 'Historical injustice and reparations: Justifying claims of descendants', Janna Thompson ponders on this issue and gives an answer. To make claims for reparations for descendants of slaves, it is necessary to link the present harm suffered by the descendants and the harm done to the ancestors in a causal relation which should be automatic and within the scope of the first injustice. It seems difficult to meet these two conditions over a period of 200 years. Nevertheless, Thompson argues that the suffering of the descendants of persecuted families is directly and automatically connected to the injustice done to them in the past because the identity of an individual is forged on the remembrance of the history and past of the family he or she belongs to. The anger, pain and sadness are an automatic effect of the awareness of the injustice. The time and place where the injustice occurred does not matter but its meaning for the present generation has to be considered as a direct consequence of it and of the fact that no apology and no recognition has been expressed to them. Mari Matsuda, a leading thinker of the Critical Legal Studies movement and the Critical Race Theory, argues that the race consciousness of African-American today is the consequence of systematic injuries and exploitations that their ancestors suffered as slaves. This consciousness justifies the reparations and makes the refusal to pay or to acknowledge them a perpetuation of the injuries. <fnote>Thompson J., Historical injustice and reparations: Justifying claims of descendants, , the University of Chicago, 2001, pp. 133-135 </fnote>The reparations focus on the present effects of an injustice and not on the injustice itself. The group concerned has to prove that the moral, social and economic deprivations that they actually bear are an effect of the past injustice. The notion of continuity in the suffering legitimates the claim. Indeed, the ongoing injuries need reparations, not the past injustices themselves. The moral concern is not automatically translated into action. The practical questions remain. Who is entitled to reparations, individuals or groups? Who has to pay the reparations, the government or the individuals, knowing that eventually, the tax payers will bear the costs? What kind of reparations is due, symbolic, financial, political? I will try to answer these questions in the course of this essay. <heading>B/ Can a definition of descendants of slaves as a community entitle them to a collective right (as human right) to reparations, and ground a theory of 'justice toward groups? </heading>Janna Thompson refers to the Rawlsian theory of 'family lines' to define the descendants of slaves and the past slaves as a transgenerational community. This transgenerational link entitles the descendants today to claim reparations for the harm done to their ancestors. It is obvious that this community membership is not based on a blood relation line but on the very fact that the injuries and injustices suffered today are a consequence of the enslavement. <fnote>Op. cit. p. 132-133 </fnote>The community of injured descendants of slaves can be defined as a 'cultural minority' whose 'cultural membership' would be constituted of a shared past and history of enslavement and exploitation. We need to borrow the distinction that Kymlicka makes between the 'political membership' and the 'cultural membership' to define the group to whom the reparations are owed. Not all Black people living in the US are concerned, for instance, but only those who suffer from severe discrimination, poverty and insecurity. The concept of minority culture is not about the number of people who compose the group but rather the social position of the group and the relation of power with the other groups. Indeed, a minority group is a dominated and disempowered group which does not possess the means and place of political expression. Kymlicka favours 'collective rights' which will take the situation of disadvantaged minorities into consideration in order to produce principles of justice aiming at setting it right. <fnote>Kymlicka is cited by M. Williams, 'Justice toward groups, Political not juridical', Political Theory, vol. 23, n. 1, 1995, pp. 67-91, Sage Publications, University of Toronto, pp. 75-76. </fnote>A corollary question is whether the reparations will still be just in a long-term period, over several generations. The principles of reparations which are at the same time principles of justice have to be updated as the social, economic and political situation of the concerned people evolves. <heading>C/ Who is responsible and who owes reparation? A 'social connection model' of responsibility adapted to a transgenerational issue</heading>After answering the question of the beneficiaries of the reparations, it is necessary to identify who owes the reparations. It is natural that the living citizens of a former colonial empire are reluctant to pay reparations for a wrong that they did not commit. But it is also true that these citizens benefit from the economic advance of their country which had been built on the unjust and systematic exploitation of foreign populations and resources. The raw material and energy necessary for the industrialization were to be found in the colonies. The responsibility of the contemporary citizens can be evidenced by the fact that they actually take part in what Iris Marion Young names a 'structural injustice': <quote>'Structural injustice exists when the combined operation of actions in institutions put large categories of person under a systematic threat of domination or deprivation of the means to develop and exercise their capacities'</quote><fnote>Young, I., 'Responsibility and global justice: A social connection model', University of Chicago, 2004, p. 19. </fnote>The word structure refers to the institutions, the habits, relations and social processes, which people see, imagine and thus reproduce, and create as they think they are. We must think of the wrong done by slavery at a global scale as a 'structural' process which took place in the past and has repercussions today for a particular group. The citizens are responsible simply because they participate of a system where a group is highly discriminated and excluded from the political platform of expression and participation because of past injustices. Holding a former colonial state responsible for the injustices should not lead to blaming the citizens themselves. The reparations should take the form of a positive and political action toward the sustainable improvement of the beneficiaries' situation. <heading>II/ The practicality and feasibility of a legal regime of reparations: how to implement the reparations</heading>What are the practical implications and the difficulties raised by these theories? Let us imagine that the principle of reparations be accepted as legitimate. The first issue concerns the type of reparations. The first step in building such a regime is to identify the injustices which result from slavery and the racist aspects of colonization which need to be rectified today. There are two types of realities: the quantifiable ones and the non-quantifiable ones. We can observe the HDI (Human Development Index) concerning the former colonized states of Africa and the African American population, and analyse the causes of the inequalities between these groups and the world average. For instance, Black children in the USA have a life expectancy 6 times lower than White children, a Black woman has more than 3 times as many chances to die during childbirth, the number of Black families living under the poverty line is 4 times superior to White families, and the unemployment rate among Black people is 3 times superior to the Whites'. Poverty is not natural. It is a historical construct. <fnote>Source url :  URL  </fnote>The way to repair these inequalities would be to invest in the health and care services and in the education system so as to make them accessible to the poor population. But let us now focus on the three main perspectives: the legal, political and human rights one. <heading>A/ The legal approach of the reparations</heading>How can the U.N. World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Related Intolerance play a role in the establishment of a global regime of reparations? By stating that 'slavery and the slave trade are a crime against humanity and should always have been so, especially the transatlantic slave trade and are among the major sources and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination' the Conference does not bind in any way the states responsible. Indeed, the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court is not retroactive. Even if there is no prescription of a crime against humanity, the liability and responsibility of the states are not held. From a national point of view, France recognized slavery as a crime against humanity with the Taubira law in 2001. In 2005, the MIR (International Movement for Reparations) based in Martinique sued the French state for its responsibility in the material and immaterial damage that the people of Martinique endure. The people of Martinique are referred to as 'descendants of deported and enslaved Africans'. The movement claims reparation of 200 billion Euros. On the other hand, individuals lodged a complaint against the French state for the displacement of 1641 children from Reunion Island between 1963 and 1982. The displacement took the form of abductions of children from poor families, on the false promise that they would benefit a high education. Instead, the children were placed in farms in the most under populated regions of France and were used as work force and child labour. These abuses and the character of the displacement made the plaintiff evoke the perpetuation of colonialism. All these demands for reparations have yet remained unanswered. <fnote>See Appendix 3 </fnote><fnote>See Appendix 1 </fnote><fnote>The case is know as the 'Children of La Creuse' </fnote><heading>B/ The political approach</heading>The political approach seems more sustainable because it proceeds from the acknowledgement by governments of their past guilt and responsibility. It can be translated into a warrant to end the harm through political action. Indeed, the French society gives a great importance to the reconciliation, the reconstruction and the recognition of the various memories which constitute its multicultural nation. After many decades of silence, the French government, in 1999, finally acknowledged the reality of the war of Algeria by substituting the expression 'operations carried out in North Africa' by 'the war in Algeria'. This action was accompanied by official apologies for the harm done to the Algerian people. The reparation is here more symbolic than material. It aims at the reconciliation between two nations, but also reconciliation within the nation itself. This symbolic step is necessary to the construction of a strong identity on both sides of the Mediterranean Sea. Indeed, one cannot understand the violence of the riots which took place in the Parisian suburbs in November 2005 if one underestimates the consequences of denying a group's identity. The Algerian identity in France is made of a history of colonial domination, cultural assimilation, mass immigration, ghettoization in the poorest suburbs and social discrimination. The reconciliation of the collective memories is necessary to build a peaceful society and a 'happy memory' (Paul Ricoeur). <fnote>Law n. 99-882, article 4, see Appendix 2 </fnote>At the same time, through a policy of commemoration of the abolition of slavery, the French government stresses its apologies and expresses its guilt to the population. The Taubira law also insists on the importance to give to the history of colonization and slavery in the educational programmes. <fnote>As a speaking anecdote, the French Prime Minister D. De Villepin avoided to attend the reconstitution of the Austerlitz battle for the bicentenary of the victory of Napoleon in 2005, in a climate of commemoration of the abolition of slavery; slavery that Napoleon had re-established in 1802 </fnote><fnote>This interference of the judiciary power into the impartiality and objectivity of history is criticized by the historians as the imposition of an official history </fnote>This political approach of symbolic reparations, through a work on collective memory and an acknowledgement of the past, requires a long period of time (several generations) for its results to be seen. <heading>C/ A human rights approach </heading>A human rights approach focuses on the neediest population, at a global scale, in order to respond efficiently to the most challenging development problems. Indeed, it is acknowledged today that the causes of poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion and economic disparities between nations are closely associated with racism and racial discrimination as the result of the racist aspects of colonization. In this perspective, the reparations payment would be used for investments in education, housing, health care, or job training. Contrary to the affirmative action that concerns only the relatively most advantaged members of a disadvantaged group, the human rights approach which focuses on the economic and social rights concerns the whole group. <fnote>World Conference against Racism, 2001, Durban, article 18 </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>The purpose of this essay was to question the philosophical grounds of a regime of reparations for slavery and the racist aspect of colonization and to envisage its practical feasibility. The question of reparations, broader than its financial aspect, is a challenge for the peaceful and reconciled coexistence between nations in a globalized world. Should we hold former colonial states liable for the past injustices or focus on the reconciliation among nations? The same debate occurs in ICL. What is the priority: to condemn the people responsible or to build reconciliation? 