<heading>Introduction</heading>In this study I will consider non-violent alternative globalization movements and civil society organizations as social movements. I will focus on movements from the South which challenge - in different ways - the very concept and nature of international law through their pragmatic struggles. These case-studies aim at grounding the four propositions I want to make in order to improve the efficiency of civil society activism. I mean to sketch general features applicable to a theory of social movements from the study of concrete cases. The first section assesses the 'Subaltern Cosmopolitan Legality' theory developed by Rajagopal. The second one draws lessons from the original structure of the World Social Forum and of the Zapatista network in order to identify the most desirable way to organize social movements at a global and local level. The third proposition, based on the 'transcalar' use of law in the Narmada Valley struggle and by the anti-sweatshop movement in Mexico, offers a set of strategies and methods that can make the work of social movements more effective. Finally the fourth proposition identifies the legal skills developed by the Movement of the Landless in its struggle against a hegemonic and neoliberal conception of private property in Brazil. <heading>A conceptual approach of law and civil society activism: a critical assessment of the 'Subaltern Cosmopolitan Legality' theory </heading>The aim of this proposition is to shed light on the prospects and possibilities for social movements which work for the betterment of life in deprived communities of the North and of the South. The Subaltern Cosmopolitan Legality is the resistance against the inequalities produced by a differential of power in a globalized world. It focuses on the resistance from below, by grassroots movements. I consider social movements as the representatives of the Subaltern Cosmopolitan Legality. How does this conceptual framework account for the challenges to law that social movements create? It encompasses a criticism of the dominant thoughts, goes beyond the liberal internationalism of international law, and transcends the constraints of jurisdiction. <fnote>Rajagopal (2003) </fnote>Social movements have the potential to reinvent international law, challenge it, and democratize it. What is the role of law in regulating the power relations in everyday life and what are the impacts of everyday experiences on law? The study of social movements draws from the critical approach to liberal theories of international law, human rights and justice. The study of social movements enables to challenge the dominant legal framework because their resistance is based on a re-appropriation of the authorship of the definition of legality: they act at the border between legality, illegality and non-legality. They link 'everyday forms of power, struggle and institutional politics, including at the national and global levels'. Law is being reshaped in the way social movements use law at every level, depending on what they want to achieve: the local laws are challenged by the use of regional agreements and supranational institutions, international scrutiny and solidarity is called on the local struggles through the use of international legal instruments and NGOs. <fnote>Ibid. 234 </fnote>But international law remains focused on institutional actors and practices. This is precisely where a social movements' perspective clashes with the hegemonic conception of law. Rajagopal argues that the various social movements in the Third World challenge international law in two ways. First, they have their own conceptions of modernity and development that conflict with those of international law. It is a new way of thinking law: how to write resistance into international law? They use the language of human rights as the legal tool and 'discourse' of resistance. It is at the same time part of the dominant legal discourse, but also the strongest asset social movements have in order to achieve their resistance. They propose alternative human rights, different from the ones on which the state focuses, but without conflicting with the state. While the mainstream approach is characterized by a dualist position: either statist or anti-statist, social movements go beyond this duality. Social movements move international law from its institutionalist and formalist realm and propose new definitions of democracy. The neoliberal property rights regime is being rejected by the re-appropriation of resources by the local and by a redefinition of the concept of property which instead of being exclusive becomes inclusive and shared. Second, the global international system is not appropriate and is being transformed at the local level. A social movement perspective brings theoretical challenges to international law. Social movements are identity-based. There is not one definition of social movements since they encompass a plural reality, various actors with various motives and methods of resistance based on different 'political cultures'. This inherent plurality is precisely the challenge to the reductive, universalist and rationalist character of international law. For example, the feminists have shown that the distinction between private and public in the liberal theory was not relevant. <fnote>Ibid. 247-8 </fnote>Finally, instead of the unified political space produced by liberal internationalism, social movements propose 'cultural politics' where identities are related to 'survival strategies'. <fnote>Ibid. 243 </fnote>What does this new definition of the political mean for international law? Social movements 'reveal the limitations of a Kantian liberal world order based primarily on individual autonomy and rights, and a realist world order based primarily on state sovereignty'. <fnote>Ibid. 245 </fnote><heading>The most desirable approach for social movements on the 'law and civil society activism': the case of the World Social Forum at a global level and the Zapatista network at a 'glocal' level as new types of union with a non-centralized, non-exclusive and non-homogenising structure</heading><heading>The World Social Forum</heading>The World Social Forum is the expression of a counter-hegemonic globalization within which a subaltern cosmopolitan legality which will change legal perspectives is being forged. According to the Porto Alegre Charter of Principles, the World Social Forum cannot organize specific collective actions in its own name in order to preserve its comprehensiveness and inclusiveness. It is not an event, nor a conference, nor a party, nor a NGO, nor a social movement. It has no ideology. Its structure does not correspond to any modern model of political organization. It is 'a forum that facilitates the decisions made by the movements and organizations that take part in it'. <fnote>Santos (2005 : 45-6) </fnote>To borrow Hardt and Negri's framework, the World Social Forum is a place where the 'singularity' of each organization and movement, its uniqueness and the 'commonality' of their main struggle - which aims at challenging hegemonic globalization - are intrinsically linked. Indeed, within the World Social Forum, social movements do not have to be identical to work together. Differences are respected and are not a basis for exclusion. <fnote>Hardt and Negri (2005 : 204) </fnote>Seattle was the first coherent global protest but social movements did not unite under a centralized entity; they were linked together in a network structure. Should social movements concentrate more on the organization of a world forum, with a concrete, feasible program and agenda? Is that necessary in order to be heard and acknowledged? <fnote>Ibid. 288 </fnote>One has to wonder whether the coherence of social movements is desirable. In setting a specific agenda, the risk is that the movement should lose its insurgent nature and spontaneity; that a top-down structure should emerge, provoking the bureaucratization of the forum. The most dangerous pitfall to avoid is the recuperation of the movement by the hegemon. This can only be avoided by rejecting any structure, organization, language used by hegemonic globalization actors and institutions. For example, social movements can be recaptured by the hegemonic discourse through the confusion that persists between them and NGOs. According to Rajagopal, NGOs do not equate to social movements since NGOs are 'institutional actors who derive their legal identity from the national systems where they are incorporated'. Confusing NGOs and social movements narrow the potential of radical change of the latter. It reproduces the liberal categories applied to reality. 'NGOs are formed by English-language-speaking, cosmopolitan local activists who know how to relate to western donors (who provide most of the NGO funding) and write fundraising proposals, while social movements activists do not often have this power'. <fnote>Rajagopal (2003 : 259) </fnote><fnote>Ibid. 261 </fnote>There is a 'Western bias in the NGO world' since they are dependent on foreign funding, which gives a certain authority to the donor. Growing in size implies a managerial and bureaucratic shift in the structure of the NGO. As a result they lose their flexibility and ability to innovate. <heading>The Zapatista network</heading>The Zapatista solidarity network analysed by Olesen is an example of infrastructure that challenges the confusion of social movements and NGOs. It is an original form of network created after the indigenous Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) uprising in Chiapas on 1 January 1994, in response to the NAFTA trade agreement. The Zapatista solidarity network's first aim was to call for a peaceful solution to the conflict between the Mexican army and the EZLN. The network relies on international solidarity as a protection against the national authorities. Its 'information circuit' strategy is based on the production, gathering, processing and distribution of the information that will be consumed abroad through the Internet. Communication is the main tool of the Zapatistan revolution because it is physical communication at the local level between the peasants, indigenous people and members of the network, and also mediated communication at a global level with any individual, NGO or social movement which is interested for various reasons in the Zapatistan struggle. This horizontal and decentred network does not depend on a hierarchical authority. Leadership positions rotate, giving the impression of a 'vacuum of authority at the centre'. <fnote>Olesen (2004) </fnote><fnote>Hardt and Negri (2006 : 85) </fnote>This type of centrality distinguishes between core, peripheral and transitory actors. The movement has never sought secession from the state of Mexico nor political power, nor sovereignty. Network relationships and democratic practices define a type of life in common that the movement wants to share with the world through messages of solidarity. <heading>The strategies and methods that can make the work of civil society organizations more effective: the anti-sweatshop movement of Kukdong and the Narmada Valley's struggle and their 'transcalar' use of law</heading>Can the un/re-thinking of law occur within subaltern cosmopolitanism and under what conditions? What are the most effective strategies? Different aspects of law need to be conceptualized in order to identify the best strategies. Santos distinguishes between four dimensions of legality. Legal mobilization includes legal, illegal and non-legal actions. The local, national and global scales are important in so far as mobilization is often 'transcalar'. The 'rival legal knowledges' (indigenous people, peasants, women, minorities, religious groups...) should be conceptualized and included in the struggle against the official state and regulatory law. The legal temporal dimension is composed of contrasting time frames (the instantaneous time of financial capital, the long-term temporality of colonialism, and the longest duration of ecological deterioration). All these dimensions need to be considered in order to frame social movements' strategies. <fnote>Santos (2005 : 30-1) </fnote>According to Rajagopal, social movements have an eclectic, opportunistic and strategic attitude towards international law and institutions when they can use it at the local scale. <fnote>Rajagopal (2003 : 252) </fnote>This section will examine two examples of the 'transcalar' use of law as a strategy for social movements to achieve their aims. The 'transcalar' use of law designates an opportunistic approach of the different levels of law (local, national, regional and international) and the use of their conflicting nature by social movements in order to achieve their demands. First, the anti-sweatshop movement in Kukdong, Mexico, analysed by Rodriguez-Garavito is an example of the use and role of law in counter-hegemonic globalization. The movement has framed its struggle within a legal and human rights discourse. The counter-hegemonic legal strategies of the anti-sweatshop movements compete with the hegemonic use of law by transnational corporations as a way to maintain their dominance. It is an example of the 'transcalar' use of law by workers rights movements where national labour laws (hard law), ILO conventions, corporate codes of conduct (soft law) and social clauses in bilateral and regional agreements overlap and conflict. <fnote>Santos (2005 : 64-5) </fnote>Social movements and their targets compete in their use of 'plural legal fields' as they shift among different scales and types of law. <fnote>Ibid. 67 </fnote>Social movements use hard and soft law in a pragmatic and opportunistic way. They call for the softening of corporate-friendly regulation such as TRIPS and for the hardening of social regulations at the same time. They want to improve the regulatory capacity of the state and enforce the powers of international organizations like the ILO. The Kukdong case, in 2001 in Mexico, shows how social movement strategies compelled Nike to enforce its code of conduct by joining the FLA, a voluntary monitoring system of TNCs created by the Clinton administration. <fnote>Ibid. 79 </fnote>At the local level, anti-sweatshop movements sue contractors in the countries where they produce. At the regional level, they campaign to include labour clauses into regional trade agreement such as NAFTA and at the global scale, they lobby at the WTO. Another example is given by Rajagopal's study of the role of law in the Narmada Valley struggle which involved the Narmada Bachao Andolan (NBA) and the Indian Supreme Court. It is a transnational resistance which involved displaced people, local and foreign NGOs, Indians settled abroad, against Western and local corporations, the World Bank, Western governments, the Indian state and federal governments. Various levels of laws were involved such as global institutions and foreign investment laws, national constitutional norms and local, customary and informal rules. It is difficult to judge what the role of law has been over a period of 20 years of struggle. The Supreme Court was in favour of the NBA in the 1990s (by allowing them to contest the height of the dam) but then in favour of the hegemonic actors in the 2000s (by allowing the height of the dam to be increased). <fnote>Ibid. 185 </fnote>The NBA used private and regulatory law concerning the environment and the displacement of people in the first stage of the struggle. International law and transnational coalitions served at moving the World Bank away from the equation. Finally, constitutional law became a crucial ally of the proponents of the dam as the Supreme Court allowed its construction. The emancipatory or regulatory character of law is not a given fact but depends on the context. The outcomes of certain strategies can never be foreseen because of the complexity of the dynamics between different levels of legality, of the political contexts and of the nature of the actors. <heading>The legal skills that should be developed by social movements to counter neoliberalism: the case of the Movement of the Landless' use of juridical actors and institutions in Brazil</heading>Social movements should appropriate legal skills in order to change the hegemonic law that enhances neoliberalism. Social movements should adopt the language of law as it keeps its own communicative, popular, local and emancipatory language. They should include more juridical protagonists and experts in their struggle to gain a social legitimacy in the interpretation and shaping of the law. They should not see courts of law as something intrinsically outside their struggle but incorporate them into it. Law is not regulatory or emancipatory in itself but it is the dynamics between the different levels of law at play, the spatiotemporal contexts and how they are used that define the nature of law, which in turn shapes the opportunities of social movements. The MST's struggle proved its 'ability to convert movement energy into juridical energy'. It used the skills of various juridical actors in order to defend its claims and bring legal change. The main obstacles to the acquisition of legal skills by social movements are the contrasts between movements and juridical temporalities, logics, languages, methods and aims. Social movements expect outcomes on the short-term, their action is locally situated and often illegal; they need to be exposed to the public opinion through the media in order to be protected from local authorities; they use a popular language, pragmatic methods and have emancipatory claims. <fnote>Ibid. 219 </fnote>The MST focused on the illegal occupation and redistribution of private agricultural lands in Brazil. The MST's collaboration with juridical actors changed legality in practice by the enforcement of existing laws; created challenging interpretations of rights and had them institutionalized through jurisprudence; and challenged the juridical temporality by reducing it to that of social movements. <fnote>Ibid. 220 </fnote>It was first distrustful of any juridical actors and institutions for fear of being dispossessed of their claims and struggle. At the same time, it was impossible to keep their action outside legality: the occupation of land and its claim was entirely embedded into a juridical issue. That is why in the early 1990s, the movement developed a 'sophisticated reactive juridical strategy'. Their main legal skill consists in the concentration of legal talents and resources. It is therefore well-organized, structured and relies on an extensive network. <fnote>Ibid. 224 </fnote>For example, the National Network of Popular Lawyers (RENAP) works with the MST and makes the link between the action of the movement and the juridical sphere. The network helps the movement by constitutionalizing progressive laws and spread new doctrines. The publication of the RENAP's review contributes to the diffusion of the claims of the movements but also of the legal skills developed by these lawyers among the broader national community of lawyers. <fnote>Ibid. 237 </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>The first proposition aimed at underlying the importance of the 'Subaltern Cosmopolitan Legality' theory as the main framework within which social movements should think themselves and their relation with the hegemonic legality. The second proposition advocated for the organization of social movements in a coherent but fluid way at the same time, which would enable them to challenge the pervasiveness of neoliberalism through its comprehensiveness and inclusiveness. The third proposition pointed at the transcalar use of law as an effective strategy. The fourth proposition suggested that social movements should interiorize juridical actors and institutions as one of their skills. I would finally conclude by saying that the aim of social movements is to achieve global reform without being recaptured by the neoliberal ideology. 