<heading>Introduction</heading>In this essay I will try to assess whether it is possible, within the current Western framework, to think of a theory of natural-nonhuman rights. Does the anthropocentric dimension of our Western civilization allow us to think of natural-nonhumans as rights holders? Can the consumptive and exploitative structure of the Western model of life, which considers development as against nature, shift to a preservationist one? The emergence of the concepts of sustainable development in international law can be seen as a first step towards this end. But these notions are still focused on the well-being of the human species: sustainable development, the conservation of natural resources and wilderness for its needs are the concern of the current environmental policies. The preservation of the environment per se is not taken into account. We need an environmental ethic based on a rational theory which thinks the ways to live in harmony with our environment. Is the language of rights the appropriate one or should we shift to another one, an environmental rationale? The first section envisages the origins of the Western conception of nature and assesses its implications in the dominant discourse of human rights. The second one explores the possibilities of a nonanthropocentric approach of nature's rights. The third part suggests 'weak anthropocentrism' as a framework that reconcile rationality and rights of nature. <heading>I/ Is the Western dominant discourse of human rights fundamentally anthropocentric and in opposition to nature? </heading><heading>The origins of the conceptualisation of the human against nature</heading>Since Christianity replaced paganism 2000 ago, humans have only shown disrespect or indifference towards nature, nature had to be mastered. The Genesis, which tells about an absolute transcendent God who made man in his image, also dictates men how to behave with nature: master it, subdue it in order to multiply. It grants rights to humans over nature and exhorts them to exercise it by force and fear. It allows men to consume nature. The fact that Adam gave names to the animals gave him power over them. It is the 'source of Western man's ill treatment of nature'. Christianity is anthropocentric in the sense that God is given a human shape, inscribing divinity in human nature. <fnote>Passmore (1974 : 6) </fnote><fnote>Ibid. 9 </fnote>In Europe, the Enlightenment, an intellectual movement that spread throughout the 18 th century, highlights the central role of the reason - seen as the supreme authority - in the emancipation of the rational person from the church. Now emancipated from the yoke of religious beliefs, man does not lose his god-like superiority, but it is relocated in human's reason. This notion has been developed from Augustine, Descartes to Kant; and its echo reached the 19 th century with the Hegelian assessment that the real is the rational and the rational is the real. The world is viewed as a teleological system; it means that the whole world is moving, living towards one end, the human. The ability of humans to know the world and nature through the categories of the reason means having power on it. Modern science desacralised nature when it considered it as a scientific object. The reification of nature was a necessary step in the construction of nature as a mere branch of scientific studies. Science and technology became the saviours of mankind, the secular religion of progress. These features of the Western civilization are present in the capitalist as well as in the communist political and economic systems. Both the capitalist and the communist systems of production and consumption are based on the satisfaction of human needs through intensive industrial machinery. The combination of science and technology is also the union of a theoretical and an empirical way to know the world. The Western tradition of science began in the 11 th century, when Arabic and Greek scientific works were translated into Latin. By the end of the 15 th century, it is the superiority of European technology that enabled such nations as Spain and Portugal to colonize entire hemispheres. From the 19 th century onwards, the principle, inherited from Bacon, that scientific knowledge means technological power over nature, has been conscientiously followed everywhere in the world. <fnote>White (2005 : 11-13) </fnote><heading>To what extent does this conception of the human set the discourse of human rights in opposition to nature? </heading>The UDHR is directly inspired by the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789, which is the direct product of the Enlightenment thought. The idea of human dignity gives its abstract and universal character to human rights and makes them 'indivisible, interdependent, and illimitable as well as universal'. So, if the respect of the dignity present in each and every human is so important that it actually founds something so crucial as human rights, how can a human being value so much the notion of dignity for him/herself and deny it to other forms of life? While racism has been eliminated as a legitimate value, specism is not questioned at all. The UDHR does not change anything in the old assumption that human beings are at the centre of the universe, as if they were the only valuable inhabitants in it, the only ones who matter, at the top of a hierarchy of forms of life. On the contrary, the UDHR by recognizing the property right as a human right (art. 17), inscribes the possessive individual as a universal standard and objectifies the environment of humans as a mere property. It reproduces the colonialist outlook that the White-Christian-Bourgeois-Male has about the world by personifying the global capital. <fnote>Baxi (2006 : 122) </fnote><fnote>Human rights derive from the struggle to give rights to the bourgeois entrepreneur face to the nobility and the unjust privileges it held. Locke made the private property right one of the first human rights. </fnote><fnote>Baxi (2006: 158) </fnote>We need a profound consciousness shift in order to be able to move from a "speciecentric" attitude to a biocentric one. This shift implies that we stop thinking ourselves only as part of a political community of shared interests but also as part of a wider biological community. The current environmental crisis is the direct consequence of the ill treatment of nature. The awareness of the role of human action in this crisis highlights the necessity to take the needs of the biosystem into consideration. <heading>II/ Is a nonanthropocentric approach of nonhuman rights adequate to protect nature? </heading><heading>Can we extend the concept of animals' rights to the whole biosystem? </heading>The concept of animals' rights is anthropocentric. For Kant and other philosophers of the Enlightenment, cruelty towards animals was wrong only because it might induce insensitivity towards human suffering. There was nothing wrong with cruelty to animals in itself. These conclusions were based on the one hand on the fact that animals had no reason therefore no rights and on the other hand on the fact that human civilization would be impossible if men thought their relationship with animals governed by moral considerations. It would be wrong then to kill animals for food, harness them for work and ground scientific progress on experiments on animals. All these actions are the pillars of civilization. But today it is generally agreed that it is wrong to inflict unnecessary pain to animals. This acceptance of moral limits to the relationship between men and animals could be extended to nature as a whole. However, the conclusion is not that it is wrong to kill animals but only that it is wrong to cause unnecessary suffering to them. The foundation of this moral attitude is that men and animals are more alike than the Christian tradition believes, especially on their capacity to suffer. Cruelty to animals was condemned on humanitarian grounds. But only the animals whose suffering is most human-like are protected by law, leaving insects and plants without protection. Arguing that animals have rights may be the way to treat all species on an equal basis, as opposed to the discriminating suffering argument. The truth is that it is rather men who have lost rights and no longer have power over animals. 'But that men have lost rights over them does nothing to convert animals into bearers of rights, any more than we give rights to a river by withdrawing somebody's right to pollute it'. <fnote>Passmore (1974: 113) </fnote><fnote>Darwin proved the common origin of species and the affinity between the human specie and the other species in 'The origin of species' published in 1859. </fnote><fnote>Passmore (1974: 116) </fnote>On what basis can we grant rights to natural-nonhumans? Can we extend rights to all living beings without emptying the concept of rights of its meaning? This question is hard to tackle. First, a right is founded on a need and an interest. The right to food is based on the vital need to eat and on the fact that it is everyone's interest to eat well in order to live well. A right can be claimed. Do trees have needs, interests? Can they go to court? Second, the bearer of rights is also a bearer of responsibilities translated into a judiciary system. It is hard to imagine how a river would take responsibility of an overflow that killed people. As a conclusion, a certain degree of 'self-reflexivity' is necessary in order to be subject of human rights. Being 'human selves' today equates to be 'human rights selves'. Consequently, natural-nonhuman beings are not nonhuman selves because they lack self-reflexivity, and they cannot be author, subject of rights. <fnote>Baxi (2006: 117) </fnote>There lies the dilemma. The possession of reason and language made humans think that they are superior to other forms of life. If we grant rights, a rational construct, to nature, the debate remains in this hierarchical framework of rational and non-rational entities, without any substantial conceptual progression. Should we then abandon completely our ways of thinking and shift to another paradigm? <heading>Can we attribute an intrinsic value to natural entities and abandon an anthropocentric discourse? </heading>It is commonly acknowledged that giving intrinsic value to nature is desirable, but that it is too difficult to justify, and that it cannot be used as an argument. The argument for the defence of the environment cannot be founded on its intrinsic value in the current Western legal and moral systems. This is why it is preferable to reject a nonanthropocentric position. After all, human behaviour is involved because the language of rights is a human and rational construct. We have to find a realistic and feasible way to give a standing to natural entities without falling into the trap of the intrinsic value debate. Instead of appealing to the intrinsic value of nonhuman entities in order to protect the environment from the exploitative human attitude, Norton refers to 'the human consciousness and the rules it implies' as the bases for the criticism of the destruction of nature. We do not have to go out of rationality but we can find valid arguments within a rational framework, against those of destructive behaviours. Two opposite rationalities can debate and one can win over the other; it is 'easier' to operate a shift of values within the rational framework than to try changing a whole framework. For instance, the idea of human harmony with nature can access the status of value and inform a rational 'world view' compatible with the preservation of nature. <fnote>Norton (2005 : 242) </fnote>The application of the language of rights to nature cannot be separated from a human perspective. <heading>III/ A 'weak anthropocentrism' as the foundation of an environmental ethic? </heading><heading>'Weak anthropocentrism' and its implications in human attitude towards nature</heading>A weak anthropocentrism is adequate to support an environmental ethic by criticizing the individual, consumptive needs and without raising the ontological problem of the intrinsic value of nature. It is a mistake to focus too much on the anthropocentric/nonanthropocentric debate. <fnote>Norton (2005: 227) </fnote>Norton defines anthropocentrism not with reference to the position taken on where to place value (humans as the origin of value and nature as merely instrumental to his interests) but concentrates more on the notion of human interest, which is the expression of preferences. He distinguishes between 'felt preferences' (any desire or need) and 'considered preferences' ('any desire or need that a human individual would express after careful deliberation' and after 'altering his felt preferences so that they are consonant with' 'a rationally accepted world view'). <fnote>Norton (2005: 230) </fnote>On this basis, he defines two forms of anthropocentrism. 'Strong anthropocentrism' takes unquestioned felt preferences as determining value. A value system which places consumption as the greatest societal value will consider the exploitation of nature as the behaviour that meets the society's 'interests'. Weak anthropocentrism provides a basis for criticism of value systems and for 'value formation embodied in the criticism and replacement of felt preferences with more rational ones'. If we consider that values are formed by contact with nature, nature can be seen as the 'teacher of human values', the 'source of inspiration in value formation'. Weak anthropocentrism is auto-reflexive. It is weak because instead of putting human beings at the top of a natural hierarchy, it places them inside a broad and interdependent ecosystem. It is anthropocentric because it is a reflection about human behaviour by a rational framework. It does not resort to the difficult justification of a nonanthropocentric discourse based on the intrinsic value of nonhuman entities. Indeed, humans are still the authors of any discourse, and the authors of the actions that harm nature. <fnote>Norton (2005: 231) </fnote><fnote>Norton (2005: 233) </fnote><heading>The concept of 'guardianship' and the 'legal-procedural' approach of nature's rights could be the practical application of the 'weak anthropocentrism' theory</heading>Throughout legal history the successive extensions of rights to new entities were 'unthinkable': it was unthinkable that children could have rights when they were considered as incomplete human beings and less than a person; it was unthinkable to grant rights to women because it was believed that they were not worthy enough to receive faith and have reason; it was unthinkable to consider Blacks, Indians, disabled people as perfectly humans and hence to give them rights equal to those held by the "White-Christian-Male". Today, inanimate entities hold rights: corporations, municipalities, states. A corporation is a legal person who can sue and be represented in court against another inanimate person as well as against a human person. It has the rights of free speech, property, reputation. A corporation does not stand in the court, a lawyer does. What is so unthinkable in the idea of nature's rights? <fnote>Stone (2005: 9-11) </fnote><fnote>I am not advocating for the extension of rights to corporation and I totally agree with the Baxi's critique of 'market-friendly human rights' and the Grear's concept of 'corporate human rights distorsion' (Grear, 2006: 171-199), but corporations rights and legal personality are a fact. </fnote>Stone solves the dilemma of ascribing rights to natural entities that cannot claim or defend their rights, entities that do not have interests. He focuses on the 'legal-operational aspects' of rights. First, having rights means that some public authority is able to intervene in situations where these rights are threatened and 'to have a legally recognized worth and dignity in its own right, and not merely to serve as means to benefit "us" (whoever the contemporary group of rights-holders may be)'. It means that the holder of legal rights acts on its behalf and gets compensation for an injury made to it. It exists jurally and does not need a third party to represent it. Consequently, it is clear that the environment does not have rights. <fnote>Stone (2005:13) </fnote>A natural object is rightless because it does not have a standing. It is taken into account only to the extent that the rights of the property-owning individual are concerned. None of the natural objects are holders of legal rights. They are merely objects for humans to conquer, master and use. They are conserved in order to guarantee our consumption and enjoyment, but are not preserved in order to guarantee their own existence. We should consider natural entities as legal incompetents and create a 'guardianship'. The guardian is entitled to raise the natural entity's right in the entity's name. This legal mechanism already exists for human beings who are not able to manage their matters and for corporations. <fnote>Stone (2005:16-20) </fnote>We have to recognize the cost of pollution to the environment itself and not only the one borne by humans. To do that, it is necessary to personify the environment in a damage calculation approach, in order to prove the monetary value in court. It is a difficult task since the damages to natural entities are priceless. But it is true that the rationale of the legal system is to create a monetary worth for things that do not have any of their own. For instance it is the law of copyright that provides a precise economical value to a literary work. The same process can be applied to natural entities. The damages can be measured by the cost implied in restoring the environment's wholeness as it was before humans injured it. <fnote>Stone (2005: 21-23) </fnote>Stone does not advocate for an extreme and unrealistic situation where no action could be undertaken in relation to any natural entity. The 'Co-existence of man and his environment means that each is going to have to compromise for the better of both'. For instance, pollution can occur only temporarily, when a social need is really high. <fnote>Stone (2005: 26) </fnote>Stone finally gives the fundamental reason why it is not inappropriate to apply the language of rights to the environment. The language of rights does not limit itself to the expression of rules. It is endowed with a meaningful force that pervades our thoughts and social and legal rules. It is important because the new ethics we need in order to give an intrinsic value to the environment will emerge only from a set of new attitudes, which arise from a different way of thinking and seeing the world. This is a long process which should not be started from the outset by giving an intrinsic value to nature in a way that would not be justifiable, but by giving manageable rights to natural entities. <fnote>Stone (2005 : 31-32) </fnote><heading>Conclusion:</heading>The aim of this essay was to show how possible it is to gradually change the way we traditionally think the world. I considered the possibility of giving rights to nature and analysed on what grounds. I tried to justify it on a moral then on a legal basis. I finally opted for a 'weak anthropocentric' approach which does not require the abandonment of the rational framework, essential for human thought, but its adjustment from its pedestal into a rationality that considers life in harmony with nature as a fundamental value. 