<heading>Introduction:</heading>The concept of security has substantially evolved since the end of the Cold War. Far from a traditional, realistic, militarised and state-centred concept, the debate now includes a comprehensive approach to security problems. This evolution can be seen as a real opportunity to minimize the importance of the sovereign state in the concern problematic of human security. But it also contains several pitfalls. If everything that causes a decline in human well-being is labelled a 'security' threat, the term loses any analytical usefulness and becomes vaguely synonymous with 'bad'. In this essay I will try to question the polemical nature of global security through the securitization of the environment. The notion of environmental security is considered today as an issue of global security. The problem is that both concepts of environmental security and global security are used as if they were self-evident. What are the implications of the securitization of the environment on the perception of what global security is? Behind the label of 'global security', we imply not a utopian consensual cooperation of all the nations toward the betterment of everyone's security, but rather a discourse, a way for the powers to impose their views and maintain the status quo. In order to challenge the accepted concept of global security, I analyze it as a discourse as defined by Foucault. Then, in order to further analyze how this specific discourse develops, I focus the study on the implication of the securitization of the environment, more precisely of 'sustainable development' as a narrative within the global security discourse. <heading>I/ Is 'global security' a discourse? </heading><heading>What do we commonly understand by 'global security'? </heading>A security issue is an issue that threatens one's security and life; and which is politically responded to. What is the difference between global security focused on human security or international human rights law and global justice? Is global security the product of the extension, horizontally (considering more than the military power) and vertically (including referent objects other than the state), of the traditional conception of security, by the incorporation of more levels of analysis and more issues? Does global security comply with the holistic principle according to which the security of every actor is intrinsically linked? The difficulty in the task of defining 'global security' arises when the limits between security and the infinite number of threats that constitute life have to be justified. All threats to human-beings are potentially threats to security. How does a threat become a security concern? Traditionally, security has been analysed from a Western historical perspective, as a state-centred-military concept opposed to human security. Security is a questioned concept, whose meaning is subjective and fluid, changing along with spatio-temporal context, and if a physical, economic or psychological approach is taken. For instance, realists interpret environmental security as access to resources and the use of the environment as a weapon; pluralists focus on the role of international legal regimes and organizations; and structuralists understand the linkages between northern over-consumption, southern poverty and environmental degradation as provoking environmental insecurity. How to think then a coherent concept of global security? Risks are everywhere but of various intensity and different for everyone. The supposed universal applicability and validity of the concept must be questioned and challenged. I want to undertake this task by questioning the concept of global security as a discourse. In the current interdependent context, trans-, supra- and sub-national and national entities are actors which interact with each others. The different situations in the North and in the South, where people are burdened by debt, political unrest, environmental degradation, ineffective administrative structures, question the concept of global security as an abstraction imposed to a complex and differential reality. In order to challenge the concept of 'global security', I will analyze it as a discourse. First, we need to understand what a discourse as defined by Foucault is, and then I will try to apply this notion to 'global security'. <heading>What is a discourse ? </heading>What is reality, what is the world? The world and our consciousness of it are effects of the representations we have of it, as Kant theorized the way the categories of the mind project themselves to encompass what we perceive as reality. According to Foucault, discourses are bodies of knowledge and produce disciplines - intellectual and institutional. Foucault was referring to science, medicine and sociology to describe intellectual disciplines, and to the prison, the school, the hospital as disciplinary institutions of social control. In this essay, I consider International Law, International Relations theory as intellectual disciplines and the system of the United Nations, NATO and conferences like the 1972 World Commission on Environment and Development as disciplinary institutions. Indeed, International Law has been analyzed as the reproduction of a colonial type of power relations between the North (which possesses expertise and knowledge) and the South. The concept of discourse highlights the relations between disciplines (bodies of knowledge) and disciplinary practices (institutions of social control). Global security is a discourse in the sense that it refers to a specific area of social knowledge. It is everything that constrains and enables at the same time to write, speak and think within a particular discipline and historical period. Historically contextualized, a discourse is therefore a specific way to say, write, think and construct the truth. There is no universal truth about what global security is. It is a discourse within the framework of a specific relation between a discipline and disciplinary institutions that creates a specific reality. Discourses function according to power relations. The language, through which the global security issues are formulated, is an instance of power. Discourse highlights the role of power in the production of knowledge. There is an essential link between power relations and their capacity to produce the truths we live in. Truth is the product of scientific knowledge and expertise and is produced through power, and power is exercised through the production of truth. <fnote>McHoul and Grace (1995) </fnote>These 'politics of production' of social reality reflect the disparity of scientific and managerial expertise between the North and the South. <fnote>Baxi (2006: 98) </fnote><heading>Why is 'global security' a discourse? </heading>The strength and particularity of a discourse is to make a polemical notion look non-polemical, to make power relations look like consensus. This is why 'global security' is a discourse. An issue becomes a security issue when it is viewed and treated as an urgent priority in a political discourse. It is a matter of 'speech act'. Security is not an objective concept but depends very much on one's capacity to make his/her fears or interests heard. Even if global security is a concept whose aim is to shift the authorship of security issues from the sovereign state to local, regional or global non-state entities, the state remains the actor who secures threatened people: it chooses which issue to prioritize. <fnote>Hough (2004: 17) </fnote>Security is subjective and relative to the politicisation of particular issues which provokes their rise and fall in the international agenda. The analysis of the behaviour of the actors reflects the meaning of the securitization of a particular issue. <fnote>Mansbach and Vasquez (1983) </fnote>Global security is paradoxically highly subjective: it is the assertion by a subject that an issue is of global concern for the security of everyone. The North seeks to defend its own interests by convincing the other actors that it is their interest too. The others cannot refuse to see it as global as soon as it is said to be so. Their reluctance to act in this imposed way is hence delegitimised as an egoist act. Furthermore, global security is a discourse embedded in the discipline of international law. This relation is essential to the reiteration of global security discourse since international law, as a symbolic and post-colonial tool of domination, provides the words, the institutions, the methods and the framework necessary to deploy a discourse. Every aspects of the discourse have to be defined into legal terms in order to gain the authoritative legitimacy necessary to be imposed to the international community. For instance, 'sustainable development' is a legal concept created by the 1972 World Commission on Environment and Development and elaborated by the 1987 Bruntland Report which followed. This commission and the report gathered lawyers, experts, governments' representatives and scientists, mainly from the North. First originated in soft law instruments, sustainable development has been reinforced in hard law instruments like the Kyoto Protocol entered into force in 2005. A legal discourse is produced within a certain temporality which corresponds to the long-term temporality of international law. Indeed, global security is a concept rooted in the rejection of a historically situated notion of security originated in the Cold War period, in response to a new understanding of threats to security as global. <heading>II/ Is the securitization of the environment a narrative in the 'global security' discourse? </heading><heading>How and why the environment has been securitized </heading>Environmental threats are global threats and thus concern global security - that is the security of every political entity (the state, the individual, the community). I call them a narrative in the global security discourse, not to deny their global scope and significance, but to highlights that despite having always been global in essence (climate change and the depletion of the ozone layer are borderless threats) they have been characterized as an issue of 'global security' only in a recent historical period and context. It means that the construction of this reality does not aim at saying the truth about the world, but at enunciating a discourse that brings a new area (the environment) within the framework of discipline (security studies) and disciplinary institutions (NATO, the Security Council, the CIA). Why has the environment been securitized? What does it tell us about the nature of the global security discourse? Why is the North concerned with environmental tensions in the South? The economical interests (trade, new markets) of the North lie in the well-being of the South. Political stability in the South has a direct effect on the security of the North. Environmental problems in the South (the deforestation in Amazonia) spill over the entire planet. Environmental degradation, population growth and poverty can trigger mass migrations and destabilize entire regions. The awareness that problems in the South could have repercussions on the security of people in the North brought new environmental issues to global scrutiny. What was just a cost became first an 'environmental problem' and then an environmental security issue. The realization of the global nature of an environmental threat led to its securitization. These problems did not occur in the South to be exported towards the North. They have been caused by northern democracies and concern the globe. What does it tell us in terms of the interpretation of global security as a discourse? Isn't the securitization of environmental issues by the North a means to get rid of the responsibility of the current environmental crisis? <heading>How does the rhetoric of 'sustainable development' fit in the discourse of 'global security'? </heading>Sustainable development can be used in the global security discourse because of its vague and contradictory definition and interpretation. It is synonymous of ecologically sustainable but can also be interpreted as sustained growth, successful development. There is a theoretical weakness in the concept of sustainable development: what is to be sustained? For whom? How long? The value (and danger) of the concept 'lies in its ability to generate an operational consensus between groups with fundamentally different answers to these questions'. There is no consensus but only tradeoffs and negotiations where the most powerful impose their views. <fnote>Lélé (1995) </fnote>Sustainable development translates the will to sustain growth and hides it behind the goal of ecological sustainability: It puts the blame on the poorest: Lélé identifies the linkage between environmental degradation and poverty as one of the premises of the mainstream sustainable development thinking. It is based on the traditional development objective of increasing the productivity of all resources (human, natural and economic) in the South and maintaining the standard of living in the North. The strategy of 'visibility' is deployed in order to put the blame of global environmental security on the poorest and take the responsibility for the environmental crisis from the North. The adjustments will then be made in the South and not in the North. <fnote>Ibid. 231 </fnote><fnote>Escobar (1995) </fnote>The notion of 'sustainable development' is a tool in this discourse of global security to compel the developing nations not to industrialize their economy. Global security is used as a discourse in order to preserve the status quo in the international relations. Sustainable development is a narrative in this discourse because of the origin of the concept, its contextualization and the consequences of its application in the power relations between the North and the South. It endorses the application of a double standard to reality in spite of a discourse which calls itself universal: The US has not ratified the Kyoto Protocol. Issues of global security do not come to the international agenda out of a consensus, but are put forward from a certain voice, through an identified speech: sustainable development had been created by the North to limit global warming and the depletion of the ozone layer. The North says that we are all - as part of an interrelated system - concerned and threatened by global environmental risk and proposes the ways to enhance the security of everyone by fighting these risks in a certain way. It is the imposition to the South of a restricted industrialization, which is said to be the only way to stop global environmental risks. As a result, the South will never industrialize in a way susceptible to challenge the North's wealth and leadership. Another way - precisely not proposed as a fair solution - would be that the North - mainly responsible for the current environmental situation - should subsidise the conversion of the Southern industrial apparatus into an eco-friendly one. To what extent can a concept like sustainable development contribute to global security taken in the broad sense of food security, health security, environmental security and the security of the future generations, all at the same time? The promise of sustainable development is to reconcile an equitably distributed growth with the preservation of the environment for the present and future generations. <fnote>The Bruntland Report (1987) </fnote><quote>'Are we talking about a concept at all or a justification of neoliberalism'? 'Is this not simply another case of Western expert knowledge being imposed' on the world? </quote><fnote>Pettiford and Curley (1999: 133) </fnote>The scientific and managerial expertise of the scientists, businessmen and lawyers of the North enforce a cultural hegemony by using their power of speech. Sustainable development, by claiming to secure today's and tomorrow's worlds, preserves the status quo without substantial modifications to a neoliberal consensus which preserves the security of the market. 'The connections between sustainable development and security, such as they exist, can only really be evaluated in terms of how the former is being implemented, and how it might be changing things, in concrete contexts'. <fnote>Ibid. </fnote>Escobar talks about the 'ideology of sustainable development' which is related to the modification of practices (the assessment of the implications of projects), social situations (the acknowledgement of the possibility of a bottom-up approach) and economic and technological factors (the possibility to measure the ecological degradation). <fnote>Escobar (1995: 194) </fnote>Sustainable development is part of the problematization of the relationship between nature and society as a global survival issue. The sustainability of the global ecosystem has been problematized and defined in international law according to the perception of those who rule it. Liberals believe that all are equally responsible for the environmental degradation. The sustainable development discourse fosters the 'economy of visibility': it puts the blame of environmental degradation on the poorest without acknowledging that the problem is rooted in the developmental cause of the pressure of the environment of poor people. The visibility and blame are shifted from the 'large industrial polluters' from the North to the impoverished communities of the South. <heading>What are the outcomes of the imposition of 'global security' as a discourse? </heading><quote>'If all countries followed the industrial example, five or six planets would be needed to serve as 'sources' for the 'inputs' and 'sinks' for the waste of economic progress'</quote><fnote>Sachs (1997: 292) </fnote>Turning the environmental crisis into an issue of global security and proposing 'sustainable development' as a solution is a way for the North to protect its own security, which is based on the security of the market (protected by the impediment that sustainable development measures will put to the industrialization of the South), and of the 'global consumer classes'. Sustainable development serves their interest and sustains economical growth. The rhetoric of environmental security is an excuse to continue the North longstanding practice of military and economic intervention and to write into international law. The extensive focus on the South is a way for the North to deny its own responsibility for the deteriorating state of the planet. <quote>'The North has seized hold of environmental issues by using them to cloak its own security concerns'.</quote><fnote>S. Saad (1995) </fnote>By redefining the environment, the North imposes its economic, political and legal norms and lifestyles to the rest of the world. The outcome of the imposition of 'global security' as a discourse through the securitization of the environment is the preservation of the status quo and the reproduction of the current power relation. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>Analyzing global security as a discourse enables us to think of its conditions of implementation and its effects in the maintenance of the international status quo. Contextualized within a specific power relation between the North and the South which rely on a specific international legal system, global security loses its consensual appearance and reveals the features of domination at stake. It is only one among the various discourses that shape socio-legal international relations. Indeed, power relations take place in a linkage of discourses. Analysing narratives on environment securitization and on sustainable development allowed to highlight how complex and intertwined the notions at play are. 