<heading>Introduction</heading><quote>"The law whereof this summary is made, is of ancient usages warranted by holy scripture; and because it is generally given to all, it is therefore called Common." Sir Edward Coke</quote><fnote>Coke, "Deo, Patriae, Tibi" preface to part 9[1613] of the Reports, supra note 5 taken from Raffield, Paul: Contract, Classicism and the Common-Weal, Coke's Reports and the foundations of the modern English Constitution, Law and Literature, Vol 17, Issue 1, University of California Press for the Cardozo School of Law, 2005 </fnote>The common law has long been thought of as an unchanging body of common sense and reasoning fundamental to the heritage of English people. The common law is the foundation of the English legal system, described by Sir Edward Cooke as "a maxim of policy, and trial by experience" and as having been "refined and perfected by the wisest men in former succession of ages". Sir John Davies wrote that "the customary law of England.... Doth far excel our written laws." Therefore it can be seen that the primacy of the common law is of fundamental importance. <fnote>Le Quart Part des Reportes (1604), sig. B2v.Cf. Co. Inst., vol. I, p379 taken from Baker, J.H: An Introduction to English Legal History, Butterworths, Fourth Edition, 2002 </fnote><fnote>ibid </fnote><fnote>Le Primer Report des Cases en Ireland (1615) taken from Baker, J.H: An Introduction to English Legal History, Butterworths, Fourth Edition, 2002 </fnote>The common has developed from its earliest origins of the Druids, the introduction of written laws from the Anglo-Saxons and the expansion and modification of the Norman invasion. The common law came under threat from the civil law embodiment of the Corpus Civilis Iuris of the Emperor Justinian and the revival of Roman law. During the sixteenth and seventeenth century the legitimacy of the common law was in direct conflict with the imperialist claims of the King, escalating during the rule of Charles I; ultimately leading to civil war, the execution of the King and the effective creation of the English constitution as we know it today. Throughout the development of the common law it has undoubtedly been subjected to numerous influences and theologies affecting its direction and development. One of the most influential is of course the Judaeo-Christian theology, an emanation of the natural law theory, its significant influence resulted in the words of William Dugdale, that "the Common Laws of England are grounded upon the Law of God". In order to determine the importance of the Judaeo-Christian theology I shall examine its influence upon the development of the common law and the secular legal profession, in particular focusing upon its period of greatest influence and importance during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. <fnote>Dugdale, William </fnote>In order to create a more accurate representation of its importance, I shall also undertake a comparative analysis with two other importance influences upon the common law. Firstly the classical Graeco-Roman theology, which arguably influenced the development of the common law in challenging the imperium of the Tudor monarchs and became a basis for the legitimacy of the modern secular legal profession. Secondly I shall also analyse the influence of the symbolic nature of the common law, that its legitimacy is borne from its antiquity and history and its utopic nature. In undertaking these comparative analyses I hope to discover the true contextual importance of Judaeo-Christian theology. <heading>Judaeo-Christian Theology</heading>Judaeo-Christian theology is the basic principle of the indivisibility of law and God. Writers during the early modern period aligned the English law with God, Fulbecke stating "where God is not there is no truth, there is no light, there is no Lawe" thus demonstrating the English constitutions indivisibility of divine law and common law. <fnote>Fulbecke, William: A direction or Preparative to the study of Lawe, London, 1599 </fnote>The Act of Supremacy in 1534 was one of the most fundamental influences upon the common law of England. One effect of the reformation was to abolish the ecclesiastical courts, removing the opportunity of appeal to the Pope. Many common lawyers advocated for the abolition of the church courts at the same time, however this would have required a fusion of canon law and Common law, which was never a feasible proposition. The Judaeo-Christian influence upon the common law can clearly be seen through the practices at the Inns of Court. The Courts symbolic eating rituals and oratory nature were likened to those of monastic origins. The order of dining was described to be "the order of a lawful world, a symbolic order in which Justice, Rule and Law are to be understood to be expressed together through culinary measures, victuals and wine". During dining members would take communion, further aligning the Judaeo-Christian theology and the practice of law. These rituals became fundamental to the teaching of law and legal practice. <fnote>Fulbecke, William: Direction or Preparative to the study of Lawe, London, 1599, epistle, p3 taken from Goodrich, Peter: Commons, Common Land, Common Law, The Journal of Legal History, Vol 12, No.3, Dec 1991 p246-67 </fnote>In essence the relationship between the Inns of Court and the Judeao-Christian theology was the defining influence upon the common law during the sixteenth and seventeenth century. The Act of Supremacy in 1534 resulting in the emancipation of England from the jurisdiction of Rome fundamentally altered the legal and political culture of England. The newly created imperial power of the King created a division between common law and the monarchy; both vying for legitimacy and supremacy. Henry represented himself as Imago Dei and adopted the European jurisprudential stance, quod principi plaucit vigorem legish habet (that which pleases the prince has the force of law), in direct opposition to the common law maxim lex facit regem (Law makes the King). <fnote>The image of God </fnote><fnote>Henry de Bracton, The Laws and Customs of England (1200-68), trans. S.E. Thorne (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1968-77) </fnote>This became an issue of great conflict for the Judaeo-Christian theorists, two competing bodies fighting for divine legitimacy. The failure of natural law to deal with the resultant conflict with the imperium of the King was a significant theme within Titus Andronicus. Following the impact of the Act of Supremacy and increase in Henry's prerogative power forced common lawyers to consider other sources of legitimacy, arguably giving rise to the influence of the Graeco-Roman tradition which I shall deal with shortly. However it would be incorrect to argue that the common law abandoned all Judaeo-Christian influences as this was not the case. <fnote>Raffield, Paul: Titus, Troynovant and the Loss of Justice </fnote>During the rule of Charles I common lawyers continued to oppose the concept of the "intrinsical" prerogative of the King, Coke stating that "it is an act of right, not of grace, that we stand upon". Charles I continued to be at odds with the common law and during his Personal Rule intervened numerous times as to the regulation of the Inns of Court. The outbreak of civil war permanently altered the nature of legal education within the Inns, its role undermined by the rule of Charles I. Following his execution in 1649 a new government was established under Cromwell in the name of Judeao-Christian theology, although its authoritarian nature, isolated those common law, JudeaoChristian scholars from positions of influence. <fnote>Paragraph taken from Lecture Notes </fnote><fnote>1642-1653 </fnote><heading>Other Important Influences </heading>In the political context of the Act of supremacy, it became necessary for the common law to adopt an opposing source of legitimacy in opposition of the monarch. The common law adopted two major theologies in its fight for supremacy; that of the Graceo-Roman theology, based upon community and citizenship and that of the historical supremacy of common law. I shall examine both of these in relation to their impact upon the development of common law and the secular legal profession. <heading>Graeco-Roman Tradition</heading>The Graeco-Roman tradition is one emanating from that a positive law jurisprudential stance. In the political context mentioned above it became necessary for the common law to rely upon a new ideology to assert its constitutional supremacy. As a result contemporary jurists began to rely upon the Graceo-Roman theology as a basis for legitimacy. The theories of justice and fairness described by Aristotle and Plato became the perfect antidote for the authoritarian monarchic rule. The concept of citizenship and the Roman Republican law, Salus Populi Suprema Lex Est ("the welfare of the people is the supreme law") created legitimacy and origin and could therefore provide a much more powerful defence to the imperium of monarchy. <fnote>Aristotle, The Politics </fnote><fnote>Plato, The Republic </fnote>The concepts of righteousness were embodied within the legal profession within the Inns of Court. Fortescue described the Inns as "a Sort of an Academy or Gymnasium, fit for Persons of their Station; where they learn Singing, and all Kinds of Music, Dancing and such other Accomplishments and Diversions". The significance of this is Fortescues endorsement of the works of the Inns from a secular perspective, praising the teaching and ethos of the Inns. The Inns became a manifestation of Plato's ideal state and a symbolic of justice and righteousness. <fnote>Fortescue, De Laudibus Legum Angliae p111 </fnote>Although theories of Graeco-Roman tradition arguably did not command the same importance upon the common law, they represented a move away from Judaeo-Christian philosophy, towards creating a secular legal profession. Despite the religious influences this at least marks a step towards the principles of the modern profession. Finally the influence of justice and righteousness of the Graeco-Roman Tradition were embodied in the claims to liberty and equity from John Lilburne and the Levellers. Following the execution of Charles 1 and the creation of the Commonwealth and Cromwell's Protectorate, Lilburne became the advocate against tyrannical government, writing to Cromwell "insisting that the tyranny of Parliament as well as the tyranny of the monarch was resistible." Although ultimately unsuccessful in his fight against the "absolute Arbitrary Sovereignty" of the commonwealth, Lilburne filled the void left by common law activists and the Inns failure to oppose the increasingly intolerant government. <fnote>Haller & Davies, The Leveller tracts, 1647-1653, "Jonah's Cry", New York: Columbia University Press, 1944, p10 - Lecture Notes </fnote><fnote>Whitelock, Memorials, fo 652 </fnote><heading>Historical Supremacy </heading>The final influence upon the development of the common law is that of the historical supremacy of the common law. Although in many ways this did not develop the common law through change, it was a theory advocated by many eminent contemporary scholars and was widely endorsed against the monarchic imperium. The theory states that strength and indeed unique nature of the English common law is borne out of its antiquity and legitimacy of existence since "time immemorial". In 1470 an English serjeant-at-law maintained that the common law had existed since the creation of the world. The significance of this is noted by Goodrich, that <fnote>Baker, J.H: An Introduction to English Legal History, Butterworths, Fourth Edition, 2002 P1 </fnote><quote>"The indefinite time of the originary refers to a past which was never present; it refers to an archetypal time whose function is iconic and not representative, it can only be personified symbolically since it has neither human nor historical likeness."</quote><fnote>Goodrich, 1S&LS (1992) 7-28 at 11 Taken from lecture notes </fnote>This demonstrates that the reality of the origins of the common law are effectively immaterial as more important is the symbol of antiquity and legitimacy which the system conveys. Essential to the legitimacy of the history of the common law is Cokes argument of the "artificial reason" that the common law is borne out of the knowledge and experience of many before and is tested by the experience of those after. Therefore, "optima regula, qua nulla est verior aut firmior in jure, neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus: no man ought to take it upon himself to be wiser than the laws." This encompasses the theory of the common law as custom, of immemorial, the doctrine of the ancient constitution. <fnote>Coke, Seventh Reports, Calivin's Case; here from the edition of the Reports by Thomas and Fraser (London, 1826), vol IV p6 taken from Pocock, J.G.A: The Ancient Constitution and the Feudal Law, English Historical Thought in the Seventeenth Century, Norton & Company, 1957 p35 </fnote>Imagery of the legitimacy and importance of the common law was showcased through the revels and masques of the Inns of Court. In doing so the members learned oratory skills and performance and created a utopian state The significance of the history and myth of the common law is not in its content or even its practical development of the common law but in its ability to protect the legitimacy of the common law against the encroaching forces of the imperium monarchy. If there is faith and belief in the system it can continue to function and succeed, without that it is nothing. The masques of the Inns of Court, the Shakespearean references to the power of the common law and the mythology of Geoffrey of Monmouth's King Brutus of Troy, all worked together to create the utopian myth of the common law of England. Its value and importance should not be underestimated when considering theories which contributed to the development of the common law. Finally it should be remembered that this legal imagination and mythical idyllic foundation for legitimacy is still used today. The establishment of this mythical, utopian ideal is something that cannot be touched and cannot be challenged, a prospect which should protect the common law for many years to come. <heading>Conclusion </heading>When assessing the development of the common law and the origins of the secular legal profession, it seems clear that the modern constitution as we know it was influenced by a combination of all of these factors. There can be no doubting that the Judaeo-Christian theology had a hugely significant impact upon the development of the early common law. The Judaeo Christian theology provided the common law with its legitimacy and its influence is seen throughout the early ecclesiastical courts and in the teachings at the Inns of Court. The Judeao-Christian theology was fundamental to developing the common law through the teaching at the Inns of Court and provided common lawyers with a theoretical basis to defend the common law against the imperium of the King. Similarly the Graeco-Roman Tradition allowed common lawyers to rely upon an alternative source of legitimacy to battle the Kings prerogative powers. Although such a belief appears to be contradictory to the indivisibility of God and law, many common lawyers believed in the Coalescence of the two theologies, creating a divine based law, advocating ideals of citizenship and the welfare of the state. Finally there is the importance of the image and antiquity of common law. In analysing these three influences a common theme arises of a protection of the common law, rather than a development. All three theologies sought to protect the common law from the imperium of the King and the tyrannical rule of the Commonwealth and Protectorate. The Judeao-Christian influences within the Inns of Court helped to develop the common law through oratory, teaching and dining and created a body of lawyers and a utopian state. When deciding upon which was the most important influence, the historical antiquity of the common law is surely the most deserving. The significance of the immemorial nature of the common law is not a tangible matter, but a utopic ideal. In creating a legitimacy and faith in the law so strong, as demonstrated by the fervent support from the likes of Fortescue and Coke this has created a legitimacy and a legacy which one can only hope will last forever. <quote>"we must not hold antiquity to be that which is old, nut that which is oldest..... antiquity has no bounds, no limits, it signifies the ages of an indefinite time.....which indefinite time tough in itself it passes by all things created, and rests only in that infitnite majesty, beyond whom there is no time, without whom there is no being, for whom there lieth no appeal."</quote><fnote>Antiquitie Triumohing over Noveltie (Favour, 1619: 33-5 taken from Goodrich, Peter: Poor Illiterate Reason: History, Nationalism and Common Law, Social & Legal Studies, Sage, Vol. 1, No. 1, 7-28 (1992) P11 </fnote>