<abstract><heading> Abstract</heading>In this paper I argue that the "war on terror" has prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in the East Asian region. Here I subscribe to the Gramscian idea of hegemony which refers to a state of absolute control achieved through the ready consent of the controlled. It is in the light of this definition that I establish the claim made above. The argument focuses on three countries, namely, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines. I begin by examining the control US maintains in these countries through the support it provides to their military strength and internal counter-terrorism machinery. However, this control is insufficient if the US wishes to claim hegemonic status in the region. For this it requires to elicit the consent of these countries (people and government), and the second part of my argument deals with how the "war on terror" has prevented the US from achieving this end; thereby, keeping it from gaining hegemonic status in the region. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Ever since the cold war period the United States has been a crucial actor in East Asia. It has maintained its control in the region by providing military and monetary assistance to the countries in the region. Though the "war on terror" was prompted by the September 11 terrorist attacks, the US grabbed it as an opportunity to further strengthen the control it had been maintaining in East Asia. However, this paper argues that this strengthened control is not hegemony. Though the "war on terror" has enabled the strengthening of US control in the region, it has on the other hand prevented the country from establishing its hegemony in the East Asia. It is important to mention here that I am using the Gramscian idea of hegemony in this paper. According to Gramsci, hegemony is a state of absolute control that is established and maintained through the " 'spontaneous' consent" of the controlled (Gramsci 2002; p. 61). Such a conception of hegemony emphasises that for control to be absolute, the controlled needs to be convinced as to the legitimacy of the control; for only then would the former " 'spontaneous[ly]' consent" to it (the control). In the light of this nuanced conception of hegemony I argue that the "war on terror" has had a negative impact on US' ambition to establish its hegemony in the East Asian region. For, though the war has enabled the US to maintain and even strengthen its control in the region, by necessitating the latter's support for building up the military strength and counter-terrorism machinery of East Asian countries, the "war on terror" has also served a severe blow to the legitimacy of US power and control; thereby, keeping the US from establishing its hegemony (or absolute control) in the region. <fnote>The "war on terror" has also enabled the US to gain control over the region through its economic ties with various countries. For instance , it has signed FTAs with certain East Asian countries to keep itself involved in the region, which according to the US is essential for the security of the region (Rajan in Dosch 2007;p. 77). However, in the countries I am specifically concerned with-Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines- the most crucial developments have been the security cooperation arrangements by virtue of which the US has gained control in these countries. Therefore, I focus on this aspect of growing US control in the above-mentioned countries. </fnote>These two dimensions of control and consent, that constitute the Gramscian conception of hegemony, are what I analyse in the two parts of my essay. For the purpose of a closer analysis, I focus mainly on three countries of the region that have been crucial to the US' efforts to contain terrorism on the "second front" --- Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. In the aftermath of 9/11, the US increased its support to the internal security forces and military of these countries, in order to combat terrorism in the region. It is through these security cooperation arrangements, necessitated by the "war on terror", that the US automatically gained control in these countries. I elucidate this in the first part of my argument. And in the second part I analyse how this very war has prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in the region. <fnote>I have chosen these three countries because they serve as good examples to show the limits of US' control, and offer a complex understanding of how and why this control stops short of attaining the status of absolute control or hegemony. I discuss this in detail, later in the essay. </fnote><heading>US Control In Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines</heading>As early as in May 2001 the Council on Foreign Relations, in a memorandum to George Bush ('The US and Southeast Asia: A Policy Agenda for the New Administration'), argued that " '[t]he [Bush] Administration should preserve a credible military presence and a viable regional training and support infrastructure'" in the Southeast Asian region (Tuazon 2003). The "war on terror" was seized upon by the US to achieve these ends and thereby strengthen its control, as the case of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines evidences. However, it is important to mention here that while the Philippines has remained a consistent supporter of the US-led "war on terror" from the beginning, the Indonesian and Malaysian governments have been critical of the war (Abuza 2003; p.189), though they have been providing practical security cooperation nevertheless. The causes for these different reactions to US power do not concern us here but shall be discussed in the next part of the argument. The aim of this section, however, is to establish that by virtue of the support the US has provided for the strengthening of the military and internal counter-terrorism machinery of these countries, the latter have become increasingly reliant on the US to maintain this machinery; thereby, giving the US enough control in the region. Soon after 9/11 the US granted US$ 12 million to Indonesia, for combating terrorist activities in the country, especially those of "terrorist financing and money-laundering" (Capie 2004; p.229-30). In 2003, shortly after the Bali bombings, the US granted another 12 million to train and equip a special unit of the Indonesian police force called Special Detachment 88. Since its inception this special unit has killed more than 200 suspected Jemaah Islamiyah terrorists, including Azahari Husin who was involved in the Bali and Marriott hotel bombings as well as in a foiled attack on the Australian Embassy. Also, working in close cooperation with the US FBI the Special Detachment 88 arrested 12 Indonesians who were suspected of the murder of two American teachers in the region, in 2002 (Dillon 2006). Special Detachment 88 is central to the country's counter-terrorism machinery today, and is completely reliant on the funds and training it receives from the US. Though Indonesia and the US do not share the best of military-to- military ties, it is significant that the Navy SEALs have been training in Indonesia for years now (Rumsfeld 2002). Also, since soon after 9/11 the US has been benefiting from overflight rights in the country (Capie 2004;p.228). On the other hand, the Indonesian army (TNI) has benefited from raising of the arms embargo, in 2005, that the US had maintained against the former after it went on a "death and destruction rampage in the wake of East Timor's 1999 vote for independence" (Crispin 2006). Even in Malaysia the US has supported the build-up of a strong counter-terrorism machinery. Central to this is the Southeast Asian regional counter-terrorism centre for training. This centre has already led to the arrest of several terrorists of the Jemaah Islamiyah and other terrorist groups (Capie 2004, p. 230; Daley, 2003). The US has also recognised the International Security Act (ISA) as a tool for combating terrorism in the country. This act permits detention without trial and thus facilitates the timely detention of terrorist suspects. However, not just new developments but also some old, continuing practices (with renewed importance though) need to be mentioned here. For instance, since the 1980s, when military-to-military ties had been established between Malaysia and the US, the latter has been providing training to the Royal Malaysian Airforce. The Navy SEALs have also been training in Malaysia twice a year, while the American army special forces have been training in Malaysia's jungle warfare school (Aldinger, 2002; Capie 2004; p.232; Pan 2006). The two countries also maintain strong intelligence ties. Thus, it is clear from the details mentioned above that by virtue of the security cooperation arrangements necessitated by the "war on terror" the US has gained great control in Indonesia and Malaysia. But of the three countries the country that has received the maximum assistance in building up its military strength and internal counter-terrorism machinery is the Philippines. In 2001 itself it received more than US$ 100 million worth of assistance in the form of funds and equipment. Another US$78million were granted in 2003 for the military equipment and the training of soldiers. Philippines was also granted the status of a non-NATO ally; thereby, enabling it to receive additional American equipment and assistance. This gave the Philippines' resource-starved army the much-needed equipment and funds (Capie 2004; p.233). It has also enabled the military to strengthen itself to combat any future threats of encroachment in territories of the South China Sea, that the Philippines disputes with China. Thus, clearly this military aid is essential for the Philippines and that gives the US an indispensable position vis-à-vis the former. Even more significant in this respect has been the sending of a Joint Task Force of 1200 US troops, in 2002, to fight the Abu Sayyaf group in the southern Philippines, though it was told to have been sent for training purposes. In 2003 the US decided to send more troops to the country, to assist the operations of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) (Capie 2004;p. 233). The former continues to support the latter in its fight against this terrorist group, though it is not directly involved in the process of fighting (Tarrazona 2007). Therefore, its established that Manila depends almost completely on US aid and support for the resolution of the problem in Mindanao. Equally important to the US' domination in the region is the MLSA. In 2002, the US and the Philippines "signed a new Mutual Logistics Support Agreement" that granted the former the "right to stockpile essential equipment and supplies in the country". Though the US could not form any permanent bases in the region, this became a good way of maintaining at least its presence there. Thus, it is clear from the preceding discussion that with the military and internal counter-terrorism machinery of these countries depending on the US for funds, equipment and training, the latter's hold on these countries has become quite strong. The "war on terror" has indeed strengthened the control of the US in these countries....but it has still not allowed it to establish its hegemony here. This is because the element of " 'spontaneous' consent" is missing. The "war on terror" has served a sever blow to the legitimacy of US power and control. Though the second part of this essay argues this in detail, it might be beneficial to outline the basic argument I make in the next part. I argue that the element of " 'spontaneous' consent" is missing at two levels (though they are not mutually exclusive) --- level of the people and of the government. That it is missing is manifested in the political manoeuvrings of the government. In the case of the people it translates into protests (for example, the rise in the appeal of jihad in protest to the "war on terror"), but is also visible in the impact it has on government decision-making. The cause for this missing " 'spontaneous' consent" at the popular level in these countries, is essentially US hypocrisy. At the level of the government, on the other hand, it is caused by the latter's tendency to act unilaterally, which the "war on terror" exemplifies, and the concerns of the people. Thus, though the two levels are not mutually exclusive, pulling them slightly apart to study enables a more complete understanding of the various ways in which the "war on terror" has prevented the US from establishing hegemony in these countries, despite having enabled it to gain major control in them. <heading> "War on terror" ," 'spontaneous' consent" and Hegemony</heading>The aim of this section is to establish the ways in which the "war on terror" has led to the refutation of the legitimacy of US power, and prevented it from gaining the " 'spontaneous' consent" of peoples and governments of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines; thus, keeping it from establishing its hegemony in these countries. While the argument that follows has already been outlined in the previous section, the structure still needs to be delineated. This section is further divided into two sub-sections. I begin by analysing how the absence of " 'spontaneous' consent" is manifested at the level of both the government and the people, and then move on to analyse the reasons for this missing " 'spontaneous' consent" in a separate sub-section. <heading>Manifestations of missing " 'Spontaneous' Consent" </heading>As illustrated in the first part, the governments of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines accepted support from the US for building up the country's military strength and internal counter-terrorism machinery, which in turn gave the US great control in the region. However, I argue here that this alliance with the US was not the result of these governments' " 'spontaneous' consent" to the US-led "war on terror", but instead the simple result of pragmatic thinking, as Capie would say, on the part of the governments' leaders. In other words, none of these governments believed in the legitimacy of the US' project to take the whole world under its wing, through the "war on terror", but played along for bilateral benefits. It is important to mention that in the following argument I refrain from examining the level of the government in isolation to that of the people, for fear of exaggerating the former's ability to take independent decisions. <fnote>In the case of Indonesia and Malaysia I am referring to the Megawati and Mahathir governments, though new governments have come to power now. I focus on the previous governments because they governed the respective countries in the initial years of the "war on terror" which was the time most security cooperation arrangements were made. Though some significant changes have taken place with the coming to power of these new governments it is bilateral benefits and not any faith in the legitimacy of US power that have brought about these changes. For instance, Yudhoyono's stronger suppression of Islamic terrorism in Indonesia, has led the US to plan an FTA with Indonesia. This would help to build the country's economic strength and prevent it from the sort of crises it faced in 2003. This economic crisis was a crucial reason for the fall of Megawati's government in the 2004 elections . </fnote>However, the reasons for the missing " 'spontaneous' consent" were different in the case of the Philippines, and of Indonesia and Malaysia. Though they shall be elaborated upon in the next sub-section, it is important to mention them here. While Indonesia and Malaysia are Muslim-majority countries, the Philippines has a Catholic majority, with a Muslim minority concentrated especially in the southern part of the nation, where terrorist groups like the Abu Sayyaf group operate. Though the governments of all these countries supported the US in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, only the Arroyo government moved on to approve of the US-led "war on terror" as well. The Megawati and Mahathir governments on the other hand, remained critical of the use of force by the US, to fight terrorism in the Middle East. This was because of the threat this war posed to these two largest Muslim-majority nations in the region, that had been deemed safe hubs for the Al-Qaeda, and were high-up on the target list of the war's "second front". The increasing unilateralist tendencies of the US, which the "war on terror" exemplifies, further accentuated the threat; not to mention the impact the opposition and popular opinion had on the government. In the Philippines however, the Arroyo government still remains convinced as to the legitimacy of fighting Muslim terrorists. Arroyo went to the extent of calling the Basilian island in Mindanao (hub of terrorist activities) " her 'little Afghanistan'" (Dosch 2007; p.81). However, as in the case of the other two, this government too discerned the increasing unilateralist tendencies of the US, more so due to the pressure exerted by the nationalists and public opinion; thereby, preventing it from "'spontaneous[ly] consent[ing]" to US control, for fear of risking its sovereignty. Thus, the "war on terror" rendered US domination , illegitimate. And at the level of the government, it manifested itself in acts of resistance and/or verbal critiques. None of these countries, for instance, have till date allowed the US to establish permanent military bases on their territory; for it could threaten the sovereignty of the land which is an issue of great concern in the region. Also, the US was criticised by state-heads (especially of Indonesia and Malaysia) soon after the issue of the 'National Security Strategy Paper of the United States of America', which gave the US the right to pre-emptive warfare and to the use of WMDs. States saw this as an infringement upon the right to sovereignty of nations that the US decided to label "rogue states". However, as mentioned above, these acts of resistance were not just expressions of the government's missing " 'spontaneous' consent" to the US-led "war on terror", but also reflected the resistance of the people (and its representatives). For instance, despite being a signatory to the 'coalition of the willing' the Philippines sent no troops to fight the "war on terror" in the Middle East, though it sent labour force to help in the reconstruction of Iraq. It has also been resisting the use of military combat forces on its soil. Due to the pressure exerted by the nationalists, the government refrained from allowing the MILF to be labelled a terrorist group (Capie 2004; pp.236-7). These expressions of combined resistance were not uncommon in Indonesia and Malaysia either. Megawati's criticism of the war in Iraq, for instance, was an expression of the nation's anger at the use of violence against Muslims in the Middle East. She even called on groups to oppose the US-led war on terror and praised the Iraqis for defending themselves against this "act of aggression" (Capie 2004; p.229). Malaysia too protested against the US' "exclusively militaristic response to terrorism" (Capie 2004; p.231). Mahathir criticised the lack of interest shown by the US to comprehend the actual causes of the anger that made "people ever willing to blow themselves up" (Kyodo 2002). Like the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia too did not send any troops for fighting the "war on terror" in the Middle East. <fnote>According to Abuza, while Megawati was being pushed alike by the parliamentary leaders and terrorist groups like Laskar Jihad, to take a stringer stance against the US, other moderate Islamic organizations like the Nahdlatul Ulama (NU) and Muhammadiyah were rather supportive of the war. However, NU's reason for supporting the US further reinforces the argument I have been making here. This organization advocated supported the US -led "war on terror" lest "[s]olidarity with Muslims in Afghanistan" damage their national interest (Abuza 2003; p.192). Thus it was not " 'spontaneous' consent" but fear of losing bilateral benefits that instigated the moderates to support the US-led "war on terror". </fnote>However, not through influencing government decision-making alone, the peoples of these countries also expressed their resistance to the US-led "war on terror" through direct protests, in the form of the rising appeal of Jihad against the "war on terror", for instance. There was major unrest in Indonesia and Malaysia, when the US declared war on Iraq. The growing intervention of the US in the Philippines was also opposed to by the people, for fear of it further aggravating the problem of maintaining peace in the country by instigating the Muslim population in southern Philippines (Capie 2004; p.236).While the "war on terror" was anyways being perceived as "anti-Muslim" by many in the region, the war on Iraq confirmed it (Abuza 2003; p.231). It was this increasing anger of the people that enabled (and is still enabling) terrorist organisations to recruit more easily and expand their diffused networks, to continue functioning 'smoothly', even as the counter-terrorism machinery in these countries led to the hampering of their operations. Thus, the missing " 'spontaneous' consent" of the people was manifested in their " 'spontaneous' consent" to terrorism, perceiving it as the only way of making the US " "taste" the humiliation and injustice Muslims feel the world over" (Abuza 2003; p. 231). It is therefore clear from the discussion above that the governments and people of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines did not " 'spontaneous[ly]' consent" to the US' growing power and control over the world, which the "war on terror" exemplifies. While this sub-section dealt with the manifestations of this resistance, the next shall analyse the reasons behind it. <heading>Reasons for missing " 'spontaneous' consent"</heading>Osama bin Laden's "fundamental denunciation concerns US hypocrisy in the world arena" (Wallerstein 2003; p.199). Harvey identifies the unilateralist policies adopted by the US, especially in the "Bush II era", as the basic reason for the decline in US hegemony (Kiely 2007; p.194). The two key terms here, 'hypocrisy' and 'unilateralist policies' sum up the argument that follows. The "war on terror" exemplifies these features of US foreign policy. It has thus rendered US power illegitimate in the eyes of the people and governments of the region I am concerned with here. <fnote>I am using the term hegemony here because Harvey too differentiates hegemony from domination. </fnote>These countries were especially incensed at the change in the US' stance vis-à-vis the human rights issue. Disclosures of the abuse of prisoners at the "Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad, the Guantanamo Bay detention centre in Cuba, and Bagram Airforce Base in Afghanistan" were enough to infuriate even the moderate Muslims (Pan 2006), let alone the impact it had on the radicals. It revealed the hypocrisy of the US which had chided and humiliated these Southeast Asian countries for violating human rights; particularly so in the case of Indonesia and Malaysia. For instance, the US had imposed an arm's embargo on the Indonesian military when the TNI went on a death and destruction drive in East Timor, after the latter's 1999 vote for independence. It had even decried the ISA, in Malaysia, on the grounds that it was inhuman to detain without a trial. However, soon after the 9/11 attacks the US became more readily prepared to side-step its concern with human rights, in order to tackle the threat of growing terrorism in these countries. On the one hand, the ISA got appropriated as an important tool of the Malaysian counter-terrorism machinery, and on the other the US began to provide "non-lethal equipment" and support to the TNI to prepare it for combating terrorism in Indonesia (Capie 2004; p.229). Though these swings in stance enabled the US to establish a formidable counter-terrorism machinery in these countries, they prevented the US from eliciting " 'spontaneous' consent" to its control, by rendering this control highly unjustified in the eyes of the peoples of these countries. Along with human rights the US has also stood for the equality and freedom of all. It is precisely for this freedom and equality that the MILF has been fighting in the Philippines. However, rather than examining the validity of this group's concern, the US simply supported the Arroyo government (and continues to do so), in suppressing the group further, to win the latter's support in combating terrorism in the region. However, what is even more interesting is that the US hinted at classifying the MILF as a terrorist organisation. Irrespective of the cause, the US deemed the group's violence against civilians in southern Philippines enough to label it a terrorist group (Capie 2004; p.235). But by that logic is the US-led "war on terror" not terrorism as well? If the cause be side-lined and the nature of activities alone be considered, it is indeed; thus the hypocrisy of the US, and its habit of formulating definitions and rules from its own vantage point. While the stance of the US vis-à-vis the Israel- Palestine issue had been proving this for years, to all Muslims in these countries, the "war on terror" made the point afresh. However, while the discussion above elucidates some ways in which the hypocrisy of the US has rendered US power illegitimate amongst the peoples of these countries, the "war on terror" has also made the governments careful about US support and 'benevolence'. The cases of Saddam Hussein and Osama bin Laden have warned governments as to the predilection of the US to create and destroy according to its own convenience. Also, the US' ability to disregard even the UN's prohibition against going to war in the Middle East has clearly spelt out the subservience of the international system to the US. The hypocrisy and unilateralist tendencies of this country were never more pronounced than they have been since the beginning of the "war on terror". The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, a key document of the war announced in 2002, exemplifies these characteristics of US foreign policy. It gives the US the right to "act pre-emptively" against "rogue states" that it considers to be threats to its own national interests and to those of its allies. However, the fifth section of the NSS concludes with the US' assurance that these pre-emptive acts shall always be for a "just cause" and the use of force "carefully measured" (NSS 2002). In the year of its issue itself this paper created great unrest , especially in Muslim-majority countries of Indonesia and Malaysia. The governments and peoples of these countries saw it as a threat to the sovereignty and security of their respective nations. In addition, the hardly just and hardly measured destruction in Iraq has raised serious questions as to the legitimacy of US power and control. According to Bobby Tuazon, doctrines like the NSS as well as the strategies of the Bush administration could be traced back to the 'Defence Policy Guidance (DPG) of 1992 and to the 'Project for a New American Century' (PNAC 1997). Both the documents focus on conserving and strengthening Pax Americana throughout the twenty first century, predominantly through the use of military force. He argues that when Bush II came to power the DPG of 1992 and PNAC became a reality. On the pretext of fighting terrorism on the "second front", the US managed to push its way into Southeast Asian countries, making the Philippines the "template [...] for greater , military presence and power projection in the region" (Tuazon 2003). It is not surprising then that the Philippines has been highly sensitive about its sovereignty and the long presence of US military forces on its land, especially since the new security cooperation arrangements, necessitated by the "war on terror", have been in place. However, it is not just the pursuit of imperialist goals but a unilateralist approach to the achievement of those goals that is stressed in the DPG of 1992. It emphasises that the US will be bound to neither international laws nor international institutions , in the pursuit of its ambition to conserve and strengthen Pax Americana (Tuazon 2003). The "war on terror" has established this beyond the shadow of doubt. Thus, it is the hypocrisy and unilateralist tendencies of US foreign policy that have been exposed by virtue of the "war on terror". This exposure has served a severe blow to the reputation of the US and has raised serious questions as to the legitimacy of its actions, amongst the peoples and governments of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. While the response of the people has been one of direct protest, the governments have obviously had to act more carefully, considering the diminished power of international institutions to protect the interest of weak nations in the face of the threat of invasion from the US. This sub-section therefore establishes how the "war on terror", through its exposé of the true characteristics of US power , has rendered US power illegitimate at the level of the peoples and governments of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines; thereby, preventing the US power from gaining "'spontaneous' consent" and the US from gaining hegemonic status in the region. What this section on the whole argues is that though the "war on terror" has enabled the US to gain control in the above-mentioned countries (as explained in section one), it has failed to secure alongside for the US the " 'spontaneous consent" of the peoples and governments of the above-mentioned countries, which is essential for the US to gain hegemonic status in the region. On the contrary in fact, the war has led to the refutation of the legitimacy of the US' new role in the international arena, by highlighting the true intentions and tendencies of the US; thereby, dashing the American dream to become a hegemon in the region, for years to come. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Taking into account the Gramscian concept of hegemony, this paper argued that "war on terror" has prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in three countries of East Asia, namely Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. According to Gramsci hegemony refers to a state of absolute control that is established and maintained through the " 'spontaneous' consent" of the controlled. Such a conception of hegemony stresses on the need for the controlled to be convinced as to the legitimacy of the control which thereby leads the controlled into " 'spontaneous[ly]' consenting" to the control. This element of " 'spontaneous' consent" is what distinguishes hegemony from power or control. It is thus that I argued that the "war on terror" has not enabled the US to establish hegemony in the region but only control. The security cooperation arrangements that the war necessitated have indeed led the US to becoming indispensable to the above-mentioned countries through the support the former (US) provides to the military and counter-terrorism machinery of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines; thereby, enabling the US to gain control through the support provided. The control gained thus established, I moved on to point out the sites of resistance at the level of the government and the people, to prove that the control is not absolute (hegemonic). Interestingly even the governments of these countries, through political manoeuvrings, try to resist more US intervention than suits the country's needs (and their own). Thus, while the governments seem to be cooperating with the US in the "war on terror" it is because of bilateral benefits (as explained in section one) , and not faith in the legitimacy of US power. The resistance of the people on the other hand is less ambiguous, though it not only manifests itself directly but also through its influence on government decision-making. In this paper, I identified two main reasons for this missing " 'spontaneous' consent" amongst the peoples and governments of these countries--- the hypocrisy and unilateralist tendencies of the Bush II administration. I argued that by revealing these characteristics of US foreign policy the "war on terror" has served a severe blow to the reputation of the US and its growing power in the international arena; thereby, preventing it from gaining " 'spontaneous' consent" in these countries. Thus, by laying out both sides I have argued that the "war on terror" has certainly enabled the US to gain control in Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines, though it has also, on the other hand, prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in these countries. 