Supramolecular interactions as described by Lehn [1] and discussed by Marsh [2] offer synthetic chemists access to a vast array of materials with novel properties. Supramolecular polymers, where monomers are connected non-covalently, allow the materials formed to exhibit advantages over traditionally covalently bonded species. Polymers formed in this way can respond to environmental change e.g. pH change, thermal stimuli [3]. Hydrogels, formed by an elastic network whose interstitial spaces are filled with water are used extensively as biomaterials [4]. Recent work in the field of synthesising biologically active materials as a route to drug delivery combines these two areas to produce supramolecular hydrogels with novel properties. Hydrogels based on an amino acid derivative that could release water soluble drugs and related molecules in a controlled manner on heating were first reported by Kiyonaka et al. [5] in June 2002. Later that year, Xing et al. [6] reported the first gelator based on the antibiotic Vancomycin (Van). Their pyrene derivative of Van formed a non-covalent polymer. In balancing the hydrophobic interactions of the pyrene rings (π-π stacking) and the hydrogen bonding ability of Van, they created a stable hydrogel. They hoped such a material would be used to treat infectious wounds or of use as an antiseptic matrix. Efforts to design a hydrogel that forms part of a drug delivery system inspired Zhang et al. to conduct their research into supramolecular hydrogels that responds to ligand-receptor interaction. Whilst synthesising a short peptide hydrogelator, they noticed the intermediate Fmoc-protected D-Ala-D-Ala dipeptide formed hydrogels efficiently. They proceeded to synthesise a range of analogous molecules from commercially available protected amino acids and investigated their gelation properties. <figure/>The dipeptides 1-5 (scheme 1) produced hydrogels with increasing minimum concentrations (1 being the most efficient gelator at 3.6mM; 5 the least efficient at 52mM) at pH3. Emission spectra were used to elucidate the nature of the non-covalent interactions. In particular, peaks in the spectra of 1 and 2 suggested that the fluorene rings overlapped in an anti-parallel fashion - this hydrophobic interaction along with the intermolecular amide hydrogen bonding produced the supramolecular polymer necessary for gelation. It was well known from previous work by Whitesides and others [7], delivered by Marsh [2], that Van binds to particular dipeptides with particular affinities. It was shown that the hydrogel of 1 (containing the D-Ala-D-Ala sequence) was efficiently disrupted by addition of even 0.01eq. of the Van hydrochloride salt. In contrast, 2, the enantiomer of 1 (containing L-Ala-L-Ala) showed essentially no response on addition of 1eq. of Van. This agrees with previous work on the enantiomeric specificity of Van [8]. Circular dichorism (CD) was used to confirm the chiral differences of monomers 1 and 2. This represents the most important discovery in this work - that a hydrogel can be destroyed by ligand binding purely based on stereochemistry. It was proposed, based on emission spectra, that the gel-sol phase transition was caused by the hydrogen bonding of Van to the D-Ala-D-Ala sequence, this disrupting the fluorene π-π stacking interactions essential for the supramolecular polymer network in the gel (scheme 2). <figure/>Scanning Electron Micrographs were used to show the effects of Van addition on the hydrogel networks. Whereas the nanofibre matrix of 1 was destroyed by Van addition, the matrix of 2 was unaffected - Van precipitated onto the matrix. This research not only advanced the particular field of bioactive hydrogel materials but opened up a new avenue of research in drug delivery. Indeed, research in this area has built upon the conclusions of this paper and been published in other well respected journals such as Chemical Communications. Reports include hydrogels based upon a class of anti-inflammatory drugs closely related in structure to the protected dipeptides described here [9]; and hydrogel materials containing complexing agents for the treatment of uranium poisoning in wounds [10]. It is clear that the material covered in the paper is of high scientific value. The Journal of the American Chemical Society (JACS) is well read by chemists; with more article cites than any other journal in 2004 [11]. JACS communications are designed to be concise reports of work that the authors feel should be delivered with some immediacy to a general audience. This paper is easy and enjoyable to read and conveys the necessary information clearly and concisely in the style expected in JACS. It deals with a fundamental area of chemistry, i.e. ligand-receptor interaction, so is likely to be of interest to a majority of the readership of the journal. We are presented with a report that gives a logical argument for the conclusions made based on the evidence shown. However the evidence provided alone is not conclusive. The supporting information gives details of synthesis and the procedures employed to test the responses of the hydrogels. Unfortunately, no information or data is given regarding why the authors decided on the proposed mechanism of disruption of the hydrogels by Van. Figure 1 in the paper gives a CD and emission spectrum of the hydrogels 1 and 2. Rather than conveying much scientific meaning, these simply illustrate the text. It would be appropriate for data such as these to be available as supporting information for closer inspection. We are told that further study is underway on the relationship between monomer structure and gelation properties. The paper suggests that the hydrogels are formed by a combination of hydrophobic and hydrogen bonding interactions, but no convincing evidence is given for either of these interactions. NMR nOe data on monomer interaction would support the claims made more solidly. In summary, this work represents a significant step forward in this field toward creation of a novel drug delivery system. This paper's publication in JACS is well justified, although more evidence to support the conclusions made would be welcomed. 