<abstract>This paper presents a method for assessing water fluoride concentration utilising the fluoride ion selective electrode. The effects of tea infusion on tap water fluoride levels are studied. We find that tea infusion dramatically increases the average fluoride concentration of tap water from 0.054mM to 0.274mM. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>A common modern method for measuring fluoride concentrations in water utilises the fluoride sensitive electrode invented by Frant and Ross []. This electrode contains an internal fluoride standard and a LaF 3 ion exchange crystal. LaF 3 exhibits an affinity toward F-. The internal fluoride ion activity controls the potential of the inner surface of the LaF 3 crystal. The test solution comes in contact with the other side of the crystal, and a potential difference is created across it, proportional to the ratio of ion activities on the inner and outer sides of the crystal []. An external reference electrode is used to measure the potential of the fluoride electrode and thus the activity of F− in the test solution. <enote></enote><enote></enote>The cell potential, E, is given by the Nernst equation, where α is a constant:  FORMULA  (1) Thus a calibration of the electrode using several standard solutions of fluoride allows us to measure the fluoride activity of an unknown solution. Several conditions need to be met in order to measure F− concentrations in this way. Ionic activity coefficients are largely dependent upon ionic strength. Samples prepared for measurement must have a high ionic strength relative to the contribution from fluoride. Stabilising ionic strength will make the fluoride activity coefficient relatively constant, so the measured potential becomes proportional to the fluoride concentration. Competing chemical equilibria present an important source of error. The electrode is sensitive to hydroxide ions, but this is only significant its concentration exceeds that of fluoride [1]. Another pH dependent effect is due to the fact HF is a weak acid. Below pH 5, HF complexes will result in a decrease in measured fluoride activity. Prepared samples must have a pH between 5 and 7. Fluoride complexes with other species present in solution. Si +4, Fe +3, and Al +3 all form complexes with fluoride and thus interfere with measurements. Ideally, addition of a strong chelating agent such as EDTA would minimise polyvalent cation complexion interferences. <heading>Experimental</heading>The average fluoride concentration in local tap water was found to be 1500µg/l [], and in brewed tea worldwide varied from c. 600 to 3000µg/l []. A series of standard fluoride solutions encompassing this range were made from a 0.1M NaF stock solution of 0.4200g reagent grade NaF (Aldrich) dissolved in 100ml distilled water at 295K. Standards of 0.01M, 0.005M, 0.002M, 0.001M, 0.0005M and 0.00005M NaF were made. To 50ml of each of these was added 50ml 0.1M ammonium acetate buffer (pH = 6.83) to give a high ionic strength and control pH. <enote></enote><enote></enote>Potential measurements were made using the ISE25F Fluoride electrode (Radiometer Analytical S.A.) against a saturated calomel electrode. Electrodes were cleaned using 250ml distilled water stirred by a magnetic follower at 1200 rpm then tissue-dried. Standard solutions were allowed to equilibriate to room temperature (295K) and a clean magnetic follower was introduced. Electrodes were introduced, the solutions stirred at 400 rpm and measurements taken when the reading stabilised. Fluoride measurements started with the least concentrated solution to minimise cross contamination. Measurements were taken in triplicate. Tap water was analysed in a similar way. 50ml of ammonium acetate buffer was added to 50ml samples of tap water and readings taken at 295K. Three such tap water samples were analysed. Samples of five different brands of tea were analysed to determine the effect of infusion on water fluoride concentration. For each sample, 220ml distilled water was heated to boiling point, a follower was introduced and the water boiled down to 200ml. At this point, a tea bag was introduced, the heat turned off, but stirring allowed to continue at 400rpm. After 2 minutes, the teabag was removed without straining. Stirring was stopped and the solution allowed to cool to room temperature. 50ml of the infusion was added to 50ml buffer and the sample analysed as above. The dependence of infusion time upon water fluoride concentration was studied using two brands of tea. Infusion time was varied from 30s to 12 minutes using the same method as above. Measurements of fluoride concentration in the distilled water and in the buffer were also made. A pH meter was used to ensure the pH of each solution to be tested was within the range pH 5-7. This procedure is based on the EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency) method 340.2 for fluoride from D. C. Harris Quantitative Chemical Analysis 3rd edition, Freeman, New York, 1991; with additional information from Frant and Ross [] and Lingane [2]. <heading>Results</heading>A plot of -log 10 [F−] versus measured potential (mV) for the standard solutions gave the expected straight line relationship at 295K between 5mM and 0.0025mM F−. Calulations were based on the linear regression best fit line. The average tap water fluoride concentration was found to be 0.054mM. It was found that tea infusion increased this value by between 0.14mM and 0.33 mM, and on average 0.22mM, a 405% increase. Decaffeinated brands increased fluoride concentration to a lesser extent than caffinated ones. Below an infusion time of 2 minutes, fluoride levels were roughly proportional to infusion time. After 4 minutes fluoride levels remained almost constant; typhoo decaffeinated contributing to a 0.27mM increase in fluoride and the tea from C523 contributing to 0.38mM increase. <heading>Discussion</heading>The tap water fluoride concentration found in this experiment is only slightly less than the value of 0.079mM publised by Severn Trent Water. Tea infusion produced fluoride levels much higher than the researched values of between 0.032mM and 0.157mM. We now believe that these values are under-estimates. The problems that arise when dealing with very dilute (>0.05mM) solutions are highlighted by this experiment. The multiple dilution method employed meant that the weakest standard had a large percentage uncertainty, reflected by the error bars on the calibration graph. Although this means that we do not have an accurate value for the potential reading at such great dilution, the data at higher concentrations follows the Nernstian relationship closely such that extrapolation to lower concentrations can be done with confidence. Although this experiment presents a rigorous method for assessing fluoride concentrations, there is scope for improvement. If time allowed, the NaF used for the standard solutions would have been oven dried for 2hours at 110º to remove any traces of water that would contribute to inaccurate fluoride standards. A TISAB (Total Ionic Strength Adjustment Buffer) would have been prepared containing the buffer and a chelating agent to remove interferences from polyvalent cations which would further improve experimental accuracy []. <enote></enote>Test solution temperature was controlled in this experiment to 295 ± 0.5K. A more accurate method of temperature control would utilise a thermostat bath. The electrode calibration curve not only shifts but changes slope with changes in temperature. It is estimated that a 1 degree change in temperature at 298K would result in a 2% error in the potential reading at the millimolar level. Whereas the effect of this on solutions of concentration above 0.005M is insignificant compared to the other sources of error in the experiment, solutions of below 0.0005M may suffer significantly from such a temperature difference. This report has assessed water fluoride concentrations and explored the effects of tea infusion upon such values. The factors leading to the greatest sources of inaccuracy referred to in the introduction were sucessfully controlled. Had time allowed, a more rigorous treatment of the uncertainties inherent to this method would have been conducted. Our findings show the experimental method was suitable for the task, but also highlight some of the problems that need to be addressed if this topic was to be studied further. 