There is a consensus amongst nursing theorists and researchers that caring is the central and unifying core of nursing (Crowden, 1994; Scott,al. 1995; Bassett, 2002), yet paradoxically caring is itself an inherently difficult and elusive concept not only to define and conceptualize, (Webb, 1996) but also to assess (Morse,al. 1991; McCance,al. 1997). As such, formal definitions of what constitutes quality care are numerous (Peters, 1991) as are the approaches and methods used to assess and measure quality of patient care (Harvey, 1991; Beck, 1999). For example, whilst some nurse researchers only favour single-strategy methods, such as qualitative explorations of caregivers' interpretations and/or perceptions of care (Valentine, 1991) or quantitative examinations of caring behaviour through the use of psychometric instruments (Larson and Ferketich, 1993), an increasing number of health care researchers are now integrating both quantitative and qualitative methods via multi-strategy research (Shih, 1998; Barbour, 1999) despite the overt epistemological concerns that these paradigms represent mutually exclusive ideal types (Winchester, 1996; Oakley, 1998; Clarke, 1998). The current discussion will attempt to provide a critical discussion of the virtues and drawbacks of single- and multi-strategy research within the context of nursing by comparing the following articles: 'The delivery of quality nursing care: a grounded theory study of the nurse's perspective' in the journal of advanced nursing (volume 27, number 1) by Anne, M. Williams (1998) and 'Integrating quantitative and qualitative methodologies for the assessment of health care systems: emergency medicine in post-conflict Serbia' by Brett, D. Nelson and colleagues (2005) from the BMC health services research (volume 5, number 14). Emphasis will also be placed on discussing the epistemological and methodological complexities involved in multi-strategy enterprises, and ascertaining the appropriateness of the researchers choice of methodologies in relation to their specific research aims and objectives. Whilst both Williams' (1998) and Nelson et al's (2005) work stresses the importance of obtaining user views of health care, the underlying research questions and the manner in which the research is conducted, differ immensely. According to Patton (2001), this difference in the choice of methodologies is very much shaped by the specific nature of the researchers enquiry. For example, Williams adopts a single-strategy qualitative research design to explore nurses' perceptions of what constitutes caring behaviour and to identify factors that facilitate or hinder the delivery of this type of care to patients. In this instance, the use of semi-structured interviews seems appropriate as it provides Williams with ample opportunity to explore and understand the caring phenomenon (Pretty et al 1995; Williams, 1998: 809). In addition, since the findings derived from qualitative analyses are grounded in the nurses' real and lived experiences and perspectives (Jayaratine and Stewart, 1991; Oakley, 1998) coupled with their feelings, opinions and values of caring and/or nursing (Avis,al. 1997; Coyle, 1997), Williams' study can directly contribute to efforts aimed at improving and maintaining quality nursing care (Department of Health, 1997; Williams, 1998: 809). Despite this however, a number of researchers warn against the use of single-strategy methods in the context of health system assessments on the grounds that they cannot adequately expose or elucidate the intricacies and complex dynamics of a health care system (Kazic, 1996; Eliades,al. 2001; Nelson,al. 2003). As such, nursing theorists assert that integration of methods provides an effective and complete assessment of an entire health care service (Benneral. 1996; Foss and Ellefsen, 2002) since it capitalises on the strengths of different methods while compensating for their individual weaknesses (Punch 1998). Nelson and colleagues (2005) article provides an example of a study that employs such an approach since they integrate both quantitative and qualitative data collection, and data analysis techniques (Layder, 1993 in Bryman, 2001: 444). For example, they combine focus-group discussions with questionnaires and by-person factor analysis to assess, determine and evaluate the strengths, needs and obstacles related to the development of quality (emergency medical) care in post-war Serbia, Belgrade. By specifically using qualitative focus-group discussions, as a preliminary form of data collection, they are able to surface the range of opinions and attitudes held by emergency medical staff (Morse 1991, Morgan 1998) whilst identifying variables/themes that require further investigation such as priorities for change of the existing health care system (Bullockal. 1992) and developing a quantitative instrument, in the form a free-response questionnaire, to assess this (Barbour, 1999: 356-358). Moreover, conducting a by-person factor analysis of the qualitative data derived from focus-group discussions allows them to objectively evaluate and deduce the degree of consensus or discordance amongst the participants' opinions and attitudes regarding quality of care delivered to patients (Stephenson, 1935 in Nelson,al. 2005: 3; Barbosa,al. 1998). Taken collectively, it's evident that combining quantitative and qualitative techniques (or tools) at the method and analytic level is both feasible and desirable (Bryman, 2001: 446). For example, it not only incorporates more structure to the study (Marsland,al. 2000) but allows Nelsonal. (2005) to capture method-linked dimensions of the caring phenomenon thus providing readers with a more complete, elaborate and multifaceted view of caring (Loos, 1995; Begley, 1996; Hammersley, 1996). Moreover, as integrating methods allow Nelsonal. (2004) to qualitatively explore the cognitive/affective components and processes of care, whilst quantitatively representing its structural features, it appears that multi-strategy methods technique expand and improve the scope and analytic power of research (see Swanson, 1992; Irurita 1993; Coyle, 1997; Tashakkori and Teddlie, 1998). Moreover, multi-strategy methods allow for researchers to cross-check the findings of one method against the findings of another i.e. researchers can ascertain that the results are in fact determined by the participants and the context of the inquiry, rather than their own personal biases (Goering and Streiner, 1996). These processes are collectively known as triangulation (Shih, 1998; Neuman, 2003), and as a result of its benefits, there is a dominant belief that the internal and external validity (or trustworthiness) and reliability of information is greater when quantitative and qualitative approaches to data collection and analysis are combined rather than when used separately (Pretty, 1993; Plewis and Mason, 2005). There is also an emerging recognition of the fact that combination of qualitative and quantitative methodologies increases the acceptability of results (Marsland,al. 2000; Sandelowski, 2000). Despite such evidence however, it is important to note that multi-strategy methods of research should not be used because of the assumption that more is better or that qualitative research is incomplete without quantitative research (Morse, 1996). Likewise it would be misleading to stipulate that researchers should seek to combine research methods in order to improve the credibility and dependability of their research as factors such as the size and structure of a sample population can have a bearing on the importance of these criteria (Plewis and Mason, 2005). For example, external validity plays less of a role if the target population is small meanwhile the validity of findings derived from a large sample population are dependent on how representative the sample is of the total population. In addition, as Nelson et al (2005) use qualitative information drawn from focus group discussion to produce a free-response questionnaire, there is a case here for arguing that reliability and validity are not properties of this specific questionnaire, but they are a technical description of the relationship between this questionnaire and a set of social realities at one point in time (Coyle and Williams, 2000: 1230). Moreover, there is a possibility of improving validity by using multiple methods from one paradigm e.g. semi-structured interviews, observations and focus groups (Williams, 1998; Beck, 1999). Furthermore, researchers have suggested that variables/themes or specific research questions for quantitative inquiry can be derived from sources other than qualitative investigations (Coyle and Williams, 2000; Marsland,al. 2000). For example, a quantitative study may identify discrepancies in findings amongst a particular group of patients, which can be explored further by using qualitative methods, deductive reasoning may provide explanations for deviant cases and personal experience or media reporting of a social issue may generate research questions and hypotheses (Coyle and Williams, 2000). Moreover, there is a debate regarding the nature and the combination of quantitative and qualitative methods. For example, some researchers argue that combinations of quantitative and qualitative techniques and their subsequent uses/benefits are only possible when researchers disregard, or play down, the epistemological commitments to specific paradigms of inquiry, (Sandelowski, 2000; Coyle and Williams, 2000). From this perspective, multi-strategy research is not a mixture of paradigms per se, but rather the paradigms are reflected in what techniques or tools the researchers choose to combine, and how and why they decide to combine them (Coyle, 1997; Coyle and Williams, 2000). Alternatively, others argue that combinations of quantitative and qualitative research are impossible since the techniques are grounded in incompatible epistemological and ontological principles (Winchester, 1996; Goering and Streiner, 1996). According to Barbour (1999), the successful use of qualitative and quantitative methods within the same project rests on the researchers decisions about the epistemological position of the actual research project. These decisions would include a priority decision that pairs a principal method with a complementary method, and a sequence decision that determines whether the complementary method precedes or follows the principal method (Morgan, 1998: 336). In this instance, although it is possible to deduce from Nelson et al's (2005) work that qualitative data collection techniques precede quantitative techniques, it is less obvious which method they use as the principal data-gathering tool. Whilst some would argue that Nelsonal. (2005) give prominence to quantitative methods of data collection since they use more of these tools (Coyle and Williams, 2000), others may assume that no single method or research strategy was dominant (Bryman, 2001: 448). In this case, researchers turn to the sampling used to distinguish qualitative from quantitative inquiry, or vice versa, (Patton, 1990). Since Nelsonal. (2005) use non-probabilistic sampling, the underlying assumption here would then be that study employs a predominately qualitative stance to develop idiographic knowledge from generalizations from and about individual cases, and enhance understanding of the information-rich case (Sandelowski, 2000). In conclusion, although the use of a single methodology has been advocated by a number of authors, many of the supporting arguments are decidedly pragmatic, such as time constraints, the need to limit the scope of a study, and the difficulty of publishing the findings (Creswell, 1994 in Jones, 1997: 11). As a result, researchers have increasingly have used mixed method techniques to expand the scope of, and deepen their insights from their studies. As advocates of mixed-method research have argued, the complexity of human phenomena mandates more complex research designs to capture them (Sandelowski, 2000). The crucial aspect in justifying a mixed methodology research design is that both single methodology approaches (qualitative only and quantitative only) have strengths and weaknesses, and the combination of methodologies, on the other hand, can focus on their relevant strengths. The researcher should aim to achieve the situation where "blending qualitative and quantitative methods of research can produce a final product which can highlight the significant contributions of both" (Nau, 1995: 1) where "qualitative data can support and explicate the meaning of quantitative research" (Jayaratne, 1993: 117). By adopting the following assumptions, the researcher should ensure that the final product maximises the strengths of a mixed methods approach (Jones, 1997). Moreover, withstanding the prevailing epistemological debates, the choice of particular research tools or techniques and combinations should be conditioned not only by the research question (Bryman, 2001) and the extent to which they improve trustworthiness, but also by the time, money, expertise and other factors which can act as constraints to the process of data collection and analysis (Marsland,al. 2000: 4). 