This paper will examine the historical and legal context of the minority rights of the Anglophone population in Quebec, and its conflicts with the other national minority in Canada, the Quebec Francophones. The paper is divided into three sections: the first section will briefly give the necessary historical and legal background to the establishment of the minority rights of both the Quebec Francophones and Anglophones. The second section will examine theory of consociational democracy within the context of the situation in Quebec. The third section will examine how the legally enshrined rights have been interpreted in relevant case law, both domestically and internationally. <heading>Section I: Background Information </heading><heading>The Quebec Francophones as a Minority</heading>To discuss minority rights in Quebec is to engage in controversial and emotion-fueled discussion where even facts in evidence are up for debate. This section will try to give a brief historical overview of how the Quebec Francophones (QF) came by their minority rights. <fnote>Terms in and of themselves carry significant meaning, particularly when discussing such a controversial topic as minority rights in Quebec. As such, the terms used in this paper are carefully defined: the French-speaking population of Quebec is termed, in this paper, Quebec Francophones. The English-speaking population of Quebec is termed Quebec Anglophones. The main reason that the term Québécois is not being used in this paper is that there is continuing controversy over whether Quebec Anglophones are considered to be Québécois. </fnote>The arrival of the French colonists in 1535 began Canada's European history. From 1535 to 1763, the colony of La Nouvelle France was established in what is currently Quebec, and was comprised of approximately 65 000 francophones. In 1763, however, La Nouvelle France fell from French control into the hands of the British. "The first policy act, the Royal Proclamation of 1763, was quite definitely assimilationist in intent. It sharply reduced the boundaries of the old French colony, set up English law and courts, and set aside lands for the support of Protestant clergy and schoolmasters." However, in order to secure the loyalties of the francophone population, the British passed the Quebec Act, which guaranteed the francophone majority the right to practice their faith (Catholicism), omitted religious references from the oath required for their public office and, arguably most importantly, allowed for French civil law to be used in all local matters. The Quebec Act was truly the first effort at recognizing the QF as a minority, despite the fact that at this point in history they were still a majority in numbers. In 1791, the Constitutional Act established two colonies: Lower Canada (predominantly French) and Upper Canada (predominantly English). However, segregating the colonies did not bring peace to the linguistic divisions. Following increasingly hostile demands for responsible government, 1840 saw the establishment of the Union Act, which created the single "province" of Canada, a legislative council and an elected assembly for the combined Upper and Lower Canada. English was the only official language of government, and for the first two years of its existence, Francophones were excluded from participation. Eventually, "the use of French language returned to the assembly, though English remained the official language." In 1867, the British North America Act created the federal union of Canada. This had a profound effect for Francophones in Canada. "The Province of Quebec, not the French-Canadian nation was technically the unit entering Confederation. Moreover, French Canadians living outside Quebec were now members of an ethnic minority rather than the francophone citizens of a union between two nations."  <fnote>Gary Caldwell and Eric Waddell, The English of Quebec: from majority to minority status (Quebec: Insitut québécois de recherche sur la culture, 1982) at 370. </fnote><fnote>Ibid at 371. </fnote><fnote>Ibid at 373. </fnote><heading>The Quebec Anglophones and their Minority Rights</heading>The Quebec Anglophones (QA) were fairly well protected until the culmination of the Quiet Revolution in the 1960s. During this "revolution", the QF struggled to challenge the social and political structures in the province, wanting more control and access to the prestigious commerce sector jobs, and more control over their culture and language. In 1968, Rene Levesque, one of the politicians instrumental in creating the Quiet Revolution, created the Parti Québécois - a separatist party. Pierre Trudeau, the other prominent politician to rise from the Quiet Revolution, took the federal direction and eventually became Prime Minister. Trudeau established the Official Languages Act, which declared both French and English to be the official languages of Canada, requiring that all positions and services in the public service and all governmental proceedings and documents be available in French, as well as English. The Parti Québécois came roaring to power in 1976 and the exodus of the QA community began, as the QA feared that they would be trapped in a sovereign Quebec with no rights. The housing market crashed and one of the few English newspapers in Montreal, the Montreal Star, shut down its presses. As individual Anglophones left Quebec, more were forced to leave as large corporations relocated their headquarters out of the unstable world Quebec had become. To this day the numbers of how many QA fled is unclear, however, "according to a study released in November 1978 ... at least forty-two major companies moved all or a major part of their head office operations out of Quebec in the two years after the election of the Parti Quebecois."  <fnote>Ibid at 153. </fnote><heading>Legislation Affecting the Minority Rights of the Quebec Anglophones (and e/s2Francophones</heading><heading>Bill 22</heading>In 1974, Bill 22 came into force, making French the official language of Quebec. It also created a language test for newly arrived immigrants to determine if they were to be placed in English or French schools. Bill 22 pleased no one: "francophone unilingualists complained that Bill 22 did not go far enough; minority anglophones complained that their rights (as guaranteed by Bill 63) has been removed; and immigrants spoke bitterly of discrimination." <fnote>Richard Y. Bourhis, Conflict and Language Planning in Quebec (Cleavedon, England: Multilingual Matters, 1984) at 235. </fnote><heading>Bill 101</heading>Upon their election victory in 1976, the Parti Québécois (francophone nationalist party) immediately set about replacing Bill 22 with new legislation. Bill 101, the Charter of the French Language, requires that all primary and secondary education in Quebec be in French. The exceptions to this requirement included all children whose father or mother was educated at the primary level in English in Quebec and those children already in English education at the coming into effect of the Act, and their siblings. Among its other restrictions, "was the declaration French was to be the only language allowed on commercial signs in the province. With few exceptions, the use of English was banned." <fnote>Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, CBC News In-depth: Bill 101, online: < URL > Accessed on June 3, 2007 </fnote><heading>Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms</heading>The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms came into effect on April 17, 1982. To this day, it is one of the most advanced domestic human rights documents in the world. It provides individual human rights protections to all Canadians from the state and its actions. It supercedes all laws in Canada and "can render invalid or inoperative any laws that are inconsistent with its provisions." The CCRF is contained within the Constitution Act of 1982, which was the last significant constitutional enactment in Canada. <fnote>Canadian Heritage, Human Rights Program - The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, online: < URL > Accessed on June 3, 2007 </fnote>Section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (CCRF) delineates the educational rights that are guaranteed to Canada's French and English minority groups. Unlike some of the other sections of the CCRF, Section 23 is available only to Canadian citizens. Section 23(1) guarantees minority education rights to those "who have received their primary school instruction in Canada in English or French and reside in a province where the language in which they received that instruction is the language of the English or French linguistic minority population of the province." If an individual meets this criterion, their child has a right to instruction in the same language as their parent. However, there are a few limitations on this section. According to section 23(3), this right is subject to there being enough children entitled to minority language education to justify the use of public funds for education in minority language. The most significant restriction on section 23 of the CCRF is contained in section 59 of the Constitution Act of 1982, which states that Section 23 of CCRF does not come into effect in the province of Quebec until a proclamation is issued by the Queen or the Governor General, and gives the power to decide to enact this provision to the Quebec legislation. Quebec has not chosen to enact this clause and continues to restrict the minority education rights of the QA. <fnote>Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, s.23, Part I of the Constitution Act, 1982, being Schedule B to the Canada Act 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c. 11 </fnote>Section 33 of the CCRF was designed as an appeasement to the provinces, particularly Quebec. Called the Notwithstanding Clause, it allowed provinces to operate temporarily notwithstanding sections 2 (fundamental rights), sections 7-14 (legal rights) and section 15 (equality rights). It must be renewed every five years unless it is enacted permanently by a provincial legislature. <heading>Section II: Compromise in Conflicts Between National Minorities </heading>Will Kymlicka has argued that a group that is a national minority is allowed more entitlements than other cultural groups in the country. However, Kymlicka fails to explain what happens when two national minorities conflict. In such a conflict there can be only one solution - compromise. Over the years, Quebec has acclimatized to the idea of compromise, if only because a refusal of compromise has led to fervid legal battles and very negative media attention. However, the recent temperament of accommodation has not led to a fair balance between the two national minorities. Minority rights are constructed as a method of protecting those with less power in society. However, when looking at minority/majority relations in terms of power, one has to wonder if there is ever an equitable solution. Some argue that power is a zero sum game: if one group gains power, another loses it. "Relations of dominance and non-dominance determine who defines norms and practices and who must follow them; who is important and who is not; who defines the parameters of the debate and who does not; who is valuable and who is not. These are the profound and longstanding inequalities of the world..." Others have convincingly argued that compromise can rule society. Power games will still occur, but the society is generally balanced. <fnote>Gunhild Hoogensen and Kirsti Stuvoy, Gender, Resistance and Human Security, 2006, 37 Security Dialogue 207 at 219. </fnote>Arend Lijphart, in his theory of consociational democracy provided strong argument for compromise and how it could work even in the presence of power dynamics. "He defined consociational democracy as 'government by elite cartel designed to turn a democracy with a fragmented political culture into a stable democracy.'" It allows the leaders of each sub-group in society to represent their issues and provides institutional constructs to guarantee effective and fair negotiations and accommodations. However, there are a number of requirements for consociational democracy to work in an efficient manner. It is generally seen in situations where the society is in entrenched conflict over ethnic or religious issues. One of the more difficult requirements, at least in the case of Quebec, is the determination of those in power "to avoid secession or partition of the country ... and so [to] make use of procedures for accommodating the interests of their followers and devising consensual solutions to problems." Another problem area for Quebec is that it also requires a that "subcultures are treated with equal respect, even if they are not strictly equal in size." It can be argued that in the brief period between the Quiet Revolution of the 1950s and the rise of QF nationalism in the 1970s, this was the model that was in operation. "Proportionality was usually maintained, with the relatively small anglophone group receiving at least its fair share of most benefits ... Fundamental decisions affecting the interests of the minority were usually made after private negotiation with its representatives." The point at which consociationalism failed was the rise of the nationalist movement - and the decision to abandon compromise. Ian Lustick's model of control would adequately describe the model that Quebec chose to follow once in the grasp of the nationalist fervour. This model describes a system where "the dominant group controls the authoritative allocation of resources and gives its own interests priority over those of one or more subordinate groups. There is little bargaining between groups, except in situations where the system is breaking down." Essentially, where power again becomes a zero-sum game where one side must lose for the other to gain. <fnote>Garth Stevenson, Community Besieged: the Anglophone Minority and the Politics of Quebec (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1999) at 8. </fnote><fnote>Ibid at 9. </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Ibid at 15 </fnote><fnote>Ibid at 10 </fnote><heading>Section III: the Interpretation of Minority Rights Legislation in Canada</heading><heading>Ford v. Quebec</heading>The case of Ford v. Quebec (Attorney General) was a landmark case in terms of minority language rights in Quebec. The case was brought by a number of business owners who were seeking to challenge the constitutional validity of s.58 and s.69 of the Charter of the French Language, otherwise known as Bill 101. Section 58 of the Charter states that advertisements and signs must be posted in French, and can only have another language posted on the sign if the French is "markedly predominant". Section 69 of the Charter declares that "only the French version of a firm name may be used in Québec". The case made its way to the Supreme Court in 1988, where it was determined that section 58 and section 69 of the Charter violated section 2, freedom of expression, of the CCRF. The appeal was struck down, as well as the sections of the legislation. The issue should have ended with this Supreme Court decision. However, with the existence of the notwithstanding clause, as described above, Quebec had another option: they passed bill 178 which declared that, "the provisions of section 58 and of the first paragraph of section 68, brought into effect under sections 1 and 6 respectively of the present bill, shall operate irrespective of the provisions of section 2, paragraph (b), and section 15 of the Constitutional Act of 1982 ... and shall apply notwithstanding articles 3 and 10 of the Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms." The notwithstanding was in effect for five years. <fnote>Charter of the French language, R.S.Q. c. C-11 at s.58 </fnote><fnote>Section 69 of the Charter of the French Language has since been repealed. </fnote><fnote>Ford v. Quebec (Attorney General), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 712 at para. 7 </fnote><fnote>United Nations, United Nations Human Rights Website, online: < URL > Accessed on June 3, 2007 </fnote><heading>Attorney General of Quebec v. W.F.H. Enterprises</heading>Cases continue to challenge the status quo: the case of Attorney General of Quebec v. W.F.H. Enterprises challenged the "sign law" under Bill 101, citing, among other arguments, a violation of their Freedom of Expression under article 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. In the surprising decision, the Honourable Danielle Cote found for the defendants, claiming that "the province can't continue to impose restrictions on the use of languages other than French on commercial signs unless it can prove the fragility of the French language in Quebec society." However, this decision was overturned in April of 2000 where the Quebec Superior Court claimed that the legislation was justified as the fragility of the French language in Quebec society was proven by its geographic reality as an island of French in a sea of English territory. <fnote>Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, CBC News In-depth: Bill 101, online: < URL > Accessed on June 3, 2007 </fnote><heading>Gosselin (Tutor of) v. Quebec (Attorney General)</heading>More recent challenges include the Supreme Court of Canada (S.C.C.) decision March of 2005, where the Court ruled in Gosselin (Tutor of) v. Quebec (Attorney General). In this case, a number of francophone parents were seeking the right to send their children to English language schooling. The parents claimed that section 73 of Bill 101 violates sections 10 and 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in that it had the effect of prohibiting francophone children from obtaining a publicly funded English education. The S.C.C. dismissed their appeal claiming that "since the appellants are members of the French language majority in Quebec, their objective in having their children educated in English simply does not fall within the purpose of s. 23 of the Canadian Charter. The appellants have no claim to publicly funded English language instruction in Quebec and, if adopted, the practical effect of their equality argument would be to read out of the Constitution the compromise contained in s. 23."  <fnote>Gosselin (Tutor of) v. Quebec (Attorney General), [2005] 1 S.C.R. 238 </fnote>While the S.C.C. was simply upholding the current legislation, and their legal interpretation cannot be faulted, one needs to consider the discrimination issues raised by this case. While Francophones are majority in Quebec, it cannot be forgotten that they are still a minority in the English-dominated country; one must consider the ramifications of prohibiting access to English language education to a minority group that is surrounded by English speaking territories. This invokes one of the time-old issues in minority rights: should the priority be securing the rights of a minority if it sets them apart as "other", and could potentially have the effect of alienating them further from the majority culture? The government of Quebec has decided that the value of securing the francophone culture is worth any loss of opportunity and alienation that could occur. However, it is obvious from this case, and the similar cases that have transpired in the past that the minority group themselves may not agree. <heading>Singer v. Canada: a communication to the United Nations Human Rights Committee</heading>In the case of Singer v. Canada, the applicant's business, Alan Singer Limited, served a predominantly anglophone clientele in a predominantly anglophone region of Quebec. From 1978 onward, he was notified by Quebec authorities that he was not permitted to advertise in English, as a result of the relevant sections in Bill 101. He took the government to court, and his case was dismissed at the Court of Sessions in Montreal, Quebec Superior Court and the Court of Appeal. In 1991, Allan Singer made a communication to the United Nations Human Rights Committee under Article 5, paragraph 4 of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In their statement, it was declaraed that, "the Human Rights Committee, acting under article 5, paragraph 4, of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, is of the view that the facts before it reveal a violation of article 19, paragraph 2, of the Covenant." Following the submission of Mr. Singers claim to the Committee, but preceeding the Committee's decision, the law was re-written (in 1993) in a manner that no longer required the notwithstanding clause. However, as the law had been changed to allow additional langauges besides French on signs, the Committee concluded that Singer has been given a resonable remedy by the State, and closed the claim. <fnote>Supra Note 20 </fnote><heading>Conclusion </heading>Over the years, there have been significant changes to the legislation that governs minority language rights in Quebec. Since its creation, some of the provisions of Bill 101 have been relaxed. There is no longer a requirement for parents to have been educated in English in Quebec; now, education at the primary level anywhere in Canada will suffice. The laws governing English on commercial signs have been relaxed as well, likely a direct result of the decision of the United Nations. However, the QA population continues to clash with the QF majority, particularly in regards to rights concerning language in education. It cannot be denied that the QA are one of the better treated minorities in the world. However, for violations of minority rights to take place in a country that is recognized as a world leader in the protection of minority rights is unacceptable. The basis to a solution is respect between the linguistical minority and majority in Quebec - respect that has sadly been lacking through much of Canadian history. <quote>"Il me semble que plus je marche, plus loin est la destination. Que je ne vais jamais y arriver. Mais c'est du mouvement et ca me réchauffe et je retrouve mon espoir."</quote><fnote>Supra note 1 at 70. Translation: It seems to me the farther I walk, the farther away the destination. That I will never arrive. But it is movement and it warms me and I find my hope. </fnote>