This paper will examine the draft Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and assess whether it meets the specific needs of women with disabilities. It is comprised of three sections: an examination of theories of identity and how they help understand the multiple identities of women with disabilities, an explanation of why women with disabilities have specific and unique needs, and an assessment of the draft Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and how it treats the needs of women with disabilities. <heading>Section I: Theories of Identity</heading>In recent years, disability has been seen in a medical model, defining disability in terms of the individual's limitations and their method of mainstreaming with the "able" community. However, this model ignores the social limitations and obstacles that "disable" persons with disabilities. Those who reject the biological definition of disability have established the social model of disability, which argues that disability should be interpreted as a difference "rather than be seen as a deficiency which should be overcome."  <fnote>Carol Woodhams and Ardha Danieli, Disability and Diversity - a Difference Too Far? (2000) 29 Personnel Review 402, at 403. </fnote>Since most legal instruments still use the medical model, disability will be defined, for purposes of this paper, using both the medical and the social model of disability. Disability is "the social consequences of having an impairment." This impairment can be physical or mental in its nature, and can be visibly identifiable or invisible. <fnote>Disability Awareness in Action, The Social Model and Different Impairments, online: Disability Awareness in Action < URL > </fnote>The ability to identify with one's own "kind" is a human necessity; it offers group members comfort and protection. However, how does one "prioritize" identities when a person has multiple groups with which they identify? With the issue of disability and gender, politics of identity become extremely sensitive. Some women with disabilities claim their identity as a part of the disability community, others as woman and are geared towards the feminist community, and others identify with entirely different communities (cultural, sexual orientation, religious, etc.). Many, however, wish to claim both identities of woman and person with disability (and perhaps others). When looking at the multiple identities of women with disabilities, one must look at how these identities interact and conflict. "Studying disability without looking at the intersections of multiple identities results in a very limited perspective about who disabled people are and what they need." However, as debates concerning the politics of difference always highlight, the inner diversity of a movement can be its own undoing. Indeed, this is one of the main aspects of the ongoing political debate of "recognition" vs. redistribution. <fnote>Corbett Joan O'Toole, "Sexist Inheritance of Disability Movement" in Bonnie G. Smith & Beth Hutchison, eds., Gendering Disability (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2004) 294 at 297. </fnote><quote>Claims for recognition often take the form of calling attention to the putative specificity of some group and then affirming its value, thereby tending to promote group differentiation. Claims for redistribution [of political and economic recourses], on the other hand, often call for abolishing economic institutions and arrangements that underpin group specificity. Accordingly, they tend to decrease differences between groups.</quote><fnote>Agneta Hugemark and Christine Roman, Disability, Gender and Social Justice: Claims for Redistribution and Recognition in the Swedish Disability Movement, trans. by Fereshteh Ahmadi Lewin (Uppsala: Uppsala University, 2002), at 8. </fnote>There is no clear solution to the recognition/redistribution debate. Many theorists have examined it, but their solutions seem always to highlight one side over the other - providing a victory, but not a solution. One argument that may allow the circumvention of this debate is the idea of focusing on practices of identity. According to Upendra Baxi, there exists a human right to choose their practices of identity and to exercise these practices in the manner in which they prefer. This view of human rights reduces the clashes of multiple identities, by allowing an individual to practice their multiple identities without impinging on others. It accepts and advocates that "practices of identification under the signature of 'contemporary' human rights secure an open normative future for each and every human being. Further, the human right to choose practices of identification necessarily contests attempts (by state and civil society) to enforce enclosure." Indeed this concept also integrates a major problem for the disability community - that of being labeled. However, Baxi's explanation of practices of identity illustrates a way out of the identity politics dilemma. The greatest concern with this theory is not whether it resolves the difficulties posed by multiple identities and the politics of difference, but whether it is practical in a world still heavily grounded in the concepts of individual and group rights. While the human rights model of practices of identity would allow for more voices in the disability movement (and all other movements), the reality of the situation is that the international human rights regime is still very much based on the premise that human rights must be either group rights or individual rights. Baxi's practices of identity model straddles this stark divide. <fnote>Upendra Baxi, The Future of Human Rights, 2nd ed. (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2006) at 149. </fnote>The fact remains that women with disabilities still face many social, political, and economic barriers that limit their voice and their potential. For these women, identity politics continues to mean compromise and, at times, a silencing of their other identities. Furthering the disability movement continues to demand that women sacrifice some of their identities for the main cause. However, there has been evidence of positive moves forward for women with disabilities. "Within the Disabled People's Movement, there is growing evidence that the intertwining of stigmatised identities and societal oppression is receiving attention... It is those who are located at the site where oppressions converge and collide who inspire this awareness and their efforts typically result in the formation of specialized subgroups for interpersonal support or political campaigning..." With these positive steps forward and the realization that there are still miles left to cover, this paper will turn to look at the specific needs of women with disabilities compared to men. <fnote>Jill C. Humphrey, Disabled People and the Politics of Difference (1999) 14 Disability and Society 173 at 175. </fnote><heading>Section II: Gendered Difference in Disability Needs<fnote> Perhaps, in light of the above section on identity, this section needs to begin with a caveat: this section will be examining the additional obstacles facing women with disabilities as compared with men with disabilities. It will not be addressing the multiple identities of women with disabilities (such as sexual orientation, or ethnic or religious identities) simply because of time and space limitations.</fnote></heading>Women with disabilities have specific needs that stem from the combination of their sex and their disability. As women they are more likely to be subjected to violence and discrimination based on their gender. As people with disabilities, their voice is often ignored and the barriers against them increase. In developing countries, the discrimination women with disabilities face are even greater: "in every sphere of life, women with disabilities in the developing world experience a triple bind: they are discriminated against because they are women, because they are disabled and because they are from the developing world." <fnote>DAWN Ontario, Factsheets on Women with DisAbilities, online: DAWN Ontario, DisAbled Women's Network Ontario < URL > </fnote>Around the world, women are subjected to violence, predominantly in the private sphere. With women with disabilities, this situation is exacerbated. In many parts of the world, accessible transit and a mobile lifestyle are not options for women with disabilities, either because of infrastructural constraints (services are not available) or because of cultural restrictions. This ties women with disabilities to the home - both socially and physically. When one considers that "disabled girls are twice as likely to be sexually assaulted" and that women are most likely to be sexually assaulted by a relative, the home becomes a very dangerous place for women with disabilities. <fnote>DAWN Ontario, Factsheets on Women with DisAbilities, online: DAWN Ontario, DisAbled Women's Network Ontario < URL > </fnote>In terms of their reproductive rights, women with disabilities face risks and discrimination that is unique to them. In developed countries, despite legislation demanding accessibility, support services specifically tailored to mother with disabilities are either under-funded or non-existent. While maternal support groups may be held in accessible locations, their mandate and resources are not geared to specifically address the issues that mothers with disabilities face. In terms of their reproductive rights, women in developing countries face an uphill battle. <quote>In many countries there are now legislative and policy pressures to prevent the birth of disabled children, to deny disabled women their right to bear children and to encourage euthanasia as a socially-sanctified "option" for people with substantial or progressive disabilities. Around the world, disabled women are subjected to involuntary sterilization, pressured to or required to seek abortions and denied appropriate health care and assistance during pregnancy and childbirth.</quote><fnote>DAWN Ontario, Factsheets on Women with DisAbilities, online: DAWN Ontario, DisAbled Women's Network Ontario < URL > </fnote>There are also added dimensions of discrimination that women with disabilities face based on culture, sexual orientation, ethnicity and the development status of their resident country. While women's voices are beginning to be heard in disability discourse, only a fraction of the issues they face are being brought to the discussion table. More needs to be done to highlight the specific needs of women with disabilities. The proliferation of national and regional support groups for women with disabilities (such as UK Disability Forum Women's Committee and DAWN: DisAbled Women's Network), as well as the establishment of local grassroots organizations, are providing a forum and a voice for women with disabilities. The question to be asked is how this is affecting human rights law. <heading>Section III: The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and Women with Disabilities</heading>This section will focus on the newly adopted Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (the "Convention"). It is the first human rights convention of the twenty-first century and it is a landmark for people with disabilities. However, whether it addresses the needs of women with disabilities and with their multiple identities in mind must be examined. The Convention emphasizes the social model in its approach to disability. In its preamble, the Convention recognizes "that disability is an evolving concept and that disability results from the interaction between persons with impairments and attitudinal and environmental barriers that hinders their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others." This method of defining disability differs dramatically from national legislation that almost exclusively defines disability in terms of the medical model. <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 7. </fnote>The preamble of the Convention, in section (p), makes explicit reference to people with disabilities who experience discrimination on multiple fronts, including sex, race and ethnicity. However, it is interesting to note that in this effort to recognize the multiple identities of people with disabilities, sexual orientation is not including on list, but would have to be inferred by the grounds of "other status". Section (q) of the preamble explicitly recognizes that "women and girls with disabilities are often at greater risk, both within and outside the home of violence, injury or abuse, neglect, negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation." The inclusion of the words "both within and outside the home" is of particular importance: it signifies a formal acknowledgment of private sphere violence against women. Other than the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), no other convention formally recognizes the violence that women face in their own home. Finally, the preamble also demands that a gender perspective be included in all projects to further the rights of persons with disabilities. <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 8. </fnote>Article 6 of the Convention is expressly devoted to women with disabilities. It recognizes the multiple discrimination faced by women and girls and requires, in rather vague language, that the state parties "take measures to ensure the full and equal enjoyment by them of all human rights and fundamental freedoms." While article 6 clearly delineates the Convention's status on women with disabilities, it leaves something to be desired in terms of implementation. <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 15. </fnote>Article 8 outlines the obligation of states to raise awareness about persons with disabilities. This article is quite innovative and explicitly obliges the state "to combat stereotypes, prejudices and harmful practices relating to persons with disabilities, including those based on sex and age, in all areas of life." The value of the article lies in section 2, where express measures are detailed. One progressive measure included in the article is the obligation of states to encourage the media towards portraying persons with disabilities in a fair and non-stereotypical way. This is particularly important for women, as they are most often portrayed in a negative manner (weak or vulnerable) in the media. If the media were compelled to portray women with disabilities (and all persons with disabilities for that matter) as strong and empowered individuals, many of the myths and stereotypes about persons with disabilities would be undermined. <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 16. </fnote>Article 12 deals with legality before the law. While it addresses many accessibility issues, it does not expressly require legal services to be made accessible in terms of their existence. The issue of accessibility for persons with disabilities encompasses more than simply allowing them the use of legal aid. For example, in the city of Ottawa, population 750,000 as of 2005, there was only one lawyer in the city that dealt exclusively with issues relating to disability. Canadian law schools are only just beginning to offer courses on disability and normally only run such courses on a bi-annual and optional basis. One can only imagine the situation in a developing country that has twice as many persons with disabilities and one-tenth of the resources available. Accessibility and equal recognition before the law are not simply about guaranteeing "access" to legal services, but include making sure that such legal services exist for persons with disabilities. Article 13 of the Convention deals with access to justice and has ramifications for all persons with disabilities who are caught in the legal system. In Canada, there is not a significant history of women with disabilities in prison. "However, with the closure of psychiatric institutions and increasingly overtaxed and under-resourced community based services, Canada is now witnessing a marked increase in the number of women with cognitive and mental disabilities who are being criminalized." <fnote>Elizabeth Fry Society, Q & A How Women with Disabilities are Discriminated Against, online: Canadian Association of Elizabeth Fry Societies <  URL > </fnote>Article 16 discusses freedom from exploitation, violence and abuse. While it does mention violence in the private sphere, the focus is not on home-based violence. The only section of the article that could be of benefit to women with disabilities who experience violence in the home is section 5, which states that "state parties shall put in place legislation and policies, including women- and child-focused legislation and policies, to ensure that instances of exploitation, violence and abuse against persons with disabilities are identified, investigated and, where appropriate, prosecuted." The concern with this section is the implementation. How will states be able to uncover violence against women with disabilities when the state has been unable to protect women who are mobile and who have ready access to communication? It is, however, possible that this article will be fleshed out in future commentary. Additionally, states can be forced into specific practices through the reporting mechanisms incorporated into the Convention. <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 23. </fnote>Article 23 deals with the home and family. One particularly bold section of this article demands that "persons with disabilities, including children, retain their fertility on an equal basis with others." This is, of course, an attempt to address forced sterilization of persons with disabilities - a common practice the world over. Canada, sadly, has a history of forced sterilization on persons with intellectual and mental disabilities. The Alberta Sexual Sterilization Act of 1928 was in effect until 1972, and resulted in over 2800 forced sterilizations, mostly of people deemed to have intellectual or mental disabilities. Tragically, in many other countries around the world, forced sterilization of persons with disabilities is not a part of history - it is very present and real threat. <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 28. </fnote>Section 3 of article 30 guarantees that laws geared towards protecting intellectual property "do not constitute an unreasonable or discriminatory barrier to access by persons with disabilities to cultural materials." This is very much a twenty-first century issue and has rarely been dealt with in previous conventions. The ability to download and access cultural materials and information online has dramatically increased access to information for many persons with disabilities. While intellectual property rights are indeed rights of their own, the legal issue of ownership should not trample on the right of persons with disabilities to readily access information and materials. This section is almost an acknowledgment of the unspoken hierarchy of rights - with a positive outcome for persons with disabilities. <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 28. </fnote>In addition to the reporting mechanisms and the establishment of a Committee to monitor parties to the Convention, the draft includes the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (the "Optional Protocol"). This, like its triplets in CEDAW and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, allows the Committee to "receive and consider communications from or on behalf of individuals and groups of individuals subject to its jurisdiction who claim to be victims of a violation by that State Party of the provisions of the Convention." The Optional Protocol is important because it offers persons with disabilities one more avenue to pursue for their rights. However, its relevance for women with disabilities, who may or may not have access to legal services, or the ability to voice their concerns and issues (whether because of disability, cultural or gender issues), has yet to be determined. That the Convention allows for groups of individuals to bring claims forward is much more promising for women, as "disability groups can provide support and help people overcome isolation, develop assertiveness, and become politically mobilized." <fnote>Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, Final Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on its Eighth Session, 8th Session, UN Doc. A/61 (2006) at 52. </fnote><fnote>Lisa Schur, "Is There Still a 'Double Handicap'? Economic, Social, and Political Disparities Experienced by Women with Disabilities" in Bonnie G. Smith & Beth Hutchison, eds., Gendering Disability (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2004) 253 at 268. </fnote>Where one woman may not have the resources to bring a complaint to the Committee, a group of women may have more chance. The Convention is an excellent starting point for persons with disabilities to obtain their human rights and has made obvious effort to focus on the needs of women with disabilities in particular. The approaches taken in the Convention are generally very innovative. While the Convention, like others of its kind, does gloss over the cultural restrictions on women with disabilities, it is hoped that this issue will be covered more deeply by future general recommendations (which, according to article 36, the Committee is entitled to make). Additionally, it is also hoped that much like the success of the state party reporting system with CEDAW, this Committee can affect similar changes for persons with disabilities. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The multiple identities and specific needs of women with disabilities is a complicated issue that demands more than just a legal instrument. It demands a change in society's attitude towards with women with disabilities and other members of the disability community with multiple identities. However, as a legal tool, the Convention is an excellent starting point and its drafters have obviously struggled to incorporate both the needs and the multiple identities of women. Like any legal instrument, the proof of its success will come with evidence of its implementation at the regional and local levels. Its success will hinge on the number of states willing to ratify the Convention and the type of reservations they make. At this point, for women with disabilities, there is only progress to be made. How much progress is made and whether the needs of women with disabilities continue to be highlighted can only be demonstrated with time. 