<heading>INTRODUCTION </heading>At the end of the 20th century, there were wide discussions across India as to what was the biggest achievement for India as a country in the 20th century. India winning Independence and crossing $100 billion in foreign exchange (forex) reserves were touted as the two biggest achievements. The buildup of foreign exchange reserves has been one of the major milestones on the Indian economic scenario .Reserve accumulation was the buzzword of the late 1990s for most of the Asian economies. Increasing financial integration in global markets has meant that the risks involved with capital outflows have multiplied. Foreign exchange reserves are considered as insurance in times of crisis and go a long way towards building confidence in the financial system. India was a relatively closed economy until 1991 and has gradually been opening its economic frontiers since then. The current account was opened in August 1994, and the capital account is cautiously, though gradually, being liberalized. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) should be given the credit for helping India to find itself in a strong position with regards to forex reserves. But the RBI now had a new ern, the policymakers were questioning whether these reserves had grown in excess to what they were required to be and serious thoughts were raised about using these forex reserves for the well being and development of the economy. My research paper is a quest towards understanding the forex reserves position and the possible uses of forex reserves from a blend of options available to the Indian policy makers in handling these reserves. <heading>DEFINITION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES (BY IMF IN 1993):</heading>The International Monetary Fund's (IMF) Balance of Payments Manual (1993) defines foreign exchange reserves as: "Those external assets that are readily available to and controlled by monetary authorities for direct financing of payments imbalances, for indirectly regulating the magnitude of such imbalances through intervention in exchange markets to affect the currency exchange rate, and/or for other purposes" (IMF, 1993). <heading>IMPORTANCE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES :</heading>Some of the objectives for holding forex reserves as stated by Dr.Y.V.Reddy (2002), Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are: 1)To balance demand for and supply of foreign currency 2) Limiting external vulnerability by maintaining foreign currency liquidity to absorb shocks during times of crisis including national disasters or emergencies; 3) Providing confidence to the markets especially credit rating agencies that external obligations can always be met, thus reducing the overall costs at which forex resources are available to all the market participants, and 4) Incidentally adding to the comfort of the market participants, by demonstrating the backing of domestic currency by external assets. 5)Cushion for unpredictability in oil prices <heading>THE SUCCESS:</heading>The traditional trade-based indicator, viz, import coverage ratio which had fallen to an all time low of three weeks of imports at end-December 1990. Since 1991-92, India has made significant improvement in terms of raising this ratio. The import cover of reserves in 2005 was stretched to around 17 months of imports, and that is the highest-level ever recorded in Indian economic history (International Financial Statistics, Budget reports). Similarly, the ratio of volatile capital flows (defined to include cumulative portfolio inflows and short-term debt) to reserves declined from 146.6 per cent as at end-March 1991 to 38.2 percent at end-March 2003 (International Financial Statistics, Budget reports). Machlup (1966) puts forth an interesting theory towards explaining the accumulation of forex reserves by central banks. He compares the reserve accumulation by central banks to his wife's passion for clothes; though her wardrobe was full she was not satisfied and wanted more clothes. According to him, monetary authorities believe that it is essential to maximize their reserves in order to ensure the smooth functioning of the monetary system. In order to do this, the demand for reserves is measured by monetary authorities as existing reserve base plus an increase over time, which is accounted as a growth factor. This theory put forth by Machlup is more commonly known as "Mrs. Machlup's Wardrobe Theory of International Reserves" (Machlup, 1966). <figure/>Source: Reserve Bank of India Reports <heading>DEPLOYMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES IN INDIA:</heading>These so-called Reserve assets are composed of monetary gold, foreign exchange assets and other claims in foreign currency. The US dollar is the most important currency in terms of global reserves. According to the IMF Annual Report of 2005, the US dollar accounted for about two-thirds of the total global reserves. In India the foreign exchange reserves can be sub-divided into: 1)FCA (Foreign Currency Assets):FCA is maintained as a multicurrency portfolio, comprising of major currencies such as US dollar, Euro, Pound Sterling, Japanese Yen etc 2)SDR (Special Drawing Rights): The IMF(International Monetary Fund) makes its financial resources available to member countries through a variety of financial facilities. The members avail themselves of the IMF's financial resources by purchasing (drawing) other members' currencies or SDRs with an equivalent amount of their own currency. The IMF levies charges on these drawings and requires that members repurchase (repay) their own currency from the IMF over a specified time. 3)GOLD: Comprising of the physical stock of Gold which has remained largely unchanged at 357 tonnes approximately. 4)RTP (Reserve Tranche Position)A member has a reserve tranche position in the IMF to the extent that its quota exceeds the IMF's holdings of its currency, excluding credits extended to it by the IMF. Subject only to balance of payments need, a member may draw up to the full amount of its reserve tranche position at any time. This drawing does not constitute a use of IMF credit, as its reserve position is considered part of the member's foreign reserves, and is not subject to an obligation to repay. I would be using the following set of variables in my research to determine the adequate level of reserve holdings: <table/>ABSTRACT The research is based on the voluminous literature available on foreign exchange and the Indian economy. The research endeavors to determine what the optimum reserve holdings should be. The duration of my study would be from 1991 crisis to July 2007. <heading>OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY:</heading><list>To examine the reasons due to which countries hoard reserves.To determine the specific reasons for which India hoards reserves.To examine the reasons for the burgeoning growth in Indian reserves position since 1991.To determine the optimal level of reserve holdings in India using various reserve adequacy measures and state whether India is holding excess reserves.If India holds excess reserves-then, to determine whether these reserves can be invested for higher returns.To analyse the present role of The Reserve Bank of India in managing these reserves.</list><heading>A NOTE ON RESERVE ADEQUACY :</heading>Most Central banks look to build up their foreign exchange reserves for different reasons. The optimal size of reserves is a question which has been bothering many policy makers at various levels. Adequacy of reserves has emerged as an important parameter in judging an economy's capability to absorb external shocks. However looking at, the rate at which capital flows have been flowing in recent times, the old school of measuring reserve adequacy in terms of import cover no longer seems appropriate. Reserve adequacy measures have been broadened to include a number of parameters. Most countries do not have set targets for foreign exchange reserves. It is very difficult to ascertain what an optimum level of reserve for a particular country should be. Different researchers have arrived at different models to ascertain the adequate size of foreign exchange reserve holdings for an economy. In the early twentieth century, under the gold standard system, the prevalent view was that the size of reserves should be connected with the amount of money in circulation. Once the gold standard system was done away with in 1971, the size of reserves was linked to the extent of international trade. Reserves were desired to cushion the fluctuations in the current account balance. In the 1980's liberalization was the buzzword and facilitation of cross border capital movement was seen as the key to global success. This resulted in the change of outlook towards reserve holdings. They were hence expected to meet the financial liabilities of the economy both short and long term and to a greater degree. <heading>METHODOLOGY</heading>The Reserve Bank of India uses different indicators of forex reserve adequacy and tries to arrive at an optimal level through an observation of all the indicators taken together and not merely one. <heading>Some of the commonly observed indicators to measure forex reserve adequacy are:</heading>1) Import Adequacy - The import cover of reserves is a traditional indicator of reserve adequacy. This determines the amount of reserves as the number of months of imports that can be financed by the country's existing reserves, with three to four months considered as adequate. This is also known as the 'rule of thumb' as it is propounded by the IMF and is most commonly accepted. 2) Debt Adequacy - Debt Adequacy is the ability of reserves to cover external debt obligations, mainly short-term debt liabilities and is measured by ratio of reserves to external debt and short-term debt. The ratio of reserves to short term external debt is viewed as a useful indicator to judge the level at which investors lose confidence in the economy. It has been recognized as a key indicator in determining the extent of reserve holdings. 3) Monetary Adequacy - This is the ratio of reserves to broad money and reserve money. It aims to capture the risk of flight of capital from the country in the event of a financial crisis. Apart from the above methods any new method encountered during the study would be incorporated. 4)Measure of liquidity risks: This has suggested a combination of current-capital accounts as the meaningful measure of liquidity risks. Of particular interest, is the Guidotti Rule, postulates that the ratio of short term debt augmented with a projected current account deficit (or another measure of expected borrowing) could serve useful an indicator of how long a country can sustain external imbalance without resorting to foreign borrowing. As a matter of practice, the Guidotti Rule suggests that the countries should hold external assets sufficient to ensure that they could live without access to new foreign borrowings for up to twelve months. This implies that the usable foreign exchange reserves should exceed scheduled amortization of foreign currency debts (assuming no rollover during the following year). <heading>HYPOTHESIS OF THE STUDY</heading>NULL HYPOTHESIS: Ho: The Foreign Exchange Reserves in India are not in excess of the adequate amount. ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESIS:H1: The Foreign Exchange Reserves in India are in excess of the adequate amount. <heading>DURATION OF STUDY : </heading>The duration of my study would be from 1991 crisis to July 2007. <heading>DATA SOURCES:</heading>1)The IMF (International Monetary fund ) Reports  URL  2)Reserve Bank of India Bulletins (1990-2006) , Reserve Bank of India publications and the official website of rbi:  URL  <heading>LITERATURE REVIEW: </heading>1)Dr.Charan Singh's Report on Foreign Exchange Reserve Adequacy, SIEPR Policy Brief(2005), Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research and Singh.C.(2005):" Should India use Foreign Exchange Reserves for financing Infrastructure?" SCID working paper no 256,Stanford University,  URL  His study analyses almost all of the objectives I would be working on. His findings are as follows: The rising levels of FER(Foreign Exchange Reserves)have succeeded in infusing necessary confidence both to the market and policy makers. However, neither the capital inflow to India nor the size FER is disproportionately large when compared to some other countries in the region. The main sources of accretion to FER are exports of IT-related services and Foreign Portfolio Investment and not Foreign Direct Investment (which is more stable),as in the cases of China and Singapore. Therefore, India which is accumulating FER for precautionary and safety motives especially after the embarrassing situation in 1991 should avoid using these reserves for financing infrastructure. The use of these reserves to finance infrastructure may lead to monetary management problems. 2) Tarapore, S.S. 2003. "Capital Account Convertibility, Monetary Policy and Reforms." UBS Publishers' Distributors, New Delhi, 2003.In 1997, the Report of Committee on Capital Account Convertibility under the chairmanship of Mr.S.S.Tarapore suggested four alternative measures of adequacy of reserves which, in addition to trade- based indicators, also included money-based and debt-based indicators. The report clearly pointed out that with respect to all the four indicators India was in a comfortable position and thus stated that India is holding on to excess reserves. 3)Special Lecture by Dr.Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at National Council of Applied Economic Research, New Delhi on May 10, 2002. His findings are stated as follows: Technically, it is possible to consider three motives i.e., transaction, speculative and precautionary motives for holding reserves. Regarding adequacy of reserves he argued that even though India was in a comfortable position with respect to the forex reserve levels, greater an increasing financial integration with global markets would require accretion of forex reserves proportionately.Hence, the domestic perceptions of level of reserves add to the comfort in withstanding drawdown through capital flight, and experience indicates that crisis of confidence in currency often originates among residents. The leads and lags in trade and even invisibles can significantly influence supply and demand in markets, particularly when markets are not fully developed. If the leads and lags can be demonstrably impacted by discretionary administrative measures, the amount of reserves needed to moderate such leads and lags may be reduced. He also asserts that where there is lumpiness in demand and supply as is the case in India, the forex reserves have to be used for meeting the temporary mismatches in forex markets. In such a situation, the incremental changes in the level of forex reserves may also be correspondingly large. It was widely felt that contingent credit lines from private sector could be negotiated and thus actual level of forex reserves to be maintained may be correspondingly brought down. The Contingency Credit Line (CCL) from the International Monetary Fund could also have similar effect. India had not accessed this facility, and in any case, experience of other countries has not been very satisfactory on this. 4)Rane Ketan , Theses on The Indian Foreign Exchange Scenario,Florida State University, College of Social Sciences(2005) etd.lib.fsu.edu/theses/available/etd. His study arrives at the following conclusions: Based on the adequacy measures and the Indian position vis-a vis the measures , it can be safely said that the Indian forex reserves are in excess of what they should be. Economic theory alone cannot determine the best way to determine the optimal level of reserve holdings. Whether the government chooses to finance infrastructure or continue to accumulate reserves should be subject to a general consensus. A good policy mix would ensure monetary management, infrastructure development and accretion of reserves at the same time. 