As a member of the infamous Bloomsbury group in the early twentieth century, E.M. Forster regarded the Victorian middle classes as leading an inauthentic life which prevented them from attaining social and personal fulfilment. He felt that they were denied any true pleasure due to their repression and the prison that their desire for respectability created. The epigraph to Howards End, 'Only connect', implies a need to unite and Forster explores this in his novels. Each story is based upon a number of binaries which he attempts to connect in order to create a socially and personally fulfilling existence. A search for truth, 'human wholeness' and 'cosmic unity' underlies the adventures of each of the main protagonists (p142, Rosecrance, 1982). Forster's ideas on the subject develop throughout his early career, yet his essential message is that individuals need to change something within themselves and their perceptions of the world in order to 'connect' to something greater than the Victorian ideals and therefore have a greater chance of fulfilment. This 'something' comes in a number of forms, such as a relationship, a truth or a spirituality. He believes that this need is what makes us human, but he portrays the achievement as a struggle, constantly frustrated by nature and society. This essay shall examine some of the themes of connection and fulfilment and explore how specific novels demonstrate them. Virginia Woolfe wrote that Forster is always 'constrained to build the cage - society and all its intricacy and triviality - before he can free the prisoner' (page unknown, 1927?). He uses a great deal of symbolism, and this 'cage' can be recognised in the convention-bound Sawston, but another good example is London in Howards End. The Christmas shopping expedition demonstrates the way in which the busy, consumer-driven city inhibits people from connecting with themselves and each other. The fast pace and progression of the city is created through growing industrialisation and capitalism, neither of which are spiritually valuable. Margaret is disturbed by 'a darkening of the human spirit which fell back upon itself, to find a more grievous darkness within' (p80) - the Christmas spirit is society's attempt at connection and its failure casts doubts on the validity of the inner life. The craving for 'excitement and elaboration' demonstrates an underlying poverty of spirit (Messenger, p116, 1991). The 'fog' (p80) represents the oppressive nature of the city and the lack of a clear vision to help its citizens recognise the more important things in life, and whilst it divides the people it does not stop the trade. The city sucks people down to its materialist level: 'satanic, the narrower streets oppressing like the galleries of a mine' (p80) and the connecting roads only connect people to yet more materialism. The fact that a symbol of the past, Mrs Wilcox, is so uncomfortable in such a place shows how far it is from anything 'good' in Forster's eyes. Her spontaneous invitation to see 'Holy of Holies' (p81) - Howards End, demonstrates her anxiousness to get back to her roots and connect to a place. Her attempt to reach out and connect to someone through her offer of a visit is frustrated by Margaret's refusal, showing how she has become a part of the disconnected city. It can be seen as a 'jail', denying its inhabitants from their better selves (p117, Messenger, 1991); we see the previously calm Mrs Wilcox become distant and irritable, and as she ascends to her flat Margaret has a sense of 'imprisonment' (p81). The car is symbolic of the city - dirty, noisy and fast. speeding people towards modernisation and making the world appear a blur. Margaret experiences this on her journey to Howards End and struggles to connect with her surroundings once she arrives. Just as the car reaches this place, the city is rapidly creeping towards it, threatening to impose its unfulfilling values. Forster believes that 'society is invincible - to a certain degree. But your life is your own and nothing can touch it' (p77, Where Angels Fear to Tread). People have to detach themselves from society in order to take control of their own fulfilment. If Forster is suggesting that the city and urban society prevent us from reaching fulfilment, he uses landscape as its counterpart - a source of truth, essential to connection. As the Marabar Caves in A Passage to India magnify the contents of a person's soul, Wiltshire plays a revelationary role in The Longest Journey. Mrs Fielding tells Ricky about his brother as they walk into the Cadbury Rings. It is an ancient place and has a special life force as so many have lived and died there. The rings are a circle of truth for Ricky in which he might connect with his brother. Stephen stands by a tree at the centre, showing him to be synonymous with roots and the earth. Upon his discovery Ricky attempts to run away from the circle and therefore the truth, but he is dragged down into the soil as he faints. When he awakes he is re-born, and 'the earth he had dreaded' (p137) seemed clearer and beautiful. He calls out for Stephen, but the final connection is frustrated by the interruption from Agnes and Sawston convention, holding him back from a truly fulfilling existence. Forster's symbolism embodies not just the landscape but the very geology that underlies it. The truth Ricky seeks is rooted deep into chalky earth, not just in Wiltshire but in Cambridge too. At university it is an intellectual rather than an emotional honesty but somehow the connection with the pure white chalk below empowers the soul and breaks through the conventions of society. Although Ricky tries to accept the truth, Mrs Fielding is right in that convention gets the better of him, and just as the chalk broke the irreplaceable fine china, so the truth broke Ricky. As the ancient landscapes featured in Forster's novels are a channel through which connections are made, so ancestry plays a similar role opening a pathway to fulfilment. The brothers in The Longest Journey seem to have their fates pre-destined by their ancestry. Ricky is born from a literally crippling relationship, meaning he is fated never to experience love and fulfilment, unlike Stephen, who was born from a passionate and loving affair. Forster is denied the opportunity to have children by his own homosexuality and is pre-occupied by this theme, his characters searching for continuity in other places, often in terms of spirituality. This is exemplified with Howards End, the longstanding family home of Mrs Wilcox. It represents old England and the way in which it is suffering due to divisions is society. Forster believes that the country needs to return to its roots in order to learn how to live together in a fulfilling way. Mrs Wilcox wishes to leave the home to its spiritual heir, rather than to her materialistic family. The Wilcox's, driven by capitalism, fail to see the point in valuing their roots as something special. They move from place to place, their 'civilisation of luggage' (p141) leaving them personally and socially unfulfilled. They do not agree with the Mother's idea of society - 'can what they call civilization be right, if people mayn't die in the room where they were born?' (p79). Margaret understands the importance of having 'some very dear place' to 'relieve life's daily grey, and to show that it is grey' (p137). Howards End is special because it has a past in the lives of people untouched by the ill effects of the modern world. The old Wychelm signifies the importance of roots and the teeth implanted in it show that belief in nature and something spiritually greater than ones-self must underpin our value system. In this house proper values are, Forster would have us believe, more readily established. For example Margaret hardly recognises the empty servants quarters as they are 'just rooms again, where friends might shelter' (p188). Forster is preoccupied with the idea that an indulgence in the arts and over-valuation of personal relations can distract us from such fundamental truths, leading only to 'sloppiness' (Howards End, p27). Certain characters have led unfulfilling lives through trying to fill voids within themselves with intellectual or romantic ideas. It is noticeable in the Schlegel sisters' failed mission to make a lasting connection with Leonard, and in Phillip Herrington's narrow view of Italy. It may have been a self-criticism of Forster himself, and this is proved correct by his alter-ego - Ricky in The Longest Journey. The novel begins with a discussion over the existence of a cow if nobody is there to see it - this thought follows him throughout life as he comes in and out of touch with reality. He has a tendency to romanticize and idealize the world to such a point that he fails to recognise important truths: 'I have a sense of beauty, which leads me astray if I am not careful' (p103). Ricky wants to believe that the cow is there, that there is more to life, even though it might not be something you can necessarily see, yet he doesn't always look for it in the right places. This prevents him from living a truly fulfilling life. His first mistake is to fall for Agnes, distancing her from reality by imagining her to be a 'dryad', even wishing she 'might not be a woman' (p79). His hesitation to join her in the dell - his place for truth and honesty, shows his reluctance to connect her with reality. With no family or strong roots to connect to, Ricky clings to any possibility of love (and therefore connection). Their marriage prevents him from fulfilment as he becomes desperately unhappy in the convention-driven, unpoetic Sawston - the cow is not there and so therefore neither is reality: 'the shadow of unreality had begun to darken his world' (p195). His has a similar problem in idealizing Stephen. By placing so much faith in one person Ricky is never truly satisfied. It seems he has an inability to love, only idealise, which is equated with unfulfilment. Whilst he has difficulty in recognising where reality lies, he does understand its importance in terms of connection. By admitting the truth, or what is real and what is not, we allow the potential for fulfilment in our own lives. An example of this is Ricky trying to make Agnes accept the reality of Gerald's death so that she can grieve and move on. Forster is critical of this characteristic, yet we often find him romanticising within his narration as well - perhaps it is the curse of someone always searching for the ultimate connection. He describes a sense of beauty as a 'desirable gift' (p75, Where Angels Fear to Tread), but it should not be over-indulged. He certainly believes that it is of preference compared to people influenced only by society and convention. CAROLINE Abbot describes these individuals as 'dead, dead, dead' (p145, Where Angels Fear to Tread), whilst for Agnes Pembroke 'the inner life had been withdrawn' (p267, The Longest Journey). A balance has to be found, which he attempts to create in Howards End, between the Schlegel's emphasis on intellectualism and personal relations, and the Wilcox's belief in capitalism and convention. Margaret acts as a connecter in this novel, hoping that with Henry she could help him in the 'building of the rainbow bridge that should connect the prose in us with the passion. Without it we are meaningless fragments, half monks, half beasts, unconnected arches that have never joined into a man' (p230). In order to make connections with Forster's perceived values, his characters have to realise that their present view of life is flawed and change themselves. Thus it is necessary for Philip in Where Angels Fear to Tread to alter his perception of the world and himself in order to lead a more fulfilling life. He had internalised the pointlessness of society life and thought he was 'fated to pass through the world without ever colliding with it' (p33). He believed that Italy epitomised his romantic ideal, yet the novel brings a series of revelations about himself and the world which significantly alter him and his perceptions. Lilia's engagement shows him that he is as opinionated as the Sawston people he despises. In order to achieve personal and social fulfilment he has to learn from experiences, of which there are many. At the Monteriano theatre he identifies with the Italians' pleasure and with their spirit, realising the superficiality of his earlier conventional English idealisation of Italy merely as a beautiful place. He sees at last 'something majestic in the bad taste of Italy' (p107). He regards the town's tower in a new light: 'the summit...was radiant in the sun, while its base was in shadow and pasted over with advertisements' (p104), accepting that poetry does not necessarily disappear with ugliness; rather the world should be balanced by both poetry and prose (p59, Colmer, 1975). His 'eternal moment' arrives after he has taken responsibility for his actions and his life and told Gino that his baby has died. The strong physical pain that he experiences along with the sight of Caroline placating Gino causes him to make the final connection within himself and see beauty within the human spirit rather than the cultured arts - 'Philip looked away, as he sometimes looked away from the great pictures where visible forms suddenly become inadequate for the things they have shown us' (p152). His love for both Caroline and Gino is his connection with the world outside himself; he has become part of it rather than a spectator. Through this process his search for personal and social fulfilment has progressed significantly, as he knows 'Romance only dies with life' (p41). Ricky has a similar experience in Where Angels Fear to Tread, when a physical and visual shock from Stephen in Sawston causes him to make the connection and see life as potential for fulfilment. Characters unlike these two, such as Stephen and Gino have a greater ability in seeing opportunities for connection and fulfilment because they aren't constrained by conventional society. They recognise the valuable things in life, such as connecting with the earh or loving one's child unconditionally. Forster demonstrates what can happen to a person if their innate abilities are denied them through Leonard Bast in Howards End. He represents a generation sadly disconnected from his more fulfilled ancestors. He is infected by his internalisation of modern values, and upon seeing him Margaret wondered 'whether it paid to give up the glory of the animal for a tailcoat and a couple of ideas' (p170) - by not connecting with his true self he is unable to achieve any kind of fulfilment. Although Philip finds fulfilment through his relationship, there is a paucity of heterosexual relationships in Forster's novels, possibly as a result of his homosexuality. Mary and Henry, Lilia and Gino, Ronny and Adela and others all fail to make truly meaningful connections. This may be because they are often in opposing binaries, but, like Ricky, who wishes that there was a special place to record the importance of friendship, Forster also appears to value unconventional relationships, with connections where you wouldn't necessarily expect to find them. One of the most unusual relationships is that of Aziz and Mrs Moore in A Passage to India. As a homosexual writer, Forster would have been fearful of being labelled. Rather than labelling helping us to connect with something, it seems to distance us from the essence of what it is, an idea explored in A Passage to India. The bond between Mrs Moore and Aziz is so unusual that it is indefinable as a relationship - a notion that Forster seems to enjoy. Despite their differences, they are able to see the beauty in each others souls and make a connection. Their meeting significantly occurs in the idealistic 'Mosque' section, and so it is fitting that Aziz finds a friend there - a place that is an 'expression in architecture of a recognisable human aspiration' (p161, Messenger, 1991). Their relationship seems idealized, yet it gives the most pleasure throughout the novel. The friendship is frequently frustrated, yet it continues beyond death as their connection is of great value to Aziz even after Mrs Moore has died. This suggests that whilst life is fragile, truly fulfilling connections gain a place in a spiritually higher sphere. Unconvincing heterosexual associations coincide with weak sexual relationships. It has been said that in Howards End it seems as though Helen became impregnated by Leonard's symbolic umbrella rather than through any physical connection (Mansfield, 1917). It is equally unsatisfying in The Longest Journey, the most obvious physical attraction between Agnes and Gerald being thwarted by a prolonged engagement and sudden death. Even odder is the situation between Agnes and Ricky. Agnes is frequently disturbed by an 'abnormality' (p80) in Ricky, and the one time that any physical connection between them is alluded to is contained within a lacuna, marked by the poetic 'A bird called out of the dell: 'Ricky!'- A bird flew into the dell' (p79). Ricky is reluctant to meet Agnes in the dell, and this could be because it is a special place for him and his friends, and so by joining her there he betrays his relationship with them. His attachment to her isn't as fulfilling as his relationship with his friends, and so he can only romanticize it. Forster may have a point in disregarding the significance of sex, perhaps believing that it is too fleeting and a deeper spiritual connection is more fulfilling. However, at the time of writing this novel he had yet to experience a sexual connection with anyone and so may not realise that it can be an immensely fulfilling experience. The final theme that this essay shall examine isn't fully explored by Forster until his last novel, A Passage to India. No doubt as a result of the devastating war, he seems to finally accept that human connections do not suffice for continuing human fulfilment. As the sudden deaths of Gerald, Leonard etc show, life is too fragile to be relied upon. Characters are constantly frustrated in their attempts to unite with each other, and so Forster searches for a connection with the universe as a whole in order to find fulfilment. His universe is both a muddle and a mystery and unexplainable to humans through such small matters as religion. Both Muslims and Christians believe in God as a presence, an opportunity for love and connection to exist within our lives, and so Godbole confuses them by saying that God 'neglects to come' (p78). However, he explains, 'absence implies presence, absence is not non-existence' (p79). India embodies this idea, as any attempt to label or define something causes it to cease to exist. The harsh and confusing landscape leaves its visitors mystified, without anything real to connect too. The Marabar Caves are a great dark space apparently void of anything, yet the absence does imply a presence, shown by its ability to reveal a characters deepest soul - for Adela the absence of love in her relationship becomes too great a presence, causing her breakdown. Forster rectifies all previous attempts at connection by concluding that everything on earth is of equal value, and that we can only live harmoniously when this is recognised. Godbole's unsuccessful attempt to make Mrs Moore, the wasp and a stone equal shows that it is an ability only capable of by God. However, his attempt to do so shows the potential of the human spirit, and the novel ends with a hint of possibility for mankind in terms of fulfilment and connection, as Fielding and Aziz are only unable to become lasting friends 'yet' (p316). The story of every character symbolises Forster's search for fulfilment and connection, and as their lives are presented in such an intricate manner it is impossible to investigate every theme fully. However, ideas such as convention, landscape, intellectualism and spirituality have been highlighted in this essay - all of which would have been the concern of a man disillusioned by a shallow and materialistic society, intolerant of his sexuality. At the turn of the century it seems natural that he would look back upon our roots and an idealized society for guidance. Whilst Forster sometimes seems pessimistic about the fate of the human spirit, he certainly recognises a potential for us to achieve connection and fulfilment once again - 'perhaps the last word would be hope?' (p197, Howards End). 