At the time of writing Othello, Shakespeare's knowledge of tragedy would have been largely dependent upon ancient Greek drama. This genre of performance was deeply ritualised and frequently based on events in the religious calendar, aimed at the Gods. They believed that tragedy was in their hands and that anyone who transgressed their laws would suffer vengeance as a result. These performances are thought to have presented true humility and a sense of the human character. They portrayed humanity as fallible, and Othello is definitely similar to the Greek tragedies in the sense that all of the characters are liable to make mistakes. This essay will explore the extent to which Shakespeare applied Aristotle's principles of tragedy to Othello, and specifically examine the reasons for Desdemona's tragedy. In the third century BC Aristotle attempted to differentiate between the different genres of writing, and he came up with five main principles of tragedy. The first point stated that "Tragedy is the representation of an action that is worth serious attention, complete in itself". By this he meant that it is not dependant on its characters and more focused on the actual plot. The play would always display a unity and wholeness, with the action as a complete thing, with all of the strings tied up in the final scene. In relation to Shakespeare's tragedy, Othello is a highly concentrated and controlled play. Very few of the scenes loosen from the plot and the action focuses heavily on it. The great attention to action is heightened through the claustrophobia created in Othello. This is a unique sensation in Shakespeare's plays and is created as the attention becomes fixed on a single bedroom, which is where the final tragedy occurs. This is heightened by the fact that there is no subplot, which intensifies the dramatic tension as the audience doesn't get a single moment to look away from Iago's progress, as he pushes Othello towards tragedy. This is added to by the fact that the audience is aware that they are observing a group of characters who exist in a tightly knit social network, where each person has a clearly defined role and a view of each member of the group. Iago threatens the order and harmony of this network because he is able to manipulate characters' views. The language used relates to this point as it helps to carry the story forward. This is especially true of the leading character, Othello is gifted with the power of good speech and his tales of military feats gives a sense of action. The characters psychology is also reflected in language, as Othello's suffering increases his lines become more contorted, "O Desdemon! Dead Desdemon! Dead! O! O!". The sense of action and conflict is also created through the war with the Turks. Although this is isn't the main focus of the tragedy it is a factor of movement, as it is what moves the cast to a new setting. However, Othello does deviate from this principle in one way as, unlike in Greek drama, Shakespeare centers action on the individual. This tragedy is focused on the psychology of its characters and this is what creates the action, the movement of the play follows the movement of their thoughts. Aristotle's second point is of reversal, discovery and calamity. Through this the audience follows the process of the leading character coming to understand their fate as they are overturned, and a tragedy is presented at the end of the play. He noted that the discovery was often the most poignant or awful stage in the play, which created sympathy and/or empathy in the audience. Like many of these dramas, this play began hopefully with the newly blossomed love between Othello and Desdemona, they were looking forward to a happy and peaceful future together. This was when Othello was at the height of his prowess, both with women, and his position professionally, as he was a highly sought-after member of the military forces, and a name to admire. This status makes the reversal even more poignant. As the discovery occurs his name falls apart. It is interesting to note that 'O' at the beginning and end of his name reflects his calamity at the end of the play, exclaiming 'O, O' as his attempts to remedy his actions are ultimately irredeemable. The third point is that tragedies include both pity and fear. Aristotle stated that "the plot ought to be so constructed that, even without the aid of an eye, he who hears the tale told will thrill with horror and melt to pity at what takes place". These contradictory emotions are often wrapped up in religion and fear of the Gods. The audience often pities the protagonist's dilemma. In many ways Shakespeare does apply this theory to Othello, yet there is little reference to the Gods. However, there is still a large focus on fate, and how the characters are unable to escape from it. The play explores the ways in which different people make sense of events in their lives, including what they merely imagine to be happening. Often their fate is set by the social concepts of the time; for example, it could be suggested that Desdemona's death was inevitable due to the view of women in that era. It makes the audience consider the ways in which certain events are 'fated' to us, but the reaction towards the plot of Othello doesn't just include fear and pity. The power of this play as a tragedy is founded in its ability to make the audience recognise how much it shares as human beings with the characters because of a fundamental link between needs and fallibility, such as the human need for desire and the mistakes it causes us to make. Othello also makes the audience acutely aware of its needs for emotional and moral certainty. It will not allow them to judge its characters in terms of moral 'debit and credit', yet it still creates a need for the audience to seek a shelter from the full reality of its ending. Even though the audience and the characters recognize that there's "no remedy", it doesn't overcome the need for one. Whilst the dramatic illusion is bearable, there is still a need for some moral simplicity to lessen it, which is why some people might take Othello's final speech as a form of redemption for his terrible act. The penultimate principle is that the protagonist invariably has exceptional qualities. They are often good, kind and noble beyond normality, which makes their mistakes seem all the greater. Hamlet claimed that even the best of people can fall from grace, even from just one fault. Othello is extraordinary in his colour and achievements, but he has one vicious flaw, and that is his pride. He boasts about himself and his background, with his high breeding and achievements. When faced with Brabantio he says, " My services, which I have done the signog, shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know - which, when I know that boasting is an honour, I shall provalgate - I fetch my life and being from men of royal siege, and my demerits may speak unbonneted, to as proud a fortune as this that I have reached". His pride carries him through to his tragic destiny. At the point of his death he regains part of the nobility that he has lost. He reasserts his use of language to reflect his character, talking as if he's describing his future chronicles which once again proves his exceptional qualities, "when you shall these unlucky deeds relate speak of me as I am: nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice". The final point is the purging of emotion. The audience is able to release its energies and emotions in a safe way. It is supposed to make the audience know their place in the world, to become better citizens and reaffirm fear of the Gods. Othello reminds us that prejudice and narrow-mindedness have awful consequences and may teach us to be better citizens. However, in Leonard Tenenhouse's book 'Power on Display', he wrote that the miscegenation in the play was included in order to show that this sort of relationship is destined to have problems. This makes it difficult to deicide whether Shakespeare followed Aristotle's point. The way in which Shakespeare handles gender in Othello is interlinked with his handling of the conventions of tragedy. Perhaps the most inetersting gender study in the play is of Desdemona. Much of the action is focused on her. The audience is frequently made to feel both fear and pity for her circumstances, she is an exceptional character and her traits, along with the perception of women at that time, are the factors that decide her fate and indeed the greatest tragedy of the play. Desdemona is destined for trouble from the very beginning. Almost all of the prominent playwrights of the Jacobean era included the torture of an aristocratic woman in tragedy. This happens to them for two reasons. Either they have become the desire of someone that isn't a part of the aristocratic community or they have become the subject of a clandestine love. Desdemona suffers from both of these story lines. Othello is led to believe that someone else is in love with her, and the miscegenation in their relationship and their unpermitted marriage appears as a mutiny against her society. The prejudice is witnessed when Iago says to Brabantio, "an old black ram is tupping your white ewe". There is a theory that Desdemona yearns for authority because her father influences her, she models herself on him in an attempt to acquire power on a level with Brabantio. The command he holds over her makes her strive to gain an equal role. She assaults the patriarchal Jacobean society by asserting authority over her life. The audience is first presented with her sense of power at the beginning of the play when she addresses the senate advocating her marriage to Othello. She is capable of speaking the language of law, and standing up to her father - "here's my husband; and so much duty as my mother showed to you, preferring you before her father, so much I challenge, that I may profess due to the Moor, my lord". By marrying Othello she proves that she is strong enough to break her societal confines. However, as with all the mutilated women in Jacobean tragedy, by asserting her sexuality she has become 'sexually monstrous'. It is thought that by expressing desire, a woman takes on 'male parts' and is therefor monstrous. However, her desire for authority is equally matched by her desire for Othello. She is genuinely in love with him and this also contributes to her tragedy. As J Adamson wrote, her view of Othello 'as unshakable is itself disastrously unshakeable'. Desdemona said, "I saw Othello's visage in his mind and to his honours and his valiant parts did I my soul and fortunes consecrate". Her loyal devotion to him blinds her to reality until it is far too late. Her ignorance is fatal and her innocence incurs guilt. She nervously refuses to acknowledge that anything could change in their perfect relationship. When she tries to find out what is happening her efforts are so recessive that he takes them as an admission of guilt. However her obvious love for Othello is futile in saving her. Her actions in the first half of the play endorse Iago's vicious rumours. By taking charge of her own destiny, Desdemona revealed to Othello that he was destined to lose control. He may have been frightened by her aggressiveness as a woman, which could have led to his changing views of her. Yet asserting control over her love life wasn't the only problem. Iago is able to turn features of her political rebellion into to signs of unchaste desire, and so by the end, when she talks to Lodovica about Cassio's problems it proves to Othello that she is a "devil" and "the whore of Venice". The ultimate power of society's outlook, topped with Othello's paranoid sexual jealousy, are the final factors leading to her murder. As with so many independent women of literature, Desdemona had to die because there was no place for a woman of her character and principles in society. Shakespeare certainly kept to the criteria of Jacobean drama when it came to the leading lady, and this ties in with his presentation of tragedy. Aristotle influenced the form of Othello, and although there are some deviations, Shakespeare followed the main principles, creating a play full of the typical conventions of tragedy. 