Jessica is 14 and her sister, Emma, 16. It is Sports Day at school and Emma is sports captain for her house. Jessica watches her sister win all of her races and listens to her friends cheering her on. When their house wins everyone says how wonderful Emma is. Jessica doesn't like sport and school Sports Day is her worst nightmare. She feels jealous of Emma. At home Jessica's mum pushes her to decide what she is going to do when she finishes school and is worried because Jessica's grades aren't as good as Emma's. Emma tells Jessica to do what she enjoys and is good at, but Jessica can't think of anything. The next day everyone is still talking about Sports Day. A group of boys ask Jessica if Emma has a boyfriend. Even Jessica's best friend, Amy admits that Emma is much prettier than Jessica - every girl wants to be like her, maybe Jessica should try something that Emma doesn't do. After school, Jessica and Emma's Dad collected them with their step-mum, Louise. It is Louise's birthday and as a treat Jessica's Dad is taking them to the theatre. Jessica loves the theatre and is very excited. She imagines how wonderful it would be to play the main part in a show. Louise suggests she try for the school play. Jessica had always wanted to audition before but had been to shy. Jessica tells her mum that she thinks she'd like to do drama and wants to audition for the play, but she tells her that she doesn't think it's a very good idea and that she should pursue something more sensible. Jessica decides to try for the play anyway and show her mum that she is good enough. The next day Jessica goes with Amy to audition for the play. Nervous, she tries her very best. At the end of the auditions the drama teacher offers her the main part having noticed that Jessica has the potential to do very well. Without her mum knowing, Jessica works hard to prepare for the play. As her confidence grows Jessica's performance gets better and better. At parents' evening the drama teacher tells Jessica's parents how pleased she is with Jessica and is looking forward to seeing her in the school play. Jessica's mum is furious, but her dad tries to stand up for her. Suddenly Jessica finds herself in the middle of a huge row between her parents. Emma comforts Jessica and agrees to cover for her rehearsals. On Tuesday, Jessica has her dress rehearsal. Everyone applauds her as she takes her bow. When she looks up, her mum is waiting at the door with Emma. She grounds both Jessica and Emma, but it is too late to stop Jessica doing the play. Jessica's mum, dad, Louise and Emma all come to the opening night. The play is brilliant and even Jessica's mum stands up at the end to clap. After the show everyone congratulates Jessica, even her mum, who tells her that if she wants to do drama then she can. Jessica goes to bed that night happy - now everyone knows that there is something she's the best at. 