Printed inside the front cover of the Faber and Faber edition of The Waste Land and other poems Conrad Aiken, New Republic, is quoted to have written: <quote>"The poem succeeds - as it brilliantly does - by virtue of its incoherence, not of its plan; by virtue of its ambiguities, not of its explanations..."</quote>It is possible to suggest that in fact T.S. Eliot does not invite the reader to understand the text. However, it is possible to 'make sense' of the poem through an understanding of how the text was written, and how it came to be written. Cultural Materialism holds the view that "The literary text...is always part and parcel of a much wider cultural, political, social and economic dispensation...the literary text is directly involved in history." By looking at The Waste Land from this perspective it is possible to 'make sense' of the text and understand it as a literary piece that has arisen through a period of historical culture. <fnote>Hans Bertens Literary Theory the Basics (London: Routledge, 2001) p.176 </fnote>Eliot is regarded to be one of the great literary icons of the Modernist movement which developed radically through the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Modernism rejected previously established forms and artistic ideals. Evident in The Waste Land is the breakdown of chronology in literature and the shift towards the process of reflection. The Waste Land has been linked with James Joyce's Ulysses as well as with non-literary works, which share aspects that allow us to identify them as being Modernist works of art. Such works "originally signified cultural disruption and radically new ways of interpreting the world". However, readings of The Waste Land from a 'post-modern' perspective have placed it within the literary canon. In order to 'make sense' of the text, Rodrigues and Garratt propose ways in which a reader should focus on the text as a piece of Modernist literature. Their suggestions are strongly related to the methods of textual analysis employed by Cultural Materialists; "to work on the material - the words, the shapes"; "to piece together the references, allusions and collage-like nature of the material"; and "to situate the works historically and critically so that their difficulty is translated into effective meaning and feeling." It is arguably these methods that can best help a reader 'make sense' of The Waste Land. <fnote>Chris Rodrigues and Chris Garratt Introducing Modernism (Cambridge: Icon Books Ltd, 2001) p.47 </fnote><fnote>Introducing Modernism p.49 </fnote>Through the application of Cultural Materialist ideas about contextual significance in textual analysis, it is possible to understand the text through the way in which it subverts hegemonic forms. Modernist artists were in part, reacting against the established and accepted lavish narrative techniques of the Romantic period. The most obvious evidence of this within the text is its form and structure. It is divided into sections, or books, much like some of the epic poems written by Romantic poets, for example Milton or Keats. However, despite passages of narrative, Eliot's verse becomes fragmented and more abstract. A clear example is the transition of the narrative passage at the beginning of 'A Game of Chess' into a more disjointed form: <quote>The Chair she sat in, like a burnished throne, Glowed on the marble, where the glass Held up by the standards wrought with fruited vines (Lines 77-9)</quote>The passage is a clear introduction and can be credited with classic poetic techniques, for example the assonance between the words 'throne' and 'Glowed'. However, line 110 indicates a development of both language and style. The verse moves into a dialogic passage between what we might assume to be a male and female. One could suggest that this is linked to the literary modernist technique of "Rework[ing] slang and argotic expressions of everyday encounters into the texture of ... prose and verse." The technique of collage was popular among Modernist artists across a wide range of genres. Eliot, together with other writers like Guillaume Apollinaire employed this technique as is evident in this shift in style. Thus, the text can be seen to be undermining previously accepted realist styles of writing and replacing them with a reflective collage of reality. <fnote>Introducing Modernism p.39 </fnote>Written in 1922, The Waste Land not only subverts traditional classical forms, but also established ideals of society. In "The Burial of the Dead", Eliot manipulates and challenges hegemonic Romantic ideas about nature in order to evoke immediately the sterility of the modern experience. George Williamson comments on the "paradox of the seasons" which "inverts the attitude towards the life-cycle...giving an ironic turn" to the text. This is related to the modernist interrelation of memory and desire, which was largely due to the work of Freud and psychoanalysts alike. In Williamson's observations it is possible to identify such themes within these opening lines. "Spring disturbs the dead land, stirring memory and desire; winter lets it forget." Cultural Materialism allows us to 'make sense' of the text as part of a political artistic movement which used art as the basis of a social critique of conservative expectations. <fnote>George Williamson A Reader's Guide to T.S. Eliot, A Poem by Poem Analysis (London: Thames and Hudson, 1955) p.130 </fnote>Cultural Materialism applies a Marxist critique and attempts to identify within a text, power relationships which reflect how society is a construction of contesting sites of power. Understanding the text on this level might suggest that it is one which concerns and questions identity and reality. The poem moves swiftly through a multitude of fictional characters. In particular the various female figures that are represented might reflect a societal ignorance towards identity and a sanctioning of man. Cultural Materialism employs various methods of textual analysis in order to 'make sense' of a text. Although he is perhaps not considered a cultural materialist, Mikhail Bakhtin's idea of how the novel is built upon varieties of social vocabularies also evokes the importance of the text's own historical culture. Through observing The Waste Land on this level, it is possible to illustrate how Eliot presents this ignorance of identity and authority of man. It is possible to divide 'A Game of Chess' into three sections, each of which focuses on a different female figure. All of these women, in a sense, are reflective of an artificial, infertile society. The first is presented through a narrative voice whose sensual language evokes a sexuality suggesting it is male. Indeed, this female figure has been interpreted as being a prostitute. This is also evident in the contrast drawn between the aristocratic and lavish surroundings, and 'her strange synthetic perfumes' (line 87), which suggests that she does not belong there. The perfume, itself, is used as a metaphor, suggesting that although this woman is outwardly secure, she is inwardly 'troubled, confused' (line 88); her appearance is false. The lines 111 - 139 introduce us to a woman whose own heteroglossia suggests she is hysterical. Her irrational threat to 'rush out as I am, and walk the street' (line131) is suggestive of her hysteria. She appears to represent a weaker sex and modern infertility and thus empowers the male sex. In the final section the dominant speaker can be read as a female publican whose heteroglossia is more fluent, but expressive only of gossip and thus remains artificial; there is no depth. The presentation of these women as being infertile and lacking true identity through the use of different voices and vocabularies seems to empower man over them. Eliot uses language to perhaps challenge identity and break away from realist and symbolic art forms. Literary modernists were often concerned with the exploration of the "relationship of words to reality" and "attempt to set in crisis accepted ways of coding and understanding a changing world." Cultural Materialism allows an interpretation of Eliot's "creative play with words" as an exploitation of identity and empowerment through the absence of the Romantic notion of 'self', where the poet is omnipresent. There is no continuous narrator or identifiable voice, which seems to alienate the reader; we could question if we are ever spoken to directly. The way in which the speaker changes constantly, suggests that none of them are given power over us; through isolating the reader, the text refuses us any sense of power also. However, many of the figures portrayed are in some way victims of society, both pre-modern and modern; Cultural Materialism allows us to suggest that Eliot's cathartic work perhaps empowers these figures by articulating their inner anxieties rather than asserting a power over the reader. <fnote>Introducing Modernism p.59 </fnote><fnote>Introducing Modernism p.61 </fnote>Cultural Materialism adopts Structuralist methods of textual analysis, considering that "meaning in language only arises from differences and relationships along the chain of signifiers." It is therefore possible to 'make sense' of The Waste Land through exploring the way that it is structured around a number of binary opposites. Cultural Materialism also insists that texts are "absolutely inseparable from their historical context." Practitioners approach literary texts in the same way as other texts; they aim to "...trace and bring to light relations of power and process of ideological and cultural construction." Thus, not only is it possible to understand the text on the basis of its binary structure, but take the analysis one stage further and read these oppositions as "time - and place - bound verbal construction[s] that [are]...in one way or another political."  <fnote>Introducing Modernism p. 60 </fnote><fnote>Literary Theory The Basics p. 176 </fnote><fnote>Literary Theory The Basics p.177 </fnote>A dominant binary opposition is that of life and death; fertility and infertility. The reversal of ideas about the seasons in the opening lines draws attention to this. The 'lilacs' are symbolic of new life and fertility which grow from the 'dead' and infertile land. Taking into account when and where the text was written might suggest that this opposition is a comment of dissent within a post-war culture. New technologies of the modern period allowed society to see the effects of the First World War; the previous belief in the 'nobility' of war was called into question. Within such a context, the binary opposition of life and death is particularly prominent. In book three, 'The Fire Sermon', it is made significantly poignant through the use of war-like images. Furthermore, the amalgamation of senses in lines 185-6 embodies this opposition, illustrating 'life' through the human sense of touch: 'cold blast', but also implying 'death' through the way the speaker can 'hear / The rattle of the bones'. The First World War went further to effect behaviour and expectations, particularly in social, sexual and gender relations. Through employing Cultural Materialism it is possible to detect this through the representation of emotions and relationships within the binary structure of the poem. There appears to be two sides of sexuality within the text both of which diminish the possibility that sex can bring regeneration, cultural or personal. One of the sexual dimensions represented could be described as a dry, baron interchange inseparable from neurosis and self-destruction. This is particularly clear in the scene described by Tiresias in lines 230 - 256 which illustrates "a seduction seemingly without any love or passion". The typist displays no desire to engage in sexual activity, "but no desire to resist seduction". In the lines 249 - 56, the only sensation expressed is one of relief; she is 'glad it's over.' Similarly Eliot's 'young man carbuncular['s]' experience lacks sincerity: 'His vanity requires no response, / And makes a welcome of indifference.' The second side of sexuality represented in The Waste Land is of a rampant and fecund nature associated with a lack of culture and rapid aging. This is illustrated boldly in the characterisation of the landlady in the third section of 'A Game of Chess' through her re-telling of a conversation with Lil, whose "rejection of her offspring (line 160)" once again emphasises the loss of the regenerative values of sex. Once again, by looking at the text as a piece of modernist writing, it is possible to assert that the text is making a subversive comment on the "transgression of previous sexual protocols and rules in personal life". Thus, a Cultural Materialist reading enables us to 'make sense' of the poem not only as a literary text, but as a work that embodies and evokes its own cultural context. <fnote> URL  14/05/04 </fnote><fnote>Introducing Modernism p. 9 </fnote>Some of the key ideas of Cultural Materialism derive from the work of Raymond Williams, who asserted that texts of the past should be used to 'read' the present, "Revealing politics of our own society by what we choose to emphasise or suppress of the past." This theory can be applied to the text on two levels, the first being a broader analysis of how the text is written. The Waste Land is structured around various literary references and significant myths, in particular those of the Fisher King and the Quest of the Holy Grail. Patrick Mooney suggests that the way in which Eliot has used these "underlying myths" allows the text to "comment on the modern world" and "describe modern cultural emptiness within the context of ancient myths of a heroic quest that gives meaning and relevance to life." On a second level, The Waste Land can be used to 'read' our own post-modern 'present'. A particular focus within the text is that of the city; London. The urbanisation and expansion of cities was of particular significance during the early modern period. Eliot's repeated phrase 'Unreal city', however, might have an added depth when reading the text today. Like Eliot, many artists articulated the consequent feelings of isolation caused by the expansion of streets and buildings in cities. Cities in the present day can still seem daunting because of their busy and almost 'unreal' atmosphere. Cultural Materialism allows us to read the text not only as an expression of the new modernity of the early twentieth century, but relates it to how that modernity has shaped our own 'post-modern' world. <fnote>Peter Barry Beginning Theory An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1995) p.184 </fnote><fnote> URL  </fnote>Cultural Materialism enables the reader to 'make sense' of The Waste Land on a number of different levels. In a sense, the poem as a whole might never be fully understood or explained. However, through working on the material in terms of structure and language; observing and focusing on the allusions and references within the text, and finally setting it in its historical and cultural context, Cultural Materialism opens endless channels of interpretation. This essay has recognised this piece as one of the leading modernist literary works, which embodies the dissident voices and anxieties of the period in relation to both the past and present. The fragmented style seems to express the period of change, and its ambiguities raise many pertinent questions relating to various significant issues such as identity, sexuality and, indeed, the culture of modernity itself. 