Everyone surrounding Jessica cheered loudly with more enthusiasm than she thought she'd ever felt during her entire life. Jessica was fourteen, and her elder sister Emma who was sixteen had just won her third race at the school Sports Day. She had been elected Sports' Captain of their house at school. Jessica had voted for her too, despite being so jealous of how wonderful everyone thought her sister was. She thought Emma was wonderful too, but something inside prevented her from feeling more pleased for her. Part of her even wished someone else had won the vote. Phased by everything that was going on around her, Jessica imagined how it might feel if she were Emma. All of her friends, and even those people who weren't her friends would cheer for her, and they'd all know who Jessica Beechams was. All the boys would fancy her and the girls would want to be her. She imagined having a warm feeling inside her that would make the rest of her glow with confidence. She smiled at this thought, but still wished that she could be amazing at something and experience that feeling herself. Everyone - her friends and family - were all so proud of Emma, including Jessica. If only everyone could be proud of her too. Jessica had never been very good at any sport, or anything that involved coordinating different parts of her body at the same time. During P.E. lessons she often felt a cold, painful shiver that rooted from the bottom of her spine and shot right the way up to the crown of her head. It was almost as if someone had prodded her with a sharp pin. It always felt to Jessica that everyone was watching her and to their amusement, comparing her to her sister. Emma, having noticed Jessica sitting alone, ran over still panting from the 200m hurdle race. "You ok Jess?" she sighed with exhaustion, bringing Jessica back from her fantasy world, "why are you all on your own?" "Sorry, I never noticed" she replied, suddenly realising that the crowd she had sat amongst had rapidly dispersed elsewhere. "I was just worried when I saw you here all on your own." Emma had just about caught her breath and pulled her sister up from the dried up grass. "You did really well Em, "Jessica replied brushing the grass off her clothes, not making any eye contact with her sister. Feeling a little awkward, she was almost glad when a year eleven boy, whose name she didn't know, ran over to collect Emma for the prize giving. Emma ran in her black gym shorts and red polo neck t-shirt towards the stage that had been built on the edge of the school field. Jessica sometimes wished that Emma wasn't so nice. If she was horrible then people wouldn't like her so much. They would tell Jessica that it didn't matter how good her sister was because she was the nice one. But Emma had always been a great sister, and they had become even closer since their parents had split up. For a moment, Jessica felt almost invisible. She stood alone in the middle of the huge school sports field seemingly unnoticed. Composing herself, she shook her head of thin, mousy blonde hair and opened her dull grey eyes as wide as she could before following Emma to the playground. She managed to find her class and sat down next to her best friend, Amy. The results of every race were announced, including the year nine relay race that Jessica had been made to run in. It was compulsory for everyone to participate in an event. The relay seemed a good option as it was over quickly and she wasn't the only one running. Their team had come second, which was good, but not good enough, she thought to herself. Emma would have come first. One of the boys in Jessica's class, Lawrence, turned around saying that she ran like a chicken and couldn't understand why anyone chose her to run. She knew instantly she'd gone bright red from the way her cheeks began to burn, as if boiling water was being poured slowly down her face. She held her breath to hold her tears back and eventually replied, "Who said I wanted to run anyway - idiot!" Later on she wished she could have thought of something better, but Amy had laughed and made a few comments about Lawrence's own efforts. Jessica's house came first overall. The whole school watched as Emma climbed gracefully up onto the stage to collect the winners' cup. It had been decorated with yellow ribbons for their house, which were tied to both handles. She shook hands with the headmistress firmly. Then, glowing with pride, and smiling at everyone, she held the trophy cup high above her head. The whole house jumped to their feet cheering and clapping ecstatically, whilst all the others sat and clapped, mournfully staring at the winners and quietly chatting amongst themselves. Jessica watched in admiration as Emma descended into the crowd to be greeted by hugs and kisses. Everyone lifted her up into the air like a real champion. The sun shone around her and was reflected sharply by the trophy she held so tightly. Jessica looked up and smiled silently. Standing still, she could almost feel the ground move as everyone jumped up and down with excitement. She could feel their soft cotton t-shirts brushing against her arms. The muggy smell of fresh spring grass, mixed with the sweaty muddy odours of everyone around her, seemed strangely sweet. The noise of her friends shouting and screaming gradually became muted. Jessica felt an odd feeling in the pit of her stomach which grew upwards and settled in the back of her throat. She swallowed what seemed to be the size of a tennis ball and sighed to herself. Suddenly, she felt guilty and selfish because she couldn't feel completely happy for her sister. Secretly she still wished that she could do something to make people cheer and look up to her in the same way. Clenching her teeth together and swallowing her envy, Jessica rejoined the excitement. She jumped up and down with her friends and cheered loudly for Emma and their house team. 