It has been suggested that the current children's publishing market has reached another 'Golden Age'. Julia Eccleshare writes: "Children's books are now up front big sellers and the barriers to their success are tumbling down." An indicator of this might be the Harry Potter phenomenon, which has received enormous media coverage and is evident of the Television and film interest in children's fiction. A beginning point to this rise in status might be 2002 when Phillip Pullman won the Whitbread Book of the Year Award for The Amber Spyglass. <fnote>Julia Eccleshare 'A Fast Track for Children's Books', from Publishers Weekly Special Report: British Publishing 2004 (08/03/04) </fnote>However, Eccleshare also highlights the anxieties within children's publishing <quote>"about the strength of the market to maintain the full range and volume of children's books."  She makes the point that "children are a diverse group of readers and ... [booksellers] want to cater for them all" and thus see the "...importance of a wide range of titles".</quote><fnote>Julia Eccleshare 'A Golden Time for Children's Books' from Publishers Weekly (18/02/02) </fnote><fnote>Julia Eccleshare 'A Golden Time for Children's Books' </fnote>Harry Potter has also lead to an increase in Fantasy fiction novels. Phillippa Dickinson "believes that the market for big fat fantasy fiction is insatiable". <fnote>Julia Eccleshare 'A Fast Track for Children's Books' </fnote>However, another popular genre within the children's publishing market is that of 'real-life' teenage fiction where authors such as Jacqueline Wilson and Anne Fine have also received much 'frontline' marketing attention. I have chosen Random House Children's Books as my prospective publisher. Their collaboration with Transworld Children's Books has increased their prestige in recent years. More importantly for me is the genres of fiction that are dominant in their books. Other publishers, particularly Bloomsbury, have recently become focused on fantasy and thus my book would not fit well into their list. Random House's work with authors like Jacqueline Wilson and Anne Fine has brought the real-life genre of teenage children's fiction into a prominent light and thus I feel that this publisher's experience will benefit the marketing of my book. My book fits into this segment of the market and is targeted primarily at young teenage girls aged twelve years and above. It is written from the viewpoint of a teenager which "allows them to identify with the text and to believe in what they are reading." This is what sets it in line with books by the fore mentioned authors. Moreover, my proposed novel, Centre Stage brings into play other issues that are commonly found in teenage anxieties such as divorce and various pressures from school. The way in which the protagonist overcomes her problems will be attractive to both parents and young teenagers themselves. <fnote>Louise Jordan How to Write for Children and Get Published (London: Judy Piatkus (Publishers) Ltd, 1998) p.50 </fnote>I have considered primarily 'pull' promotional strategies as the basis of the publicising of my book. There are several reasons for this. The first is that the publishing industry could be described as a "Perfectly Competitive Market", which has little consumer loyalty. Thus, for a new author it might be more effective to communicate to the readers, or buyers, more directly, since very few look at who is actually publishing the book. <fnote>Michael Fardon (et. al.) Advanced Business (Worcester: Osbourne Books Ltd, 2000) p. 130 </fnote>In Eccleshare's report, 2002, she states that "Authors....now promote themselves...through school and library visits". As a new author, this might be effective and will cost publishers very little. It appeals to both the young teenage reader and parents; the children will partake in any workshops and be exposed to the book whilst parents will sign consent forms and learn about author and novel through the child. It is important in marketing to identify the right media. The dominant theme of drama in my novel is particularly significant to me, the author, and could possibly lead to effective marketing campaigns. Initially, a local campaign would perhaps be effective as I am a teacher in the area and a well known actress within the local theatre circle. I have also written theatre reviews for the BBC Three Counties Radio Website and the local newspaper both of which might be willing to make the release of my book a major feature. On the BBC website in particular there is a specific section for teenagers which would be an effective place to print, on line, an interview or press release. In turn a more national campaign might develop including nationwide library and school visits. It might also be possible to expand this local appeal to one which might attract wider, national attention. My own stage experience began at home at the age of seven, when I performed in The Luton Children's Variety Show with Faye Tozer, before she became internationally recognised for her singing career with the pop band 'Steps'. A campaign for the book using this connection could be very effective. Although there are many alternative mediums of advertising media, as a new author, it might be more realistic and, indeed, more effective to concentrate on more publicity based promotions. It is possible to assert that as opposed to advertising "Publicity has far greater impact in that it appears to come from a third person and is thus more believable." However, one other form of publicity might be through young teenage magazines, for example Shout. The novel deals with issues that are common among teenagers of this age and thus readers of such magazines might be interested in buying my book. Furthermore, Television programmes such as Blue Peter and channels, for example 'Nickelodeon', which are aimed at my target audience, might also be possibilities, paticularly since I am a young writer. <fnote>Michael Fardon (et. al.) Advanced Business p.298 </fnote>In terms of packaging I would like my book to have a brightly coloured jacket. Although I like the illustrations for Jacqueline Wilson's books by Nick Sharratt, I think it is important that there is a significant difference in those for the sleeve of my book. Having researched many illustrators, I am drawn to the work of Steve Cox who works in a variety of styles and media. I feel his style would compliment my novel and make it attractive to both adults and young teenagers themselves. <fnote> URL  (30/05/04) </fnote>