It is possible to suggest that the most clearly obvious way into both of these poems is on a graphological level; in both there is a distinct lack of punctuation. "Pan Recipe" is structured as one sentence, although this is complicated by both the many clauses, and by the separation of the verse into paired lines. "New World A-Comin'" is divided into three verses, each of which is also structure as one sentence. In both texts this is indicated by capitalisation at the beginning of the verse and a full-stop at the end. This is one of the techniques that give both these texts cohesion. Both texts use lexical deviation as a method of foregrounding. "New World A-Comin'" is riddled with examples of words which could have several meanings and functions. This is often caused by graphological deviation; i.e. where the line ends in relation to the words and phrases, and the way syntax is used. The first three lines, for example, are particularly ambiguous in meaning. The line break between "this" (line 1) and "leader" (line 2) makes us question the functions of both words; it is unclear as to whether "this" should be read as a demonstrative article or demonstrative noun. If we take the former function, "leader" would be read as the pre-modified noun object of the phrase - a "Helpless.../leader"; if we take the latter "leader becomes adjectival and, if read as being hyphenated with "less" into a compound adjective (line 3), becomes part of a second simile. It is likely to be the latter if we look at the paralleled structures between these lines and the repetition of "-less" as a suffix. However, the syntax between lines two and three also confuses the word functions of both "leader" (line 2) and "less" (line 3). This mode of foregrounding through deviation reoccurs frequently throughout the poem particularly at the beginning of the second verse. In Agard's poem there is also foregrounding in the ambiguity of the meanings of words, which is consequent of semantic deviation. The Caribbean poem is an extended metaphor in which Agard uses the vehicle of the steel pan to convey a sense of new life born out of the past. This extended figurative structure is further complicated by the use of the term "Recipe", and the semantic language and clause structures associated with cooking. Within the body of the poem itself are also many other examples of metaphor and also puns. In line one, for example, the word "rape" could be understood in two ways, depending on what function we assign to it. If we take the verb function of "rape" the line would read as a basic phrase structure meaning to 'despoil' "a people". However, we could also read this in a figurative, metaphoric way by taking the noun definition of the word, where "rape" is a rich yellow plant, which would then be functioning adjectivally in the metaphoric structure to describe the people of the past, from which the present has been formed. Both poems also use semantic deviation in the application of animating verbs and adjectives to non-animate objects. In lines 19 and 20 of "New World A-Comin'" the adjectives "firm" and "fleshed" pre-modify the noun "flame" giving it human or animal like qualities. However, "flame" and can also be read as a compound adjective with "warm" at the beginning of line 21, thus acting as a pre-modifier itself in the noun phrase in which the "warriors" act as the head noun. This is another example of graphological deviation. In "Pan Recipe" the use of the present simple verb "stifle" animates the "drum", since a drum does not play itself. The verb is usually used in reference to the suppression, curbing, suffocation, or repression of a person or animal; these are the normal paradigms. Such foregrounding through deviation makes us think deeper about the meaning. If we read it as a metaphor and set it against the rest of the poem, we might take the drum to represent the steel pan music of the "people". Music is an abstract noun which, in a sense, is alive or animate when we can hear it. Hence, our reading would mean the stifling of the music which itself is symbolic of the "people". Although there are many techniques which create ambiguity through deviation, there are also many cohesive devices which hold these poems together. Both poems use sound patterning through alliteration extensively and to great effect. In lines 7-13 of "New World A-Comin'" the use of alliteration and sibilance is mimetic of the "silence" in line 11. The repetition of the unvoiced fricative /f/ and unvoiced sibilant /s/ also slow down the rhythm of the text which is broken at the end of line 11 through the use of enjambment. This is another example of foregrounding by graphological deviation; the use of the colon adds to this sense of "silence". In verse two of the poem, the repetition of the fricative /f/ works in a very different way. The way in which the air flow is not stopped in this alliterative passage gives it a sense of heightened action, which is echoed by semantic links between the words; "fire-arms", "fire", "flashed" and "flame" all have collocations of violence and even war, which is further emphasised by the reference to "warriors". In "Pan Recipe" Agard also uses alliteration extensively which generates a sense of rhythm. This in turn is mimetic of the dramatic language. The repetition of bilabial plosives in both lines three and five emphasise the "pain" Agard is trying to convey and echo the brutal acts to which the extended metaphor relates; the alliteration brings out the anger the persona of the poem feels about the cruel treatment of Caribbean people. This is added to by Agard's use of internal rhyme in lines three and four. The repetition of the diphthong /ɔi/ ("boil", "Foil", "voice") draws out these lines and thus emphasises the sense of time suggested earlier in line two "simmer for centuries". In "New World A-Comin'" the extensive use of parallelism is also a cohesive device which helps us to construct meaning from this largely fragmented work for example in the first four lines. Furthermore, it could be argued that there is a circular structure, whereby the end of verse three echoes the first verse in tone, mood, and in the semi-repetition of the abstract metaphor drawn between "soiled" and "silence". The cohesion in "Pan Recipe" stems largely from its genre as performance poetry and the consistent use of ellipsis - for example the ellipsis of the article in line five - and alliterative rhythms which echo Caribbean speech. 