Four Poems in Process, 2002, by Mario Petrucci and Judge Dreadword by Victor Questel both address linguistic issues. Each poem looks at the ways in which 'acceptable' or traditional language practices can be altered. Although the poems both share the same theme, the poets approach the subject matter in very different ways. Petrucci explores, through the use of poeclectics, how traditional forms can be manipulated to the point where the meaning is altered. In contrast to this almost celebratory approach, Questel looks at how such manipulations of language can be rejected and oppressed. Poeclectics, as defined by Petrucci, is a growing tendency for poets to "utilise more freely...a variety of texts, styles, voices, registers and forms". It is "a re-orientation towards Re-Writing that re-emphasises the conventional re-visitation of literature's more recognisable 'voices'." Petrucci uses such techniques in his  Four Poems in Process, 2002. In each, he takes a traditional form and manipulates the text to form something quite distinctly different. <fnote>Mario Petrucci Poetry in Performance: Intertextuality, Intra - textuality, Poeclectics,  URL  (2000/2001) pp.1-2 </fnote>The first, The Complete Letter Guide, takes the traditional forms of various different letters. Through re-arrangement and fragmentation, Petrucci creates a humorous and ironic piece. The verse is fragmented into line segments, which uses the "familiar and perhaps key 'Intra-textual technique' - the cut-up." The way in which the text is broken up leads to the juxtaposition of contrasting initial statements that, through the enjambment and even stanzas creates an ironic effect. An example would be between the second and third stanzas. 'Mr. Bird' at the end of the second verse appears to be the object of the statement. However, the tone of the letter changes in a humorous way when we read the opening of stanza three, to discover it is the death of the recipient's Chihuahua, not Mr. Bird. <fnote>Mario Petrucci Poetry in Performance: Intertextuality, Intra - textuality, Poeclectics,  URL  (2000/2001) p.11 </fnote>Victor Questel also uses enjambment and caesuras extensively in Judge Dreadword, however, the effect is distinctively different to that of Petrucci's work. Questel's poem refers to Rastafarian Youth Culture 'Dread Talk', which developed as "a formal way to refuse the Anglo-Saxon seizure on the Jamaican people and to reinterpret the new heritage." The central character, 'Rude boy Q', is being accused of practicing this Creole both in speech and writing. The use of enjambment and caesura has two different effects. As a dramatist and writer of performance poetry, Questal can be seen to use such techniques in order to create the drama of the scene we are presented with. <fnote>htttp:// URL  </fnote>It is possible, however, to see such techniques as being a reflection of the manipulation of language against accepted contemporary forms. Although the enjambment between stanzas four and five is ironic, since the reader is also not 'looking', the effect of this, as with other occasions in the text, is that the verse is disjointed. This is also apparent in Petrucci's Reflections, between stanzas two and three, where the simile 'black / as a space-time singularity,' is divided. On other occasions, in Judge Dreadword the enjambment creates tone through the encouragement of stress on certain words. An example of this is line eighteen when the vowel sound of 'every day'' becomes stressed and hard because it has been placed at the start of the line. In order to demonstrate their chosen theme, the poems Mutations and Judge Dreadword manipulate traditional ideas and forms to achieve the poets' desired effects. In Mutations Petrucci's experimentation is one of "implicit Intertextuality"; taking a "reader orientated" text and translating "not between languages, but from one discipline to another." This, he describes as a "Centrifugal tactic". Petrucci takes the first line from the children's nursery rhyme, Little Bo - Peep, which has a regular scansion with an inverted stress in the first foot of the line, then using poeclectic tactics and genetic variation he 'mutate[s]' the first line, developing it into a contrasting, sinister phrase. Petrucci demonstrates how the alteration of vowel sounds, stresses and grammar can change, not only what the text means, but how it sounds. As a piece of performance poetry its true effect can only be fully understood when it is read aloud. Written phonetically it is "astonishing to arrive at that point in the poem which drives one irresistibly to speak in Scots." <fnote>Mario Petrucci Poetry in Performance: Intertextuality, Intra - textuality, Poeclectics,  URL  (2000/2001) p.8 </fnote><fnote>Rob Pope  The English Studies Book, An Introduction to Language Literature and Culture 2nd ed, (London: Routledge, 1998) </fnote><fnote>Mario Petrucci Poetry in Performance: Intertextuality, Intra - textuality, Poeclectics,  URL  (2000/2001) p.8 </fnote>Although Judge Dreadword is not written phonetically, there is in the second stanza, hints of a sociolect. In the third line, 'I have a language in a vice all my own', there is ellipsis of the word 'of' between 'all' and 'my'. The main way Questel demonstrates this theme however, is through the content of the poem and his use - or misuse - of the poem form. 'Rude boy Q' is being charged with the murder of the English language; the poem opens with 'I am a murderer'. In Judge Dreadword the key theme of shifting traditional English forms to something more uniquely distinguished, is heavily dramatised. Questel personifies the English language and the particles used within it. The poem refers to 'Dread talk', in which alterations have been made to the English language many in the form of 'Up-full sounds'. Through the twentieth century, "the phonological structure of the English words was probed and broken into two to expose the opposition between the sounds and the significance of the words." <fnote>htttp:// URL  </fnote>Everything 'Rude boy Q' claims to do or is accused of doing relates to this development of a more distinct language that helped form the Rastafarian identity. The sentences the defendant is charged with reflect the time of suffering and oppression (or 'downpression in Rasta) that the Jamaican people have experienced and still experience today through racism. The writers listed at the end of the eighth and beginning of the ninth stanza are all controversial writers from around the world. Lorca was murdered by nationalists in Spain; Pasternak was expelled from the Union of Soviet Writers for his novel Doctor Zhivago; Russian poet, Mandelstam and Li-Po from China were exiled for their work. They are used in the poem as examples of 'word merchants', who 'abuse' tradition. This breaking of tradition is also evident in the use of the poem form in the text itself. <fnote> URL  </fnote><fnote> URL  </fnote><fnote> URL  </fnote><fnote>http://  URL  </fnote>At times there is some sense of rhythm, for example in the first line, 'I wring words by the rough of the neck', the repeated 'r' sound of 'wring' and 'rough' gives the text a fluidity. There also other poetic techniques employed such as rhyme in the penultimate stanza ('interrupt' and 'corrupt'), and part rhyme in the first and second stanzas ('necks' and 'next', 'without' and 'mouth'); there are also several examples of alliteration, such as in the ninth stanza, 'product of proven tradition'. The repeated 'P' gives a momentary sense of rhythm and infuses a dramatically angry and threatening tone. Overall, however, there appears to be little more, other than its appearance on the page, which defines the text as a traditional poem. Aloud, it reads as a dramatic dialogue which, on a macro-textual level, can be analysed through the power relations and social rules of the speakers; the Judge holds a higher status and thus has authority over 'Rude boy Q'. This is demonstrated through his repeated use of imperatives, 'Hush up'; 'Don't interrupt'. It might be possible then, to suggest that Questel demonstrates the manipulation, or 'mutation' of traditional or 'accepted' English in his own use of the poem form. Petrucci's poem Reflections also explicitly demonstrates such breakings of traditional forms using a "tactic of inversion applied to platitudes or common sayings." The poem is made up of similes, which are de-familiarised from their common usage. Petrucci uses various different poetic techniques, such as alliteration (Hills as old as hats) and the repetition of the 't' sound in the third line to create a tone that prevents the inversions becoming "facile humour" and "manages to reverse the logic of cliché to [a] distinctly non-comic effect". This illustrates clearly how the manipulation of the familiar can create something distinctly different in sound, tone and more importantly meaning. <fnote>Mario Petrucci Poetry in Performance: Intertextuality, Intra - textuality, Poeclectics,  URL  (2000/2001) p.10 </fnote><fnote>Mario Petrucci Poetry in Performance: Intertextuality, Intra - textuality, Poeclectics,  URL  (2000/2001) p.10 </fnote>However, it is not only the manipulation of common idioms that demonstrates the central theme of altering traditional patterns and forms. Although there is an almost regular rhythm, the verse scansion has been very cleverly worked upon to illustrate the title of the poem. The feet measurements of each line are, in most cases, a reversal ('reflection') or close opposite of another line close to it. The first line scans as follows: <quote> " Bees will sting like a razor "</quote>It reads trochee, dactyl, trochee. The second line scans the exact opposite: <quote> " The air will be clear as glass "</quote>This reads iambus, anapaest, iambus, which is a full reversal of the first line. The third line follows as a repeat of the first, but with an inverted stress at the beginning of the line. In the second stanza, the first and last lines are almost the exact opposite of each other also. In the third stanza lines eleven and twelve are worth noting: <quote> " Clockwork regular as citizens And the button, that big red button "</quote>The first two feet of line twelve reverse the stress pattern of the last two feet of line eleven; line eleven ends iambus followed by two unstressed syllables, whilst line twelve begins with a reversal: two unstressed syllables, trochee. The final foot follows the same pattern. The third, however, uses the opposite of the anapaest in the corresponding foot of line eleven. Like Questel, Petrucci has manipulated regular and traditional forms to create an alternative, more effective poem. Probably the most obvious technique Questel has employed to illustrate the evolvement of traditional English, is that of direct speech. Although the dramatic scene is introduced to us by 'Rude boy Q', there is no consistent narrator. As a consequence, the poem is filled with deictics and other common features of speech, such as interruption. Other than three direct answers, however, the speech of the defendant is no longer included after the first two stanzas, thus interruptions are implied: "Don't interrupt". Since it is face to face contact there is also implicit physical action: "you snivel in my court"; the poem is dependent on the atmosphere set by the writer through such techniques and dramatic language. Similarly, Trench demonstrates 'innovational situational development'. It stands as part of the Imperial War Museum, fixed upon a pillar and involves a superimposed telescopic sight. This creates a "paratextual space", which allows for the text to become multidimensional. The readers are reminded of the context of the highly dramatic nature of the poem. This is reinforced by the internal aspects of the text, such as the consistent use of rhyme, many of which are hard-ended are intended to "emphasise a sniper - like scanning of the eye". However, it also helps to create the sinister atmosphere of the situation the speaking soldier is in. This is further enhanced by the "familiar child-like naiveté of the opening lines". Petrucci has imitated the beginning of the nursery rhyme, Twinkle Twinkle Little Star), which "evokes vulnerability". The ultimate result of the textual and physical factors of the poem is a creation of "a matrix for reception far more resonant than that of the page alone." Petrucci has extended the traditional form of the poem into something physical to achieve a far deeper effect on his audience. <fnote>Mario Petrucci Poetry in Performance: Intertextuality, Intra - textuality, Poeclectics,  URL  (2000/2001) p.13 </fnote>Both writers adopt the theme of the manipulation, or 'mutation', of the English language and its various traditional forms. Despite some similar techniques however, their approaches are very different. Questel's dramatic piece demonstrates how 'Dread talk' has manipulated language in order to form a Rastafarian identity. This is achieved through the prosecution of such notions by Judge Dreadword, who appears to hold authority over what is acceptable within the English language. All four of Petrucci's poems are examples of poeclectics and the 'Re-writing' or mutation of familiar language to create a new sense of meaning. His re-organisation and manipulation of the familiar illustrate clearly how language can, and has been transformed to give new meaning, as does Questel's own dramatic transformation of the poetic form. 