Born Eric Arthur Blair, the enigmatic figure that most people know as George Orwell is one of the most influential writers to ever provoke and open up the debate between systems of power and the extent to which they maintain or could potentially maintain control and direct influence over its subordinates. Orwell believed that the most important and effective tool in upholding social order is through the regulation of language. Two novels that encapsulate the fears of how a totalitarian society can use language as a method of control over the people within it are his two last works, Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four. These novels, in which Orwell established his popularity and reputation, provoked divided opinions, radical ideas and cultural unease at a time when many people were filled with anxieties and uncertainties about how authorities would govern their countries after the World War Two. After the allegorical reflection of Joseph Stalin's tyrannical rule over the Soviet Union which was witnessed in Animal Farm, Orwell further attacked the idea of totalitarian authorities in Nineteen Eighty-Four, by portraying a world just thirty six years into the future where advanced technology gives absolute political authority to those in charge. Animal Farm's historical relevance gave nineteen Eighty-Four a sense of realism and plausibility, with his aim to convince his readers that a conscious objective approach to the use and especially observation of language was needed to avoid the type of social degradation that was suffered in the Soviet Union under Stalin's reign. <fnote>Orwell, G. Animal Farm. 1970: Middlesex, Penguin Books. </fnote><fnote>Orwell, G. Nineteen Eighty-Four. 1967: Middlesex, Penguin Books. </fnote>One of the ways in which Orwell articulates the relationship between language and power is through psychological manipulation. Two incidences in Animal Farm that display the subtle manipulation used by Napoleon, who is the Orwell's characterisation of Stalin, are firstly, where the dogs show that Snowball is not welcome on the farm, and secondly, when Napoleon's propaganda agent, Squealer, delivers one of his many responses to oppositional stances taken to the changing of the farm's original commandments: <quote> 'at the word 'Snowball' all the dogs let out blood-curdling growls and showed their side teeth'</quote><fnote>P69, Orwell, G. Animal Farm. 1970: Middlesex, Penguin Books. </fnote>And <quote> 'You would not have us too tired to carry out our duties? Surely none of you wishes to see Jones back?'</quote><fnote>P60, Orwell, G. Animal Farm. 1970: Middlesex, Penguin Books </fnote>The first quote highlights Napoleon's technique of manipulation through creating a negative feeling towards the notion of an 'other', who in this particular scene takes the form of an exiled farm member named 'Snowball'. Snowball is the novel's interpretation of ex-Soviet Union co-founder Trotski, and is continually blamed throughout the progression of Napoleon's domination of the farm for every thing that goes wrong. Not only does this prevent the animals from doubting the pigs' abilities, but it also unites the farm against a common enemy, which before the revolution was Jones the owner of the farm but now has taken the form of Snowball. This manipulation is extended further with the dogs' 'blood-curdling growls' and the display of their 'side teeth'. The combination of this subliminally anchoring verbal and non-verbal language is an example of control through intimidation. Snowball's ideas ran contrary to Napoleons, and therefore were seen as a threat to the power structure that the pigs were beginning to form. The threat of the growls and teeth are not direct, but assist to subtly instil into the minds of the animals the way they should feel towards Snowball. The second Quotation represents Orwell's implications that the lies of propaganda were essential in Napoleon's rise to power as he goes about breaking each of the seven commandments. Tyrannies are maintained through the means of lies, persuasion and subtle manipulations of the truth and the constant threat of having 'Jones back' is a cunning way of manipulating the animals into associating the changes that being made to the Commandments with beneficial purposes, even though the less civilized animals do not fully understand the point that Squealer tries to make. The novel points to a natural human tendency towards class divide, a need for the separation between intellectual and physical workers and whereas Orwell clearly shows how it is achieved on behalf of the capitalist pigs, it is noticeable that not only are the animals in a poor position to be informed otherwise, but are especially gullible and carry out hard work without question most of the time. The relation between physical labour and naïveté is important because if the animals are drained of energy physically, the pigs soon discover they are more likely to be mentally drained and as such will not make the effort to consciously observe language and therefore oppose any drastic changes to their ideologies basic principles. They are instead forced to rely on their basic thought processes and their intellectually limited minds are therefore susceptible to unconscious registrations of the associations and meanings Squealer deviously uses in his language. Another way in which Orwell exhibits the relation between power and language is through the control of information and history. The following quotation is taken from Nineteen Eighty-Four, as the protagonist of the novel, Winston, contemplates how the control of language can lead to the control of thought: <quote> 'All that was needed was an unending series of victories over your own memory. 'Reality control', they called it: in Newspeak, 'double-think' </quote><fnote>p31, Orwell, G. Nineteen Eighty-Four. 1967: Middlesex, Penguin Books. </fnote>'Double-think' is the ability to withhold two conflicting pieces of information in your head. This was a concept that the controlling party in Nineteen Eighty Four took full advantage of by continually feeding its citizens minds with information, either propaganda about current facts and figures, or lies about historical incidents. Like all modernist writers, Orwell hinted at the booming scientific movement as an extension of the government that was attempting to create a sense of 'reality' in the minds of its population. Just as the bible explains how things were are now, Orwell wishes to represent how people's perceptions can be shaped and controlled through the perversion and corruption of language by the gradual replacement of historical truths with the party's own fabricated information. As a person's memory of what really happened in the past is slowly repressed into their unconscious, the subtle implementation of new information passes unnoticed into people's minds so that not only are they oblivious to the exchange of information that has occurred, but they now believe this fresh information to be true, therefore shaping that person's perception of reality, hence Winston's phrase 'Reality control'. It is an ingenious method of maintaining the status quo and ceasing any thoughts of opposing the party, because a person would only find the state of affairs unacceptable if they had some kind of memory that things had been different at some point in time to compare it with. 'Newspeak' was a concept that Orwell invented as a further warning to his readers that if they did not have control of what they say, they will not have control of what they think. The depletion of multiple meanings in words would lead to a reduction in the range of conscious thought once used to think of such meanings until there will be no way to express opposition to the party because the concept of it, let alone the meaning, will be eradicated from the memory. From the concepts of control described above, it is possible to see another system of control that the party establishes in Nineteen Eighty-Four: the idealisms of conformity and orthodoxy through the consistent monitoring of people's language. The way that totalitarian regimes accomplish a state of orthodoxy in their people, at least the citizens of Nineteen Eighty-Four, is to create a feeling of disdain towards those that whose use of language is unorthodox in comparison everyone else. The following quotation, which is taken from Winston's conscious 'unorthodox' thoughts, describe the ways in which the party is extending its reign of power by teaching children to detect unorthodox language use in adults: <quote> 'All their ferocity was turned outwards, against foreigners, traitors, saboteurs, thought-criminals. It was almost normal for people over thirty to be frightened of their own children' </quote><fnote>P23, Orwell, G. Nineteen Eighty-Four. 1967: Middlesex, Penguin Books. </fnote>The tyrannical party's use of 'junior spies' to monitor adults language is a necessary extension of their power for them because, until newspeak is completed in the year two thousand and fifty, there is still a potential for unorthodox language use which may express opposition to the party as previously suggested in Animal Farm. Also similar to Animal Farm is the use of psychological manipulation through the use of 'double-think', as people who are already under surveillance from numerous 'telescreens' and hidden microphones, and now even have to be 'frightened of their own children', would be forced to keep their unorthodox thoughts constantly suppressed from their conscious minds should they be tempted to speak out against, and be heard by the party or its extended observers. Yet what is striking about the way that the party moulds its citizens into instruments of its power is the manner of how it is achieved, and its blatant disregard for human compassion. The above quotation highlights this method as an example of a cruel, deceitful and sadly inventive conduct of human lives; the party has raised its inhabitants to posses an unquestioned and focused hatred on everything different from what they know as normal. 'Foreigners' are looked upon in the same manner as 'thought criminals' because they all pose the same threat to, not the children themselves, but the party. They all carry the risk of disrupting the status quo of which the party has built its ideals around. The party requires certain level of hatred towards 'others' so that it can release the emotion and passion that every human being possesses in a manner that benefits the party. It needs to release this emotion to keep people's emotion and passion released, but focused on external factors, and not internal elements such as the party or its methods. This, combined with the re-writing of history as mentioned previously, allows the party to run their government as they please without ever being questioned. The deceitful aspect of this way of treating people is a very simple one, if the party members recognise and have a deep level of understanding of how to corrupt and distort language to the point that they gain absolute and unquestioned power, such as in the method described above, then the members of the party themselves must have a conscious and compassionate level of understanding of human behaviour in order to achieve this. The cruel fact that they allow the majority of the population to become devoid of any real human emotion to become merely instruments of their power is the point Orwell wishes to express: As the use of language becomes increasingly more intertwined with the uses of modern, totalitarian instruments of control such as technology and science, we as human beings must keep a conscious, objective approach to the use of language to prevent us from becoming slaves to systems of power, devoid of conscious and a sense of objective reality. Now we have seen how a system of power can use suppressed emotions in an external manner to their benefit, we will now look at how those in command maintain human beings as instruments of control whilst still catering for the other important emotional need, pleasure. Of course, a system of power would not be so compassionate as to waste the time and effort required to do this without putting this to process to beneficial purposes. One of the ways of achieving this pleasure outlet by using language is the reciting of the poem 'Comrade Napoleon' in Animal Farm, which aims to solidify the conformist behaviour of the animals by attempting to discourage individuality and promoting an advance towards a collective mind state: <quote> 'Oh, how my soul is on Fire when I gaze at thy Calm and commanding eye, Like the sun in the sky'</quote><fnote>P80, Orwell, G. Animal Farm. 1970: Middlesex, Penguin Books. </fnote>And <quote> 'Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall of the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments'</quote><fnote>P81, Orwell, G. Animal Farm. 1970: Middlesex, Penguin Books. </fnote>The poem 'Comrade Napoleon' is similar to the elements of pleasure outlets on the farm that do not use language such as parades and military awards in that it serves as propaganda. This is because, firstly, the continual and gradually unconscious reciting of the poem means that the subject matter will eventually strengthen the sense of loyalty that the animals feel towards their ruler, and secondly it will consolidate the mood, atmosphere and general feeling of the farm. In this way, the pigs have successfully provided a pleasure outlet for the animals whilst concurrently instilling the subject matter in the language used into the minds of the animals as they recite the poem. This advantages, devious use of language consequently increasing the influence of their power and strengthens the command of the pig's reign. A key use of the language of songs and poems when they are recited as a whole is the transference of the animal's mental process from internal to external. The society of the farm, just like the civilization of city life in Nineteen Eighty-Four, increasingly becomes an extension of people's mental life. The pigs, similar to the party in Nineteen Eighty-Four, seek to achieve a unified sense of self within its subordinates, one that is unconscious and therefore easier for the conscious, intellectual pigs to control and command. Just as the majority of modernist writers tended to focus on the inner conflicts of their character's mental states, Orwell describes similar processes in terms of external events. What Orwell suggests in Animal Farm and Nineteen Eight Four is that if language is the principle tool in the evolution of the human mind, language use requires a focused, conscious effort, which the pigs are able achieve. The other animals, due to their restricted levels of intellectual development, see through the perspective of what a civilized person would refer to as their unconscious mind, the natural, primitive and potentially overwhelming mental state. Hence, in external terms, if the animals realized that they themselves were being oppressed, they possess the physical potential to overpower the pigs, which is why the pigs use language to control them to such an extent. Modernist writers continually infer that a unified sense of self is 'unnatural' in a civilised person, a trait that has also been linked to large social formations such as cities and large social groups. Therefore Orwell's vision seems to indicate that, because of society's processes reflecting that of the human mind, there must be a conscious and dominating force in society that controls the majority of unconscious processes in order for that society to function correctly, and that language, being the key tool of civilization, is the means in which to achieve this control. Nevertheless, as shown in these two novels that show both humans and animals in power, language is inevitably corrupted by anyone that comes into power in order to suppress the potential overwhelming forces of the lower classes and subordinates. If most modernist writers consider the search for the internally unified self a myth, with the transition from internal to external processes in mind it seems as though Orwell is pointing towards the notion that the attempt at creating a collective whole from a group of individuals through the use of language is not only corrupt, but also highly unnatural. Because Orwell tended to focus on political rather than internal conflicts, he was not considered to be a modernist writer in the true sense. However, the external conflicts of his novels closely reflect theories of the internal conflicts of the human mind that greatly influenced the period in which these novels were written. In Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four, Orwell warns his readers that systems of power can and inevitably will use the civilizing tool of language to control the people that they rule over. The extent to which this is shown in the two novels is not as improbable as it may seem, since already we have seen how systems of power can corrupt language to the point of psychological manipulation, misleading information, prejudice against others and propaganda to make lower orders praise those in control. These methods of language perversion exist today just as they existed when the novels were written. Orwell did not write to prophesise the future, his works simply served as a reminder of how language has been put to corrupt use in the past, as was witnessed in Animal Farm, and the possible ways, though in an exaggerated manner, this corruption may occur in the future, as witnessed in Nineteen Eighty-Four. In both novels, Orwell suggests that every system of power will inevitably abuse the use of language as mechanisms of control, but what is changeable and important is the need for people outside the circle of power to keep conscious, objective approach to the use of language. If people can accomplish this, systems of power will never have the opportunity to take complete control and command of language and therefore their minds. 