Graphologically it would appear that the extracts share a similar form, as both are examples of dialogic prose that use the presence of a narrating voice to engage with the reader. Similitude in thematic content emerges as both centre on the nature of nighttime in the streets below, but the images generated are far from analogous. Divergence in tone also surfaces as one warmly welcomes the reader in, while the other promotes a firm sense of exclusion. The first extract opens with a declarative minor sentence that instantly plunges the reader into the word described; 'From my window, the deep solemn massive street.'(l.1) Heaped pre-modifying adjectives and the absence of a verb make it reminiscent of a stage direction, as it directly illustrates the scene below. Commencing the following line with; 'Cellar-shops,'(l.1) fortifies this impression by centring our attention on the physical aspects of the street, making the setting easy to envision. Prolific adjectives intensify this vivid visual realism while generating a sombre atmosphere as; 'dirty,'(l.3) 'shabby'(l.5) and 'tarnished,'(l.6) create an impression of gloom and despondency, consolidated by the bleak nuances connoted with 'shadow.'(l.2) The simile; 'houses like shabby monumental safes,'(l.5) engenders a sense of decaying past decadence as the paradoxical; 'bankrupt middle class,'(l.7) and 'tarnished valuables,'(l.6) imply loss and fading former glory. Elongated syntactic structures seem endless and impossible to exit, reinforcing the district's claustrophobic density. Copious personal pronouns imply the text is a dramatic monologue. Opening with the possessive pronoun 'my,'(l.1) firmly imbeds the voice of an involved first person narrator in the text, but they do not appear to be speaking aloud as no reporting clauses or graphological markings denote a speech act. 'I am a camera'(l.8) de-personalises the narrator through metaphoric objectification as they are; 'open, quite passive, recording.'(l.8) 'Not thinking'(l.9) conveys a feeling of numb disenchantment that de-humanises them further by suggesting that they have disengaged the mind and simply exist. Remaining 'open' implies a longing to be part of the community described as the narrator appears firmly external, possibly because of their foreign status. Distance is suggested by using 'the man'(l.9) and 'the woman'(l.10) as opposed to the names of the neighbours. This implies a lack of contact between them that erodes the normal specificity and intimacy generated by using definite articles; they are familiar only because of their physical proximity. The allusion to 'kimono'(l.10) suggests a language barrier may prevent them making contact, reinforcing the narrator's alienated position and sense of longing. The unwelcoming, harsh, glottal plosive /k/ in; 'clock'(l.13) and 'locked,'(l.14) is virtually onomatopoeic, making the sense of exclusion that permeates the extract almost tangible. The progressive present tense animates the scene by providing immediacy. Activities such as 'shaving'(l.9) and hair washing imply it is morning but the insistence generated by the modal verb 'will,'(l.13) engenders a temporal elasticity that accelerates the advancement of nighttime. 'Will' metamorphoses into the present tense, transitive verb 'are,'(l.14) bringing us back from the future to the present, creating a disorientating and unexpected time shift with; 'The shops are shut.'(l.14) It is the shortest sentence and creates a rhythmic variation that halts our reading in order to emphasise the narrator's categorical exclusion. Sudden, forceful plosive /t/ and /p/ sounds reinforce the abrasive and hostile staccato rhythm of the monosyllabic words used. The fricative sibilant sound parallelism connecting 'shops' to 'shuts,' creates a sinister stillness that intensifies the transition to a more ominous tone in the foreboding statement; 'And soon the whistling will begin.'(l.17) Beginning this sentence with 'And' uses syntactic deviation to mirror the change in the district's atmosphere, while opening in medias res creates an immediacy that moves our focus back to the future. The ability to; 'hire a room by the hour'(l.16) makes the world outside seem increasingly sordid and dark. Repeated use of the co-ordinator 'and' in; 'Their signals echo down the deep hollow street, lascivious and private and sad,'(l.21-2) makes the sentence sound like an echo, while reducing the syllabic length of the post-modifying adjectives creates a sense of fading away. Interpolating the 'and' between words gives each an equal prominence that foregrounds their semantic significance. 'lascivious' implies that the men want only physical gratification, but the 'deep hollow' suggests more of an emotional void, a desire for warmth and companionship similar to that felt by the narrator. The tone becomes increasingly seedy due to the sexual undertones of lines such as; 'They want to be let in,'(l.20) although menacing in tone, the statement remains tinged with poignancy, as the men seem to yearn more for company and welcome. Juxtaposing the burning lamps and 'lighted windows of warm rooms,'(l.19) against the image of those outside in the dark, 'down there in the cold', reinforces the sense of division between the communal and the excluded, as tactile sensory descriptions of light and heat intensify the contrastive gloom, making the external position appear increasingly lonely. The third person plural pronouns 'they,'(l.18) and 'their,'(l.21) in the final paragraph centre our perspective on the men and children, but returning to the first person 'I'(l.22) and 'me,'(l.23) moves our attention from the wider world to the narrator's emotions. Like a video camera, the writer uses spatial dimensions to alter the angles that we watch the scene from by shifting our focus between cellar, street, and balcony. The camera metaphor is therefore indirectly extended as the narrator moves in and out of the self, panning the world around, literally becoming the camera in monitoring and recording the actions of others. The; 'slats of the venetian blind,'(l.28) act almost like a metonymic camera shutter impairing the narrator's view, forcing them to become human again. This leads to a greater introspective and emotional focus that exposes their loneliness and segregation; 'I am in a foreign city, alone, far from home.'(l.23-4) Like the calling, their feelings become impossible to ignore; 'soon a call is sure to sound, so piercing, so insistent, so despairingly human.'(l.26) Parallelism is generated through the repetition of 'so,' creating a rhythmic intensity that fortifies the emotive tone. Dashes in the final sentence fracture both form and narration, pausing the reader by producing a stressed silence that generates a suspended feeling of interminable isolation. Throughout the extract modal verbs are used create a sense of certainty, which foregrounds the change to 'could not' in; 'it could not possibly be- for me.'(l.29) Here it implies a doubtful yet vague hope that someone is aware of the narrator's presence, intensifying the palpable, melancholic despondency that pervades the conclusion. Both passages employ narrative report to describe a journey through the streets below; the first literal, the second surreal. As in the first extract, the immediacy of the present tense thrusts the reader into the scene. The direct address and imperative verb; 'Listen,'(l.1) demands both attention and compliance; focus on sound quality is essential to our understanding here, as meaning is highly dependent on our interpretation of certain sound effects. Prolific aural manipulation implies it should be read aloud, as how words resonate can affect the auditory image they generate. This interplay between sound and sense is demonstrated by the plosive alliterative consonance in; 'bonnet and brooch and bombazine black..and bootlace bow,'(l.1-2) as the explosive properties of voiced bi-labial plosives creates the impression of noise. Abnormal paradigms signal that the world described is not that of the everyday. Neologisms such as 'bombazine'(l.2) and 'neddying'(l.8) employ lexical deviation to create ambiguity; as with dreams, deciphering the intended meaning of these unfamiliar words seems impossible. Certain neologisms can make it difficult to envision the world described as they have no definitive meaning, but this mystifying uncertainty augments the extract's dreamlike quality. Although; 'it is night'(l.1), allusions to clothing, bustle and noise generate a vivid visual image of an enlivened church service that is evocative of daytime. 'Fortywinking hallelujah'(l.3) engenders a similar temporal ambiguity to that of the first extract by taking us back to night, suggesting that the scene is part of a dream. The simile; 'coughing like nannygoats,'(l.3) conjures an impression of the exact noise created; direct comparison as opposed to metaphorical substitution is a less complex use of imagery which implies that the extract may be directed towards children. Enumerated commas and semi-colons fortify this impression by creating elongated, lulling syntactic structures that are reminiscent of those found in nursery rhymes. The subsequent simile; 'like a mouse with gloves'(l.4) is also simple and explicit, invoking a stereotypically fairy-tale image of a clothed mouse. It also provides a stark contrast to the raucous spectacle occurring in the dream by emphasizing the night's silence, as even the hush of scratching paws is muffled. Repeated insertion of the conjunction 'and' creates a sense of excitement in; 'the movements and countries and mazes and colours,'(l.20) as the night becomes a time for travel, discovery and exhilaration. Alternating between words that begin with 'm' and 'c' creates multiple parallelisms that enable the form to mirror the ebb and flow of the metaphoric; 'big seas of their dreams,'(l.22) as 'flight and fall'(l.21) evokes an image of wave movement. Innovative personification in; 'It is tonight in Donkey street, trotting silent..along the cockled cobbles,'(l.5-6) adds to the extract's surreal, imaginary quality as the night appears to become the donkey. The active, dynamic verb 'trotting,' makes the reader feel that they too are on a journey, as the adverbial 'along,' and 'past,'(l.6) moves our position and perspective forward. The extract is almost a linguistic painting; allusions to 'pictures'(l.19) and 'water colours'(l.7) coupled with the shift to; 'Look,'(l.10) signals an increased occurrence of visual imagery in the second paragraph. Here numerous transitive, non-finite verbs such as; 'winding'(l.10) and 'tumbling,'(l.12) illustrate movement realistically, thus intensifying the vibrancy and animation in the scene. Intriguingly, as the visual depictions become sharper and more vivid, the situation becomes increasingly unrealistic and vague. The text has a firm cohesive structural configuration as almost all sentences in the first two paragraphs begin; 'It is night'(l.1,8,10) with lexical deviation occurring in the more immediate; 'It is tonight.'(l.5) Refrain-like repetition of 'It is night 'and 'Only you'(l.15,16,19) fortifies the melodic linguistic texture by generating a musical quality. The extract is littered with parallelism, alliteration and rhythmic syntactic structures that provide textual variety and make it highly poetic. Visually indented singular lines such as; 'Time passes. Listen. Time passes,'(l.13) compel the reader to pause and focus on the actual advancement of time, yet are more commonly associated with poetry. 'Come closer now,'(l.14) moves back to the direct address creating structural and semantic variation by inviting us in further. Having been outside with the night, we then penetrate people's minds and dreams in a manner not dissimilar to that of the first extract. Such a markedly direct address leads us to question if the extract is an example of speech, but like the first extract, the absence of reporting clauses and quotation marks suggests otherwise. A narrating voice is firmly imbedded in the text, but no personal pronouns directly connect either the writer or a protagonist to the action. 'Only you'(l.15) almost allows the reader to become the absent central character, efficaciously drawing us in. Passive reading is made impossible by the demand for active participation in creating the world described; 'Only you can hear and see, behind the eyes of the sleepers.'(l.16) Moving the reader beyond the traditionally external position is typical of children's literature, as its persuasive tenor tends to make the reader feel imperative and encourages a belief in the impossible. The personification; 'you can hear the houses sleeping in the streets in the slow..salt and silent..night,'(l.15-6) utilises the quiet fricative release of air from multiple sibilant /s/ sounds to enact the presence of silence, almost making this implausible statement credible. Contextually specific regionalisms and Welsh names such as 'Dai'(l.5) and 'Bethesda,'(l.11) utilize idiolect to capture the national voice. Deviant spelling in the simile; 'quiet as a dominoe,'(l.4) utilises the additional 'e' in domino to makes the stress fall at the end of the word. Reversing the conventional stress pattern alters the rhythmic propensity of certain phrases, while melodious polysyllabic words such as; 'harmonium,'(l.7) help to enact the stereotypical lyricism of the Welsh accent. Unlike the preceding text, proper nouns are used for places and people creating a strong sense of community and familiarity. Like the street and discourse, the décor of the houses is uniquely cobbled together, as copious concrete proper nouns are concurrently heaped within a densely intertwined litany; 'holy dresser, watercolours..china dog.'(l.7) Although certain words are neologisms, their phonetic properties provide mimetic clues to their meaning. 'It is night neddying among the snuggeries of babies,'(l.8-9) uses nasal phonemes to generate a comforting sense of being snug, secure and protected. Here night is not dark and menacing, but brings liberation and safety as people are freed in their dreams. Both writers manipulate language and form with dexterity; although similar literary devices are employed, they are used to create highly divergent effects. The dark realism of the first extract is highlighted when placed against the extremely whimsical tone of the second, something that stems in part from the poetic language and form used. While the societies illustrated differ greatly, both writers effectively make them easy to envision through innovative use of visual imagery, personification and metaphor. Although little similitude exists between the images generated, abundant verbal artistry and rhetorical deftness allows the reader to enter the unfamiliar worlds depicted. 