Externally, it would appear that there are very few parallels between Louise Bennett's poem Home Sickness and Robyn Bolam's Gruoch. One is a wistful and nostalgic reflection about Jamaican life whilst the other is a dark attempt to re-write Lady Macbeth's tumultuous history. The nature of identity and the individuality of one's voice are prominent themes in both poems. Home Sickness is a context sensitive poem littered with personal pronouns such as 'me' which make it a highly personal exploration of self and belonging. The colourful tone almost belies the introspective side of the poem. This arises from Bennett's examination of the problematic nature of displacement. The importance of culture, place and language dominate the poem. <fnote>Louise Bennett, 'Homesickness' in the The Heinemann Book of Caribean Poetry, selected by S.Brown and I.McDonald (Oxford:Heinemann,1992), p11. </fnote>Similitude between the poems can be seen from the outset. The declarative sentence that opens Gruoch has almost defiant and audacious undertones that imply a strong sense of pride and confidence in the speaker's identity; 'I have a name of my own.'(l.1) A caesura breaks the rhythm of the line and focuses our attention on her name thus emphasising its importance. It is resolutely Gruoch's poem; Bolam adopts her persona and voice thus embedding her presence firmly in the poem. Bolam's amalgamation of differing poetic devises and structural elements forms the basis of a unique free verse that lacks constructional restriction. This allows Gruoch to express her feelings and assert her independence in an unimpeded manner. <fnote>Robyn Bolym, 'Gruoch' in the English Studies Book,Rob Pope (London: Routledge,2001) p355,l.1. </fnote>The authenticity of the narrator's voice in Home Sickness is created through the use of Jamaican Creole. Home Sickness betrays Bennett's firm linguistic fingerprint due to the use of idiodialect and Afro-Caribbean phonetics. The use of native grammar and spellings i.e. 'fi,' 'an,' and 'dem' helps demonstrate the heteroglossia of the English language. It also allows Bennett to remain faithful to her roots by expressing herself in the Jamaican vernacular. This is reminiscent of Gillian Clarke's technique in the poem A letter from a far country. She also used the influence of her native language to create her own personalised poetic voice that allowed her assert her identity and sense of self. As an English writer, Bolam doesn't write in the Scottish vernacular as Scots writers such as Lochhead and Leonard do, but she succeeds in making Gruoch context sensitive through allusions to Scottish history. The use of Creole idiom in Home Sickness effects the pronunciation and placement of certain stresses and can vary syllable length, thus making scansion difficult. The overall effect of Gruoch suggests that it is written in tetrameter, but this is not a consistent pattern as the number of feet generally differs slightly per line. The lack of a regular stress pattern in Gruoch reflects the lack of stability within Gruoch's life and identity. Variable use of enjambment, end stopping and apostrophes that coincide with both clauses and sentence breaks, adds to the poem's unique and inconsistent rhythmic effect. Sociolect and allusions to everyday and somewhat stereotypical aspects of Jamaican life i.e. 'black smaddy'(l.22) ensures that Home Sickness , like Gruoch is heavily context dependant. Our understanding as British readers can be impeded by the use of Jamaican Creole. Afro-Caribbean dispora can make establishing the meaning and nuance of certain unfamiliar words such as 'nyam'(l.5) and 'gwan'(l.6) difficult. Home Sickness betrays the influence of African slave poetry's aural traditions, as it too has been written for informal oral presentation. The use of elision i.e. 'people-dem'(l.14) and enjambment, conveys the animated energy and natural rhythm of the narrator's colloquial speaking voice. Ellipsis adds to this effect as it is a common feature in routine speech; i.e. 'coaknut'(l.1) and 'galang'(l.24) as opposed to go along. Enjambment creates a lyrical quality that allows the reader to be carried along by a tide of astute and perspicacious comments that elevate Bennett's rhetorical deftness, whilst providing a flowing rhythm that evokes the relaxed flow of life in the Caribbean. In Home Sickness, pungent and evocative gustatory imagery relating to food i.e. 'Fi a dumplin, a duckoonoo,'(l.9) remind the narrator of how exotic and therefore distant her homeland is. These collocations are strikingly new for some readers but comfortingly familiar to the narrator. Her longing for Jamaica is conveyed through allusions to thirst and hunger; 'But me belly dissa holler/ fi a plate a rice and peas.'(l.7-8) This phrase can be interpreted as a metaphor. The active and transitive verb 'holler,' implies an almost angry desire and desperation to go home due to the onomatopoeic nature of the word. An image of salivation reinforces her sense of depravation and suffering, and is created through the parallelism of similar word and sound structures in the line; 'An me mout-top start fi water/ Me mout-corner start fi foam.' (l.29-30) The binary themes of displacement and belonging dominate the poem. The unrelenting and fierce heat of the 'broiling sun'(l.3) reflects the strength and intensity of the narrator's love for Jamaica. This is then juxtaposed with the paradoxical cooling and soothing properties of the sea. A similar technique is employed in the third stanza in comparing the disparity between the hot spice and ice. Juxtaposition and antithesis fortify the theme of division in the poem as the narrator appears divided between her homeland and England. The proliferation of exclamatory sentences and humour jars somewhat with the poem's underlying seriousness. For example, the incongruity and improbability of seeing a; 'hairy mango pon de road!' (l.28) in England, both amuses and saddens the narrator by reminding her of the divergence and distance between both places. Bennett uses mainly nouns and verbs that relate to place and movement. A recurrent travelling motif arises through references to roads and roaming. The repetition of 'galang'(l.24)creates a kinaesthetic image that adds movement to both her literal and metaphorical journey to discover where her home lies. The metaphor; 'A dose a hungry buckle-hole me'(l.31) conveys a sense of being incomplete as 'hole' and 'hunger' imply that she is missing something. Being away from Jamaica deprives her of a part of her identity. The repetition of the vowel sound in the word 'waan,'(l.32) creates a noise similar to a wail that sounds almost like a child's cry. Like a child, the narrator looks to her family for comfort and security. Both poems contain ambiguous elements that create exploitable connotations within the language. Bolam's ambivalent use of the pronoun 'he' ensures that we are never sure who she is discussing. We can only assume it's Gillecomgain in the first stanza and then Macbeth. In Homesickness, ambiguity is used in the final stanza to help us share the narrator's confusion and to relate the complexity of narrator's relationship with Jamaica. Exclamatory sentences ensure that the poem ends on a sanguine note, but a sense of loss and depravation continues to pervade the poem. Whilst the narrator feels relived to find a reason to belong in England, the interrogative structure of the sentence 'to me wha?,'(l.34) implies that she remains unsure about what exactly binds her to Jamaica. Bennett's use of the possessive pronoun me in 'me Jamaica' (l.33) is somewhat ironic. The narrator implies that she possesses Jamaica, when in reality, it is the country that owns her- her history and culture is embedded in Jamaica and will therefore always bind her. The importance of family, roots and a sense of belonging is also explored in Gruoch ; Gruoch's pride in her ancestry resembles Bennett's pride in her homeland and language. Gruoch is a figure associated with female strength and influence largely due to Shakespeare's portrayal of the ruthless and manipulative Lady Macbeth. Unlike Gruoch, Lady Macbeth sees her feminine tenderness as a sign of weakness, demanding; 'Unsex me here/ and fill me from the crown to the toe-full/ of direst cruelly', whereas Gruoch relishes her carnal sexuality. The poem moves into the progressive present tense during the first stanza thus crating a frenzied and passionate immediacy around the sexual action. Active and transitive verbs such as, 'crush'(l.3) and 'grasping'(l.5) create both claustrophobic and violent sexual images that convey the all-consuming desire and intimacy of the moment. The scene could be interpreted as one of violation as Gruoch appears powerless and oppressed by his actions. Consonance i.e. 'grasping it in his fists,'(l.5) creates a breathless excitement within the tone that infers that whilst he has physical dominance, she actually controls the situation in creating the desire that drives his actions. <fnote>William Shakespeare, Macbeth,edited by G.K. Hunter.(London: Penguin,1995) I.5.l 39-41 </fnote>Bolam's dextrous manipulation of language allows her to evolve the simile 'like a tent ' (l.7) into a metaphor for sex; 'folds slipped open.'(l.8) Phallic images are created through allusions to 'rope'(l.6) and a 'stake.'(l.7) The tent image is developed further in the line; 'succulent as split stems.'(l.9) The fricative sibilance here suggests that it this a welcome act due to the indulgent and sensual nature of these sounds. Gruoch, like this image and its representation, undergoes a process of transformation throughout the poem. She changes from sexual being to mother, wife to queen. We must therefore question the degree of power she has over her life and identity. It would seem that men are responsible for controlling and defining her role. Like Gruoch, the way her name is said metamorphoses. It is a guttural and primitive 'growl'(l.2) when she is immersed in animalistic sexual behaviour; then uttered in wonder when she is Queen, thus conveying the reverence and respect she deserves and ends as a whisper when she beings to lose faith in her self and power. Gruoch is seen at the height of her power in the second stanza, portrayed as more influential and efficacious than war and all other women; 'war nor wantons wrenched him from me.'(l.20) Gruoch's resilience and tenacity is elevated here thus making her impotence in the final stanza more dramatic, 'Seventeen years we reigned together through/ keen seasons of hunger, feasting one to other.'(l.18-19) Images of hunger and nourishment are reminiscent of those in Bennett's poem; the narrator wishes to satiate her hunger by feasting on her country's food, whereas Gruoch and Macbeth feast upon one another and their power. Collocations relating to death such as 'obsequies,'(l.23) make the third stanza a lament about the death of love. The adjective 'dry'(l.23) implies that their bed is arid and barren; devoid of life and fire. Gruoch, like Bennett is overcome by thirst, but her thirst is for love and passion. A metaphorical winter has descend between them, as their relationship has become cold and insipid. There is no warmth to ensure that 'buds' are 'stirring.'(l.25). Opportunistic alliteration in the line 'my mouth meandered', could be interpreted as a metaphor for the kiss of life, as she attempts to revive their passion and give new life to their love. Her failure to do so makes her feel impotent and powerless. Having lost her ability to control men through their sexual desire for her, Gruoch feels that her identity has been diminished. Bennett too makes use of occasional and opportunistic alliteration i.e. 'beefy, blacky.'(l.27) The funeral motif in the final stanza ensures that a palpable sense of loss and bereavement permeates the poem. By the end her name is 'despairing: our death rattle.'(l.26) These plosive sounds submerge us in Gruoch's anguish and regret whilst adding to the dark and menacing nature of the 'death rattle.' The colon following 'despairing' creates a finality that implies nothing can bring their passion back. This melancholic, despondent and subdued ending contrasts starkly with the confidence of the opening. The visual form of the poems differ. In Gruoch, the stanza length decreases. This reflects the gradual death of passion in Gruoch's life. The poem ebbs and fades away leaving us with the strong sense of loss. Unlike Gruoch, Home Sickness has a measured and regular structure that consists of nine quatrains. This, along with the systematic and structural use of rhyme between each second and final line, contrasts with the inconsistency of the narrator's emotional journey. There is an internal rhyme within Gruoch at the start of the second stanza that emphasises the significance of certain words. The rhyme arises because there are thirteen syllables before 'daughter'(l.17) and thirteen syllables before 'slaughter. '(l.15) Both poets therefore use their verbal artistry to manipulate form and language. Whilst there is marked diversity between the thematic content, rhetoric and grammatical form of the poems, the poets employ some similar poetic techniques to manifest their notions. Both poets strive to express their voice in a way that is both eloquent and authentic. The divergence regarding the cultural and linguistic influences upon the poets ensures that their works are acutely individual. 