<heading>Week 1</heading><heading>1. Introduction</heading>The size of the world seems to shrink, as global travelling becomes easier and people move around on a wider scale. With an increase of diversity, people more and more have contact with other people from different cultures (Brislin & Cushner, 1996). People believe there is a right way of behaviour, which is based on a process called 'socialisation' (ibid: 5). Due to this ethnocentric belief, conflicts and misunderstandings arise. This learning journal will support my own development in cultural communications and increase my awareness of cultural diversity. <heading>2. Self-assessment inventory of my existing skills, knowledge, and experience</heading><heading>2.1 Understanding of my own culture</heading>The understanding of my own culture is imperative in order to understand and to be able to evaluate differences of other cultures. Until today I believed that I have a good understanding of my own culture, however, for the first time reflecting about it, makes me realizing that I have difficulties forming my believes and understanding into words. This is common, as aspects of cultures are not often spoken about, rather kept as secrets (Brislin & Cushner, 1996). The development of cultural communication skills is based on the ability to externally observe my own behaviour and to accept not to know everything, which has been identified to be a very difficult task (Adler, 2002). <heading>2.2 Understanding of other cultures</heading>I grew up in a boarding school, which is teaching German as a foreign language. Students of over 160 nationalities have been there, studying for two weeks up to one year. Having contact with the students on a daily basis, gave me some knowledge of other people's cultures. Having had an incident during work (see Appendix E), made me think about different cultures and how to engage with them. There are so many little differences between cultures, which often are not as visible as the one described in Appendix E, but which may be significant for some people. Until that time I probably have ignored or overseen many issues, which might have disappointed some of the students I lived with or made them uncomfortable. Travelling more frequently into other cultures, I believe, made me more aware of differences, as I was now the person, who found himself in an uncomfortable or strange position, experiencing a 'cultural gap' (Gudykunst & Kim, 2003:357). The knowledge I gained through travelling is probably more authentic than what I learned in my home environment, as people try to adapt to their host country. The students I was living with, I believe, did not behave exactly as they were at home. My understanding of other cultures during childhood was heavily based on stereotypes, as my friends and I made jokes of people from other cultures. This might have been due to so called 'war stories' (Brislin, 1986), which we learnt from friends and adults. Maturing I realised that stereotypes had 'some truth', but only are a primitive and a limited form of each others cultural understanding (Emig, 2000), however not dangerous as long as decisions are not based on them (Brislin, 2000). Stereotypes are no longer prejudices, they facilitate storage of information (ibid) and are used to categorise other groups of people (Guirdham, 1999). People often use them, although they know that most of them are not true. Germans for example wear leather trousers at the Oktoberfest, but not everyday as some people believe we do. Living with, travelling and talking to people from different cultures gave me a better understanding and increased my sensibility. <heading>2.3 Level of understanding of the implications of cultural diversity for managers and others </heading>As I am aware of cultural diversity through daily experience, I can handle many issues easily. However, I often catch myself, trying to impose my own cultural behaviour and thinking on others and expecting them to react similar as I would do. This is especially true in work situations. A common stereotype about Germans is their tendency to discipline and over organisation (Hall & Hall, 1990). I believe that there is some truth in this stereotype. At work I try to organise everything precisely, which I then expect from others, too. This is where I am sometimes confronted with cultural problems, as other people might tackle problems differently, but also reach the same goal. My understanding still is based on my learning in my home culture, although being in the UK for over two years has widened my point of view. <heading>2.4 Understanding of the complexities of communication in a cross cultural context</heading>An experience in or knowledge of a culture is not equivalent with intercultural competence (Brislin, 1986). The author, however, states that cross-cultural training can assist in overcoming the barriers to build competence. For successful and smooth intercultural communication, I believe that it is very important being able to listen and to observe. Once you are aware of and sensible to differences, you are able to manage cultural diversity. One example of complexity of communication across cultures is recognized by Hall (1981). The author identified two communication styles: low-context communication and high-context communication. In low-context cultures, such as Germany, communication is very direct and verbal. In high-context cultures, such as the UK or Japan, gestures are important and people have to read in between the lines in order gain whole understanding. Difficulties I came across were often based on understanding the 'hidden' meanings, which then lead to misunderstandings. <heading>2.5 Interactive skills</heading>Due to my experience in the boarding school as student and later as employee, I had many opportunities to talk to people. Working as a social organiser included communicating with international students on a daily basis. Organising events, asking students for feedback, working in teams and sometimes advising students about different issues continuously improved my skills. However, I still observe especially in group work situations that I impose my own culture on other group members. Continuous development is necessary and especially in a cross-cultural context, training can improve sensibility and sensitivity for cultural differences (Brislin & Cushner, 1996). <heading>2.6 Areas I particularly need to think about</heading>'Working under pressure in cross-cultural teams is difficult for me due to my own personal values and beliefs. As explained earlier I tend to impose my working style on people without considering their needs and beliefs. Furthermore, I feel I have to improve my understanding of 'hidden' information of gestures, facial expressions and tone. <heading>3. Critical Incident</heading>In this incident (see Appendix A) it is not only the clash of different cultures but also of different generations, which all have different values, traditions and beliefs. Knowing about the tradition, I would definitely have acted differently, hopefully being in the position to speak at least a bit of the language. Through this incident I did not only learn about a single tradition or cultural difference but also to be more aware of the differences and not to expect people to behave similar to my own culture. This incident evoked some intense feelings, i.e. anxiety, belonging and ambiguity (Brislin & Cushner 1996), which made me feel uncomfortable and feel as an outsider. Personally, I would not have thought that other cultures are so open to 'outsiders'. In my culture we have some distance to people we are not familiar with. The high uncertainty avoidance index (UAI) for Germany might be a reason for this behaviour or feeling. <heading>4. Learning and development</heading>Learning accompanies throughout one's life (Honey and Mumford, 1992). Being solely responsible, people individually have to choose the means, by which they enhance self-development (Pedler et al., 1994) in order to cope with challenges of society and life (Honey and Mumford, 1992). Learning furthermore is about satisfying our potential, improving our talents and progressing through life with meaning and satisfaction (Guirdham, 2002). The author further reports about numerous learning styles, however, there is no 'one' learning style. Learning styles differ from culture to culture (Brislin et al., 1986), they even more differ between individuals under certain circumstances and at different times (Guirdham, 2002). For this portfolio, however, I will concentrate on the learning cycle developed by Honey and Mumford (1992). I already tested my learning styles about two years ago (see Appendix B) through the use of Kolb's learning cycle. After testing them again (see Appendix C) I could identify my development within my two years of academic undergraduate study. The change was not significantly, however, I was able to increase the Reflector and Theorist learning styles. In contrast, my scores for the Activist style went down. Possible blockages Honey and Mumford (1992) identified and which I believe are correct in my case are: fear of failure, fear of ridicule and lack of self-confidence in some cases. I therefore first focus on the latter while designing my action plan. As a first step, I decided to change or do three things (see also Appendix D). <list>To have regular meetings with my tutorTo get up at 7 am every morning in order to use the day more efficientlyTo take over responsibility (captain) of Brookes Sailing Club in order to improve social activities and conditions of the boats</list>Throughout the next weeks I will comment on my development and observations of this plan. Furthermore, I will reflect on my group work experiences and try to improve my group work skills. <heading>5. My own cultural values</heading><heading>5.1 Gender roles and behaviour</heading>I am from a country side village in the South of Germany where the majority of people are catholic and where the older generation still believes in traditional cultures and values. Women in Germany traditionally are not equal to men (Hall & Hall, 1990). This chauvinistic culture roots back to the 19 th century where Kaiser Wilhelm II defined the role for women as 'Kirche Kueche, Kinder' (church, kitchen, children) (Gordeeva, date unknown). Women in Eastern Germany used to have a slightly better position than in Western Germany, but still today, women have no equal rights and have to fight for equal wages and jobs, although legislation is in place (Hodgetts & Luthans, 2003). I strongly believe in gender equality. Women and men should share responsibilities within their families and both should be able to work under similar circumstances. In contrast to Hodgetts and Luthans (2003), I believe that there is a movement towards equality as many of my friends and family of my generation already live it. <heading>5.2 Food behaviour</heading>As in many countries, food tradition is very important in Germany. It is the reunion of the family after a long working or school day, where family members exchange their experiences and share their thoughts. Germans, as they are known to be punctual and well organised (Hall & Hall, 1990), highly value this kind of daily ceremony and expect that all members of the family take part. Germans for example in contrast to British, always eat up their plates. Hosts would be upset, if their guests do not finish their plates, as this would be seen as if the food was not tasty. However, I am different to this culture. As I have lived in a cultural diverse environment for my whole life, I am more flexible and less culturally bound. I believe that I am more sensible to people's needs and behaviour when food is concerned. <heading>5.3 School and achievement</heading>In my culture, formal education is important for career and social recognition. Germans are high individualists (Hofstede, 2003). Achievement of own goals is important. Employers value formal education and increasingly expect wider general knowledge of their employees. However, pragmatic learning through internships is growing in importance. Due to increasing population and competition, people need a variety of skills and learning methods in order to succeed in their life. My learning is based on a variety of methods, through formal education in school and university as well as different work experiences and observation of other people's behaviour. <heading>5.4 Parental authority</heading>Different to the traditional German culture, where parents (father) used to be the ultimate authority, parents in my present culture are regarded as friends or partners. Authority is exercised within an environment of friendship and respect; hence decisions may be questioned by children to a certain extent. I belief that this leaves children space and the opportunity to develop better and to improve their independence for future life. <heading>5.5 Relationship with brothers and sisters</heading>The relationship with brothers and sisters in general is dominated by hierarchical structures especially in rural areas. The oldest son for example inherits the farm, and is responsible for brothers and sisters. My relationship to my sister is also based to some extent on hierarchy due to an age difference of 14 years. I feel responsible for her and although I do not intend to, I observe myself exercising some form of authority over her. I am not sure if this behaviour comes from cultural background or if it is only due to the age difference. <heading>5.6 Work attitudes</heading>Some cultures work to live, others live to work. Germans in my opinion belong to the latter group. This might be due to Germany's history, especially the proceedings after World War II. The country had to start from zero and is now one oft the most economically developed countries in the world. Achievements at work are important especially for men, as well as a good work position, which is a symbol of status. German work culture is dominated by organisation, meticulous timing, efficiency, bureaucracy and is rules oriented (Khan-Panni & Swallow, 2003). All these attributes support Trompenaars' arguments describing a country dominated by universalism (1993). <heading>Week 2 & 3</heading><heading>6. Moving round the learning cycle</heading><heading>6.1 Reflections on my first Action plan</heading>Since last week I had two tutorials, which provided me with valuable information regarding my assignment in contemporary issues. I believe that tutorials will help me to receive better result; however I personally believe that working on my own, better reflects my own learning outcomes and makes it easier for me to identify my weaknesses than through tutorials. I will have some more tutorials over the next weeks for other courses, too, in order to find out for myself, which approach I like best. Starting the day about 3-4 hours earlier than I was used to, was probably the best plan I had for long time. Not only am I more productive, but also more relaxed and well-balanced. My third action helped me to switch off university life and to enjoy my living here in Oxford much better. I already initiated a social evening for this week and set up a list of spare parts we need to repair the boats. Organising events and activities is one of my favourite hobbies, hence, I will think about other activities, i.e. participation in races within this semester. Applying this to my future career I can say that being proactive and taking initiative will be rewarded. In my culture, organisations value initiative and see it as an ability of leadership. Being active, inspiring colleagues, hence, not only has a positive influence on peers but also on one's personal development. <heading>6.2 Reflections on my communication styles</heading>Reflecting on my communication styles I use when I communicate with people, I observed that I use different styles regarding, tone, voice, speed, body language and sometimes even language. Talking to my parents I always use standard German (Hochdeutsch). This is probably due to the fact that we were all living in the language school where international students learned the language. However, with my parents I am talking very fast and often do not speak out everything, because in some circumstance, we understand each other without words. My body language is much calmer and I do not use it to support my arguments. In contrast when I talk to people whose primary language is not German, I instantly reduce my speed, am more accurate in pronunciation and do not use hidden information. Furthermore, I tend to support my arguments with active body language. Finally, talking to my best friend, we often use abbreviations and dialect to communicate. Body language makes a great part of our conversation. This time it is not to support the argument, but rather to replace verbal expressions. A range of communication styles therefore are used in different situations with different people. In job situations, however, employees or managers should try to communicate as clearly as possible, as in extreme conditions, dangerous situation, i.e. danger for health and safety might occur. In my culture it is further seen as rude in business communications to use dialects or abnormal body language. In the business I was working before I came to university, we had some international employees, who would have had trouble to understand Germans, if we would not have tried to communicate clearly and precisely what we wanted to transmit. <heading>7. Communication Styles</heading><heading>7.1 The German communication style</heading>Germany's communication culture is marked by a direct, quasi confrontational style. As Germany is a low-context culture (Hall, 1981), we do not beat around the bush, but come clearly to the point. At workplace, Germans therefore express their points of view clearly and succinct (Khan-Panni & Swallow, 2003). Difficulties are called by the name and criticism is directed to the problem and is not meant to be a personal attack. This behaviour relates back to the importance for adherence to timing. Germany's culture is dominated by time pressure, due to the common belief of "time is money". Business meetings therefore are well planned in regard of content and time adherence. <heading>7.2 The British communication style</heading>British people are driven by politeness and courtesy. British citizens therefore often give evasive responses in order to prevent conflicts. In addition, conversations often are ambiguous and contain subtleties. British humour, furthermore, is seen as a cornerstone in communication (Harzing, 2005). It is used in various situations i.e. to link differences, to criticise, or to establish a sense of mutuality. Finally, British people generally do not complain. They tend to swallow their anger in order not to cause trouble. <heading>7.3 Similarities and differences and common misunderstandings</heading>British and Germans as identified earlier are relatively different. As a German, I often come across misunderstandings of meanings, such as "quite good" and "not bad". Both for me would mean good or really good. Furthermore, British humour is very hard to understand, even after three years living in the UK I have problems to guess the meaning. However, the biggest problem for me is the difference I direct and indirect communication style. I often had problems in group work with British students, that they were unhappy, if I just told them what I think. To adapt to the flowery British language will be hard. <heading>7.4 Cultural frameworks and communication styles</heading>As mentioned earlier, the UK is a high-context culture whereas Germany is a low-context culture (Hall, 1981). Although the power distance index (Hofstede, 2001) is similar, there are differences for example in how people at work communicate with their colleagues or superiors (Harzing, 2005). In the UK people are informal. They often use first names whereas in Germany surnames and formal approach is recommended and common. A further difference can be found in the uncertainty avoidance (UA) index (Hofstede, 2001). Germany has a high UA index. It is rule oriented and aims at reduction of uncertainty. Communication therefore is direct, succinct and clear as identified earlier. Britain with a low UA index, however, has less concern with ambiguity and tolerates a higher degree of variety of opinions. This is mirrored in its use of language as identified earlier. In a work environment, cultures scoring high on individualism (Hofstede, 2001), in general discuss performance openly and direct. In collectivistic societies, however, this would result in a loss of face for the employee, as these cultures aim for harmony and less for performance (Hofstede in Groeschl, 2003). <heading>8. Appraisal Interviews</heading>This week we are performing some mock appraisal interviews in class, where I will participate as an interviewee and an observer. In order to prepare for the interviews and to gain confidence in this task, I have to understand my role as an interviewee, to review practices of appraising, to understand the purpose of feedback in the view of the interviewee, and to consider cultural issues. An evaluation of my appraisal interview can be found in Appendix Y <heading>8.1 Listening skills</heading>Communication in general is a two-way process integrating verbal and non-verbal behaviour (Guirdham, 2002). Good listening according to Guirdham takes account of several skills: to concentrate for a long time, to understand the other person's point of view and the skill to interpret the meaning of the hidden messages, which are often different to spoken words (2002:185). The key point is to understand the other person's frame of reference, which is never identically to you own, or people would not be unique (Guirdham, 1999). I would rate my listening skill in general as good. However, I am also aware of some mistakes I do. When the topic is not of interest for me, I sometimes tend to drift away with my mind, missing out information the other person wants to transmit. Furthermore, I then do not probe and question what is being told, which might appear to my communication partner as being bored and inattentive. On the other side, when the topic is of great interest for me, I start to interrupt my partner, and often to not stop talking. In order to improve my skills, I set myself a goal for the next conversations to ask a minimum of three questions, no matter which topic it was. A good example is a conversation I had today with my girl-friend about Hungarian history. I have to admit that history is not my favourite topic. Nevertheless, I forced myself to ask follow-up questions in order to gain more details and to appear more interested. It went very well, however, my girl-friend who knows me for a long time, discovered the difference and was positively surprised and wondered why I am suddenly interested in Hungarian history. This proved that active listening makes a positive picture about the listener. <heading>8.2 Managing appraisal interviews</heading>Managing employees' performance involves three key aspects: planning, supporting and reviewing (Torrington, Hall & Taylor, 2002). Planning is about design of job descriptions and agreement with the employee about the content, which will be done in next weeks group work for the recruitment interview. Support involves accessibility of superiors, teaching and coaching. The last aspect of reviewing, however, is important, because it enables employees and employers learning and possibly enhances an employee's motivation (Torrington et al., 2002). Review in form of a formal appraisal interview, however, has to be conducted skilfully, in order not to go through an unpleasant experience (Maier, 1976). First of all, objectives of an appraisal interview have to be mutually shared. Torrington et al. propose several purposes, i.e. provision of feedback, increase of motivation, identification of training needs and potential, salary adjustments, and improvement of performance amongst others (2002:300). Moreover, the participants need to be aware of difficulties involved in giving and receiving feedback, i.e. criticism or arguments about certain issues. The best form of an appraisal interview therefore is what Maier (1976) describes as 'problem-solving interview', which helps the interviewee in increasing his/ her work performance and to develop new ideas. In addition to the cultural barriers identified, Hodgetts and Luthans (2003) also remind us of other barriers to effective communication. First of all, language skills are a major barrier for cross-cultural communication. In Germany, we even have difficulties within the country with dialects. People from northern Germany do not understand a word, when I use my dialect and vice versa. In work situations, especially recruitment and appraisal interviews, misunderstandings are very likely to happen. A further barrier is the perception of reality. People have different views of reality, which influences their decision-making and judgement. An example might be that people differently perceive the level of qualification of their peers, hence, might be uncomfortable when it comes to promotions and rewards. <heading>8.3 Appraisal interviews and culture</heading>Culture is also an important issue, because managerial approaches and perceptions differ across cultures (Groeschl, 2003). Asian culture for example is focused on people's being, emphasizing personal behaviour whereas in Germany, we rather value productivity and effectiveness. Individualistic cultures, hence, are more performance oriented in contrast to collectivist cultures, which value personal relationships (Groeschl, 2003). In class we have watched a video with examples of culture clashes in interviews. High-context culture interviewees for example were not able to cope with a low-context employer, who provided direct, straightforward feedback. The interviewee then in a defensive reaction tried to respond, but made the situation even worse. I believe that it is important for both parties to engage to some extent with the communication partner's culture, however, in a work situation, it should be the superior, who is responsible to understand and consider cross-cultural issues, because it is in his interest that the subordinate understands and agrees about the interview and any outcomes. Power distance also has an impact on perception of appraisal interviews. Cultures with high PDI, such as Hong Kong, respect authority. Subordinates do not participate in the decision-making process, neither would they discuss nor critique performance related issues in public (Snape et al., 1998). Furthermore, the purpose of appraisal is focused on the review of the past performance rather than in development and learning. This is a strong contrast to the UK, having low power distance. British employees expect to have a say and focus on the future learning enhanced by appraisals (Snape et al., 1998). Employees and employers cooperate in setting goals and future planning, which leads to higher staff satisfaction. <heading>8.4 My interview observations</heading>Again, I have to admit that my note taking skills are very poor. During lectures I usually do not take many notes, because the handouts provide sufficient information enabling me to look up certain points, if I want to. The first interview I observed was conducted by Aarun and Phillip (see Appendix. As this was the first interview, which was conducted, the two guys had the most difficult part to play and hence made some mistake, which were not done by later actors. Although the opening tended to make Phillip feel at ease, Aarun rushed a bit into the main part, missing out provision of purpose and structure of the interview. Aarun listened actively and rephrased points made by Phillip. He further tried to use examples to underpin his opinions. Clear communication established mutual understanding. Aarun's strategy in this interview is related to the problem solving approach (Maier, 1976), as described earlier. Aarun for example provided Phillip with articles in order to improve his weaknesses and build on his strengths. <heading>8.5 Reflections on Observations</heading>Reflections after the interview revealed that I was not able to produce good examples to underpin my opinion, due to lack of note taking. I therefore tried to improve this for the next interview observation (see Appendix P). I have to admit that I somehow failed to do that efficiently. During the interviews I try to listen and not to miss out things, which therefore stops me from writing up notes. However, I was able to make two notes on examples Celia used. A small victory, but one step will follow the other. Providing feedback has been a difficult task for me. Although I could make some good points, I failed in underpinning them with examples. I further learned that a good structure, communicated at the beginning enhances a smooth running of the interview. Regarding cultural problems I have to say that I could not identify problems in these interviews. However, there were differences between the participants regarding the formulation of their questions and answers. As already mentioned, I tend to be more direct, as was Phillip in the interview. We both come from a low-context culture. In contrast, Aarun, as well as Celia and Judy, all three used a somehow flowery language, describing the content they want to transmit, instead of clearly formulating what they want to say. This represents a high-context cultural background. <heading>9. Group and Team work</heading>Cultural diversity is the biggest asset for teams solving difficult problems (Adler, 2002). However, if managed poorly, they also can be disastrous (Kovach in Adler, 2002). Culture comes into play with the entry stage (Hodgetts & Luthans, 2003). The authors differ between task-oriented and relationship-oriented cultures. Me as a German, I am task-oriented and usually just start off with the problem, other cultures however might need to establish trust before they begin to work. During the next stage, diversity rules, as different opinions and views generate creativity for problem-solving (ibid). The third stage, decision-making, again is difficult, because the team has to agree on a strategy and consensus has to be built. I have done a lot of group work within the last years and I believe that I work better in teams and also can support the team very well. However, I have the tendency to dominate a group and overrun members, if they do not defend themselves, especially in the early and late stages. I am a competitor, collaborator and compromiser (see Appendix L). People working in my group so far, had to be strong in these categories in order to gain equal 'rights'. A former group member once called me the "CEO" of the group, which that time perfectly described my behaviour. I know that in general this is not fair and I should improve my skills and develop my avoidance and accommodation skills. This is what I want to practice in my next group meetings in strategic management and interactive skills. My plan is to listen actively to the comments made by my team mates and to accept other views without trying to persuade them at all costs. Furthermore, I will try to accommodate them where possible and avoid conflicts in order establish a calm and relaxed group work atmosphere. Reflections will be noted down at the end of the week. <heading>10. My plans for next week</heading>I learned that a good structure for interviews is imperative. Therefore my strategy for next week is to plan the recruitment interview with my panel members. Furthermore, I will again reflect on my group work experiences and try to further improve my group work skills. My reflections will be noted down in Appendix Z. In order to improve my activist and pragmatist learning methods, I will make a plan to obtain funds from Brookes Sport Centre to be able to repair Brookes sailing boats and make them competitive for the next race to be held in May (see Appendix V, W & X). <heading>Week 4 & 5</heading><heading>11. Recruitment interview exercise</heading><heading>11.1 Preparation stage</heading>In line with the preparation for a recruitment interview, an individual critique about panel interviews and personality tests has been written (Appendix F). To increase validity of the decision based on the interview, sound preparation is necessary (Dixon et al., 2002). The group therefore set up a job description (Appendix G), a person specification based on Rodger's seven point plan (Appendix H) and a selection criteria record sheet (Appendix I). The three forms have been based on the information about the Hilton Elevator programme, which we received in class and on further research on hilton-university.com (2004). The job description's aim is to inform an employee or an applicant about his objectives, responsibilities, duties and rights (Torrington et al., 2002). It sets the content and context of the position. In order to be more flexible, the authors further recommend designing a person specification. This second form allows the organisation collecting specifications of attributes, which are shared by employees performing best in their job. However, the latter form is criticised, because of the fact that it decreases diversity within an organisation (Whiddett & Kandola, 2000). Hospitality services and products heavily involve people; hence, a diverse workforce is preferred to serve the diverse customers. Nevertheless, our panel decided to include a person specification as an additional tool to gain higher predictability for the recruitment selection process, as it is difficult to make credible decisions without explicit measure in place (Torrington et al., 2002). The criteria for the person specification have been based on Rodger's seven point plan, which the panel agreed is a useful tool for the purpose of the recruitment interview. Finally a selection criteria record sheet has been designed in order to facilitate the decision-making process and note taking throughout the interview. This form has been based on the person specifications. A discussion about the evaluation of the person specifications can be found in Appendix S. <heading>11.2 Eliminating discrimination within the person specifications</heading>Our panel had to focus on age discrimination. Looking at Appendix Q, one can see that only one specification might include discrimination. After discussion in the panel, however, we believe that we do not discriminate against anyone in regard of age. The latent possibility within physical requirements is not apparent, as the focus is on a graduate training programme. Therefore, applications are expected to come only from students in their 20's. However, if in any case there would be interest of older applicants, the panel would have to consider age as a discriminating factor. It would not be practical to have a person in the 50's applying for this position, because the potential career is seen as too short and costs for the training too high. A further evaluation of the person specification is available in Appendix S). <heading>11.3 The recruitment interview: Observation and Acting</heading>Three recruitment interviews were being held this morning. I therefore had the opportunity to observe two other interviews first, which I will discuss. My own panel interview discussion can be found in Appendix R. An overview of my observations of the two other interviews is written down in Appendix T. In general I can say that the experience was very helpful. I was able to improve my note taking skills and learned through experience, how to conduct a recruitment interview. Provision of feedback is valuable to me and it is not easy to provide. Practicing it was a good opportunity to develop this skill. I managed to provide some good comments but at the same time realized that I missed out some key points. I strongly believe that note taking as well as feedback giving only can be really improved by active practice. My further learning, hence, will focus on that, i.e. observing friends and telling how good they are in something while always supporting with evidence, i.e. examples. <heading>12. Reflections on sailing activity</heading>As stated earlier and in Appendix K, I planned to apply for funds for the sailing boats. Today I received a phone call from the head of the Sports Centre, that they will grant the full sum of about 850GBP. We are now happy being able to do all the repairs and hopefully being successful in May's race. Being active and doing things can be really rewarding, especially when it works so good as in this case. I did not believe when I started to think about the activity in week 1 that after such a short time I would have such a success and fun at the same time. <heading>Week 6</heading><heading>13. Cultural Differences in Managing Conflict</heading>Negotiation in business takes place every day and usually involves one party trying to persuade another, often in a cross-cultural context (Adler, 2002). Adler further explains that different cultures have different values and negotiation characteristics. Americans for example act rationally in contrast to Japanese, who rather use an interpersonal negotiation style. These differences also can be found in conflict handling situations. Conflict arises through various situations. Whetten & Cameron (2004:349) propose four sources of conflict: personal differences, information deficiencies, role incompatibility, and environmental stress. The first three do not need any further description. The latter, however, has to do i.e. with uncertainty of work situations, such as personal status or new work tasks. Although "c onflict is the life-blood of vibrant, progressive, stimulating organisations" (Whetten, Cameron & Woods, 2000:334), only an appropriate amount of conflict will be beneficial. The ability of effective conflict handling, hence, is important. Conflict handling styles are a combination of states (context) and traits (personality and cultural background) (Ting-Toomey, Oetzel & Yee-jung, 2001). Identifying ones conflict handling mode helps to understand and to further develop conflict handling methods. Having completed the Thomas-Killman conflict mode test I have identified my preferred conflict handling styles (see Appendix L). The outcome I believe reflects to some extent my cultural background. I scored high in competing, which reflects the relatively high IDV and MAS index for my culture (Hofstede, 2001). This is probably also a result of my childhood, as my parents left me much room, in which I could grow up independently. I rather tend to search for conflict than avoiding it. This is different to cultures, which have a high PD index or collectivist countries, in the former subordinates respecting superiors authority and in the latter searching for collective harmony. A further difference can also be found i.e. between Britain and Germany (high and low context culture) in expressing conflicts. British people would express it more through gestures and through context in contrast to Germans, who speak out their opinions in direct verbal form. One has to feel comfortable with a conflict handling method in order to use it effectively (Whetten & Cameron, 2005). Furthermore, the authors state that a single method is not sufficient to be successful. The methods are dependent on the situation (i.e. time constraint, issue importance) and on the type of conflict (i.e. personal, structural). <heading>13.1 Conflict Management: Moving Round the Learning Cycle</heading>Reflecting about conflicts I had in the past, I believe that I could have handled some of them better. In my last work position for example, I sometimes overrun subordinates imposing my ideas on them due to the power I had, but not for a good reason. For routine jobs I had my system, and I did not accept anybody to question it during service, even though it would have improved the situation. For the future I might try to solve such conflicts in different ways, i.e. cooperating with my colleagues or compromising. Sometimes even avoidance might be useful, if it does not matter about the outcome of the conflict. This might also improve the respect subordinates have towards their superiors. Personally, however, I believe that conflicts should not be avoided as they possess potential for learning and development. I think it is better to be confronted with the situation and then use the other conflict handling methods to find an effective and suitable solution <heading>14. Group work revisited</heading>In the meeting before the interview was to take place, we prepared the questions for the interviewee (see Appendix J) and decided about the structure. My two partners first presented their ideas, before we started the discussion. I have to say, that I was positively surprised that finally, it worked the way I believe it should. We had a lively discussion about their ideas, in which they actively took part. I am not sure however about the real reasons, why this meeting went much better. The change in their behaviour might be due to the fact that we were talking about their own ideas, which they were more confident talking about. It also could be that we built up some form of trust, which as discussed earlier is needed in relationship-oriented cultures (Hodgetts & Luthans, 2003). For the future, I will try to engage with the cultures I am meeting in group work situations or at work beforehand, in order to be better prepared. I believe that this will allow me to establish better relationships with my partners and to reveal better results. <heading>15. Some concluding words</heading>Finally I believe that throughout these weeks I have learned some interesting issues about interactive skills and cross-cultural communications. Applying the learning cycle proved to be a useful tool, although I was very sceptic at the beginning. However, I would have preferred to get deeper into some of the subjects instead of staying superficial at many points throughout this report. I have to admit, that I started a bit late for this report, because I was concentrating on contemporary issues and the dissertation proposal during the first two weeks. Time management proved to be of high importance. This MSc is a one year programme and the workload therefore is high, however, to have a deadline together with strategic management, for me so far the most demanding course is not very useful in my eyes. I believe that I could have done much better in both modules, if we would have had some more time or the deadline in different weeks. This would have increased my learning and left me more room to reflect on it and actually perform more activities. Overall, I realized that I focused more on my strengths of the learning cycle (see Appendix C. However, I also practiced my activist part, although not much time was available for that. 