<heading>Introduction</heading>This portfolio provides an insight into the author's career aspirations and how she plans to achieve them. By examining her skills, motivations, strengths and weaknesses it is determined where she stands, where she wants to go, and how to get there, and incorporated into a final Action Plan which establishes her path to achieving her career goal, that of opening a bakery where gastronomies of different cultures are incorporated in one product. The first section focuses on general competencies needed for success. It analyses graduate attributes and compares them to managerial competencies and entrepreneurial traits. The hospitality industry and the bakery sector are examined and specific qualities required in setting-up a bakery are identified. Following is an updated CV and a covering letter, aimed at securing a loan for the business set-up. A past CV aiming at a Graduate Training Programme is also put forth, showing the changes undergone in its presentation and also in the author's previous objectives. Finally, based on the ENGAGE model (Jenner, 2001), gaps are identified between the author's skills and those needed to secure funding. The results are then compared to the skills in the first section and areas for improvement are identified, consequently being integrated in an Action Plan, along with career aspirations. Ultimately, gaps are eliminated by transforming them into goals. <heading>1. Graduate Competencies</heading><heading>1.1 General and Entrepreneurial competencies</heading>Working environment changes have forced employers to need a range of different qualities thus making them increasingly demanding with graduates (Guirdham, 1995). The service industry' growth, increasing ethnic minorities and globalisation are some of the changes society has undergone, convincing Guirdham (1995) that interpersonal skills overcome technical ones. New organisational cultures have emerged, focusing on people and projects, thus, interaction, teamwork, and communication are imperative. Subsequently, self-awareness, learning habits, knowledge and information, developing opportunities, making decisions, continuously improving performance and social skills are crucial in order to succeed (Guirdham, 1995). Hawkins (1999), and Harvey, Moon & Geall (1997), have also identified general graduate attributes. Though not focusing on interpersonal skills, these still coincide with those stated by Guirdham (1995). Drive, self-belief, initiative and general knowledge are key personal skills for everyday management, whereas communication and interpersonal and leadership skills, when used holistically, maximize the full potential of every project (Harvey et al, 1997). Alternatively, Hawkins (1999) divided graduate skills into four categories: Self-Reliance, People, General and Specialist Skills, comprising proactivity, learning attitude, dedication, flexibility, leadership and communication skills and expertise in the chosen area. These overlapping qualities are also evident in appendix 1. Pedler, Burgoyne & Boydell (2001) demonstrate that adaptability, problem-solving skills, as well as stress control, motivation, imagination, self-awareness and high social skills are attributes common to successful managers. Entrepreneurs (who need to be managers!) also require these traits. There are no defined attributes crucial to entrepreneurs. Rather, Morrison, Rimmington & Williams (1999) state entrepreneurship must be regarded as a holistic process, by which a combination of inter-changing and dynamic qualities trigger innovative ventures. Wickham (1998) claims entrepreneurship is to create and develop visions, convey them to others, encourage people to share them and believe in change, using leadership skills (appendix 2). These definitions share the commonality that entrepreneurship entails a need for change, where opportunities are identified, resources effectively deployed and innovation developed (Morrison et al, 1999). Entrepreneurs take risks and believe they determine their own success (Kirby, 2003). Their independent nature, need to follow intuition, creativity and uniqueness, inclines them towards inimitable developments whilst their "rebel" nature, gives them great determination and leadership skills. Appendix 3 shows further entrepreneurial attributes that also match those stated by Pedler et al (2001) in appendix 1. This synchronization of the above attributes proves employers seek graduates with characteristics needed to develop successful managers. Given that employers invest in graduates, these qualities are also fundamental for those wanting to attract investors. The move from technical to interpersonal skills is visible in literature, and though some authors have not put as clear an emphasis on these skills as Guirdham (1995), it is obvious that teamwork, communication, persuasion, adaptability, the ability to understand and relate to distinct behavioural patterns are crucial in today's environment. <heading>1.2 The Hospitality Industry </heading>The hospitality industry has grown steadily for the past few years and is likely to continue, originating another 170.000 jobs until the end of 2005 (Prospects, 2005). Hospitality's main aim is to serve customers and satisfy their needs. Therefore, service industry skills (Guirdham, 1995) including honesty, creativeness, character, mental agility and awareness, are fundamental. Because it is a less hierarchical industry and operates by responding to customer needs, leadership and flexibility are vital. Problem solving and decision-making skills, proactivity and a learning attitude are also imperative. Moreover, interpersonal skills are at the core of the organisational structure and every relationship. One of hospitality's greatest current problems is skills shortages, hence business expertise, continuing sensitivity to events and creativity (Prospects, 2005) will differentiate candidates. <heading>1.2.1 Hospitality Services (Bakeries)</heading>The bakery sector has increased 2.3%, between 2002 and 2003, valuing at £7.8 million (Euromonitor, 2004) and baked goods (bread, cakes and pastries) account for over 63% of total value sales, at £4.9 million. Craft bakeries, decreased between 2002 and 2003, due to lack of product innovation, industrial manufacturers' low prices and "on-stop-shop" usefulness (Mintel, 2005). According to Euromonitor (2002), around 99.3% of families purchase bread every week. The bread sector has risen 9% between 1999 and 2004, reaching £1.96 million in value, mainly caused by a rise in premium bread consumption (Mintel, 2005). The greatest development in bakery has been a consumer shift to specialty products as consumers are increasingly eager to try new varieties and tastes (Euromonitor, 2002). Specialty breads will further increase 9% in value by 2009, becoming the main market driver. Small cakes accounted for 37% of the individual cake sector in 2003, valuing at £258 million and growing 7.9% between 2001 and 2003 (Mintel, 2004). As for pastries, the sector has risen 7%, valuing at £1,182 million in 2004 (Mintel, 2005b). It's specialty and foreign products sub-sector has gown significantly, rising 21.5% from 2002 to 2004, representing 22% of the total market and valuing at £243 million in 2004 (Mintel, 2005b). Innovation and product development are essential for independent bakeries' to compete with the major companies' low margins. Potential lies within emerging new markets where innovative, functional and healthy products, with foreign influence, contrast the traditional high-fat-high-sugar versions (Mintel, 2004). Additionally, greater consumer disposable income, allows customers to afford higher quality products and producers to charge premiums (Euromonitor, 2002). Unless craft bakeries exploit these trends, industrial manufacturers' will take over and these will eventually disappear. This situation, however, does not concern the author as her fusion-inspired bakery is all about innovation, foreign tastes, and product development. The trends above seem to indicate that her aim to incorporate different gastronomies in one product will guarantee a sustainable future. <heading>1.3 Self-employment Skills</heading>According to ShellLiveWIRE (2000) starting up a business attracted the interest of 29, 068 people aged 16-30 over the past few years, an increase of 28%. The average age is 22, and female interest in entrepreneurship is rising. The trend is likely to continue growing, as conventional career options no longer offer satisfaction. Entrepreneurial enquires in the service sector lead the way at 58%, followed by retail (30%) and manufacturing at12% (Shell Livewire, 2000) Management skills become especially important for the self-employed (Prospects, 2005a). Because, normally, capital is limited, the entrepreneur needs to manage every aspect of the business herself. Therefore, finance, technology, specialist industry skills, marketing and legal knowledge (regulations) are fundamental for the business to operate successfully (Prospects, 2005a). Perseverance, initiative, passion, motivation and sacrifice are vital to counteract the challenging conditions of setting up a new venture. Further, ambition, dedication, confidence, steadfastness and an analytical mind-frame are imperative for the business to start (Business Link, no date). To launch a bakery, apart from the attributes mentioned above, wide industry knowledge and a selection of specific bakery skills are also essential (Shell LiveWIRE, 2004). Though market knowledge is crucial to commercially succeed, it is arguable how much expertise is needed to develop a new product. Knowing that the concept is highly based on experimentation, it seems sufficient to have basic knowledge of bakery production, to develop a new product. Further, there are no rules in entrepreneurship and individuals rely on their intuition, giving them the freedom to be highly imaginative (Kirby, 2003). This argument places creativity, innovation and authenticity as key features in new product development. Passion, flexibility and adaptability are also essential, due to the long hours and different procedures involved (Shell LiveWIRE, 2004). Patience, excellent communication and interpersonal skills are crucial, to negotiate and communicate with employees, customers, suppliers and investors. Communication skills are even more important when considering the entrepreneur needs to foster his vision, motivations and passion in everyone around him (Wickham, 2004). These attributes automatically demand others such as cooperation, organisation and individual capability. <heading>2. CV and Personal Statement</heading>A CV's main objective is to offer the recipient a lucid but succinct perspective of the sender (Jenner, 2000). It should provide information on past achievements, but also give an insight into aspirations and goals. CV's must sell the senders, generating interest in the receivers, they must be personalised and establish a connection between who the sender is and what the receiver is searching for (Jenner, 2000). Covering letters are then used to enhance the main points of the CV and ensure it gets to the right person. They must directly relate to the CV however, not repeat it. The lay-out of the updated CV was changed to show investors the author's motivation, drive and achievement so far. Placing Work Experience first, emphasises initiative and willingness to work in hospitality and specifically, bakery/ pastry departments (Jenner, 2000). It shows the development of basic bakery skills and consequent progression into management experience. The Education section follows, demonstrating continuous focus on career interests and a path especially devised to achieve them. Finally, the Extracurricular Activities part, puts forth further personal attributes in non-career areas but also re-emphasizes the author's commitment to a constant learning cycle, where grabbing every opportunity is decisive for personal growth and future success. Appendix 5 shows a previous CV and the progression to the current personalised one. The covering letter (Jenner, 2001) emphasizes areas the author wants to draw attention to. It explains why she was attracted to the particular bank, why she needs the loan and why she should obtain it (appendix 4). Specific points in the CV have been highlighted by cross referencing them in the covering letter (Jenner, 2001). These are intended to focus on the author's selling points and convince the bank about her motivations and capabilities. <heading>3. Personal Career Plan and Reflective Commentary</heading><heading>3.1 Analysis Personal Skills and Gaps</heading>Appendices 6, 7 and 8 identify aspects of my ideal job, showing which elements guarantee professional satisfaction and success. Innovation and communication represent appealing areas, whereas autonomy, personal enterprise and a sense of purpose are vital outputs I demand from a job. Independence and creativity are both highly emphasized in appendix 8 and also represent entrepreneurial traits. Kirby (2003) states that, entrepreneurs are creative, can transmit their ideas to those around them and need to be independent to feel successful. The comparison between my test results and Kirby (2003) demonstrates my entrepreneurial traits whilst my determination reassures investors of the commitment and motivation they seek when assessing which business to invest in. The iWAM report (appendix 9) demonstrates my attitudinal profile. Though only offering guidelines it shows I'm proactive, plan my future and take initiatives. I also identify and seize opportunities as they appear, organize tasks before performing them, value facts and like to do things the right way while considering new possibilities (appendix 9). Especially, appendix 9 shows my need to achieve set goals through determined deadlines in order to thrive. These are attributes mentioned in appendix 1 and important to investors as they prove my drive to succeed whilst showing that I ponder all options. My profile further demonstrates many qualities sought after by employers (investors), as stated by Harvey et al (1997) and Hawkins (1999) including self-reliance, adaptability to different work environments and complacency. An additional test was done to solely evaluate my entrepreneurial tendencies (appendix 10) and a friend completed a questionnaire providing feed-back on my traits and attributes (appendix 11). The test mainly reinforces the results of my iWAM report showing I am extremely motivated, easily adaptable to different circumstances and need independence. Moreover, creativity and my business as a means of expression are fundamental to me. It re-emphasizes my perseverance, risk tolerance, self-belief and my eye for business. However, because of this latter trait, I sometimes get carried away and may get into things that do not suit me. Additionally, though I am comfortable with most types of people and in most situations, I prefer to work alone (also came through in my iWAM profiling). While the result of my entrepreneurial test came out very positive, I tend to partly disagree with some of the points, and believe I need to improve my decisiveness and problem-solving skills as I sometimes consider every option too much, and it takes me a while to reach a decision. However when I do, it is mine only and almost totally based on my intuition (simply because I can't make up my mind in the 1 st place!). I believe that this last point, which is also shown in appendix 11, when improved will further enhance my self-confidence. After considering all the test results and literature information, I concluded that quicker decision-making and basic bakery skills need to be developed as well as a more analytical approach to identifying which opportunities I should grab. Further, based on appendices 1 & 3, I believe I need to improve my skills of working with different people (also shown in appendix 11-"Am I open to new ideas?"), and not rely so much on my own independence (less of a "lone wolf"). Generally, I believe that all the skills identified in the tests, have not yet been developed to their full potential due to my age and lack of experience and knowledge. These however will be developed once I begin working and building my career. <heading>3.2 Action Plan</heading>My career objectives have been set so as to culminate in the achievement of my primary goal. Actions needed to achieve each one of the previous goals are defined considering the skills I need to improve. Finally, a reality check identifies the existing weaknesses in the Action Plan. <table/><heading>3.2.1 Improve basic bakery and managerial abilities, gain more knowledge</heading>2005-2006: Work in the pastry/bakery section of an NGO, assisting in recipe costing, and managing a small team of chefs 2006-2007: Do a Postgraduate degree in Hospitality My gap year will allow me to achieve my non-career goal of doing voluntary work and by performing in a department related to my career aspirations, I can improve my existing skills but also acquire new ones. I will also gain insight into a different culture, enhance my adaptability skills, and improve my capacity of working with different people. A postgraduate degree will enable me to form a particular mind-set and build on my academic knowledge, thus acquiring further managerial skills, essential to the efficient flow of operations. <heading>3.2.2 Acquire managerial experience</heading>2007-2012: Gain international experience as a manager in a well-known bakery/pastry chain (e.g. "Mallorca", Spain). During this time, I will also engage in a process of experimentation whereby I will create my label products, by integrating different cultural gastronomies in one single product. My learning cycle will continue by taking one-day and/or week-end bakery courses, and these will also be used to further expand my network of key industry players. Working in a foreign country will further increase my interaction with various cultures. A management position will develop my skills, including quicker decision-making. <heading>3.2.3 Create a fusion-inspired bakery</heading>2012-2013: I will continue perfecting the new products during this time. The premises will be arranged, vital staff recruited, suppliers will be contacted and equipment acquired. All financial projections will be monitored and the new venture will begin operating. <heading>3.3 Weaknesses</heading>Despite my feasible Action Plan, it does have areas which if not tackled may change the defined path; however, these will not influence my main career goal. There is the possibility I may not be accepted for a job in the company stated above, or achieve the position I require, and therefore lack the management experience I plan to attain, in the defined target. This will force me to work more years so as to gain relevant knowledge. Undercapitalisation may also be a hindrance, postponing my venture opening, as any option forcing me to give up part of my venture will be considered. <heading>4. Conclusion</heading>Although our career objectives remain the same, our choices to pursue them vary as we progress in life. I've always wanted my own business, however, when I came to Brookes I wanted a strategic management career in an international hotel company, and then to have my own business as a hobbie. Management would provide me a more comfortable, easy-to-do job, with fewer worries, no need for start-up capital, and generally an easier lifestyle. Nevertheless, I was never able to convince myself it would make me happy. Having to comply with rules and work for someone else, never (as much as I tried!!!) appealed to me. This past year showed me that unless I follow my true aspirations I will never be satisfied with life. Therefore, though recognizing it is a tough and challenging path to tread, I believe I have found my way to achieving my dreams, and just that is enough to keep me motivated. 