<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Many companies that have decided to follow the trend of business globalisation had to realise that their expatriates, who were responsible for starting the business, were not trained enough to perform in the assignments successfully. Yet, despite this, organisations have failed to recognise the importance of cross-cultural training. Which inevitably lead to the loss of business, customers and suppliers, because the expatriate was unable to adapt to the host countries culture. These issues will be discussed in more detail and examples will be shown of how organisations can overcome the failure of expatriate managers. Particular attention is paid to expatriates from international hotel organisations in China and what skills these managers need to have in order to be successful in this fast expanding business environment. Keywords: Cross-cultural training, China, Hospitality Industry, Culture shock </abstract><heading>Methodology</heading>This article is based on secondary research, which has several advantages over primary research as suggested by Stewart and Kamins (1993) who states: "Secondary sources provide a useful starting point for additional research by suggesting problem formulations, research hypothesis, and research methods. Consultation of secondary sources provides a means for increasing the efficiency of the research dollar by targeting real gaps and oversights in knowledge" (Stewart and Kamins 1993, p5). In this way, extensive secondary research from books, journals, the Internet and electronic databases have been obtained to get a good understanding and knowledge of the article topic. <heading>Introduction</heading>The importance of international human resource management has dramatically increased over the last 10 years (Pucik and Saba 1998). The reunification of Germany in 1989, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Cultural Revolution in China are all factors that have contributed to a more rapid globalisation of businesses around the world. This meant that businesses were no longer limited by national boundaries or borders, but were able to perform a significant amount of business outside their home country. With these rapid changes of globalisation and increased competition came the need for international organisations to find managers who are able to operate a business outside of their home country. These managers can be identified as expatriate managers who need to be able to, according to Wills and Barham (1994), manage across of countries / cultures simultaneously. Mainly China started to play a significant role in international organisations (Mwaura et. al. 1998), and Western countries recognised the opportunity to expand their business in a country, which was so far cocooned by the Communist party under its leader Mao Zedong. The hotel and tourism sector started to expand way beyond the expectations of Chinese people. Mwaura et. al. 1998 states,.....the number of tourist arrivals to China in 1981 being 7.75 million, spending US$785 million. Ten years later, these figures had increased to 33.35 million with an associated spend of US$2,845 billion (Mwaura et. al. 1998, p215). Unfortunately the number of expatriates, who have completed their international assignments successfully, is rather low. Shay and Tracey (1997) analysed that the failure rate for expatriates in the hotel industry is about 30 percent. Although this number is almost similar with other industries, it is incredibly high considering the millions of companies that loose out when expatriates return from their assignments unsuccessfully. The aim of this article is it therefore to examine the competences an expatriate manager needs to have when considering an international assignment, and also to underline the importance of providing cross-cultural training especially for those companies that are planning to send expatriates to China. The reason for choosing China lies in the long tradition and national and cultural history that is associated with this country. For hotel organisations that wish to enlarge their property portfolio it is essential to understand and respect the beliefs and values of the Chinese people in order to be successful in China as the company is in other countries. <heading>Discussion</heading>The People's Republic of China (PRC) had long been isolated from the outside world. It was only after 1979 under the leadership of Hua Guo-Feng and later Deng Xiao-Ping that it opened it doors to foreign visitors, tourists and foreign companies, which planned to expand their business in this so far undiscovered part of the world (Kaye and Taylor 1997). The result was an increase in business, finance and trade links, which was mainly based on the "Ten-Year Economic Plan" from 1978 and the "Ten Principles" introduced by Premier Zhao Zi-Yang in 1981 that had caused this effect. Most companies chose to employ expatriate managers to start up their business and who were responsible for establishing and strengthening the company's presence overseas. Despite this new opportunity, companies had to experience that doing business in the (PRC) can be a long gruelling process, which often results in failure (Hodgetts and Luthans 2000). The failure rate of expatriates who end their overseas assignments prematurely is normally in the literature associated between 16-40 percent (Kaye and Taylor 1997). The estimated costs of each failure ranges between $250,000 and $1 million (Ashamalla 1998), some even estimated the amount to be much higher (Shay and Tracey 1997). Ashmalla (1998) also points out some other unidentifiable costs such as, lost business opportunities, compensation and relocation and also weakened relationships with customers, suppliers and the government from the host country. The cause of this high failure rate has various explanations. Besides poor selection and poor preparation, Deresky (1997) also identifies the lack of planning for the entry and re-entry transitions of the manager and his/her family as one of the reasons for the high failure percentage. Other writers such as Barham and Oates (1991) argue that many expatriates return prematurely from their international assignments, because they fail to adapt to the new culture of the host country. Many companies belief that the way they do business in their home country must also work in other countries. This however, is a misconception as they fail to recognise that each country has its own traditions and beliefs, and its these values that need considering when planning to expand a business in a foreign country. This argument was further developed by Morden (1995) who states, "There is no guarantee, therefore, that theories developed within the cultural context of one country can with good effect be applied to another" (Morden 1995, p17). Expatriates who are unfamiliar with the culture of the host country find it harder to adapt to the new way of life, and are often unhappy living abroad. Therefore, working effectively in a multiple cross-cultural context has become a main competency for expatriate managers of the 1990's. <heading>Competencies for expatriate managers</heading>The debate about the competencies for expatriate managers has been a key feature of the international human resource management literature for many years. Varied lists of competencies were produced over the years, which all seem to differentiate in the abilities expatriate managers need to have. Harris and Kumra (2000) suggest that this could be due to the little definition in the literature of the term "expatriate" or international manager". The Ashridge Survey study for example identifies strategic awareness, adaptability in new situations, sensivity to different cultures, ability to work in international teams, and language skills as the five most important competencies for international managers (Barham and Oates 1991). Other writers such as Coulson - Thomas (1992 [cited in Birchall et.al. 1996]) on the other hand, identify strategic awareness, customer focus, individual responsibility, communication skills and creativity as very important qualities. One of the most interesting approaches about the competencies for international managers in recent years was developed by Wills and Barham (1994). The study was based on a survey, which involved 60 senior international executives from a range of different countries and industries. The study revealed that the overall competencies were composed of three inter-linking parts; cognitive complexity, emotional energy and psychological maturity (Figure 1). <figure/>The cognitive complexity competency includes features such as, cultural empathy, active listening and sense of humility. Emotional energy includes, emotional self-awareness, emotional resilience, risk acceptance and emotional support of the family. Psychological maturity includes, curiosity to learn, orientation to time and personal morality. These competencies identified by Wills and Barham (1994) differentiates totally from the other criteria's used to identify the actual selection decisions within organisations. Harris and Kumra (2000) argue that organisations rely on more traditional criteria's such as, technical expertise and knowledge of the company systems rather then "soft" skills. The high risk factor companies face when sending expatriates on international assignments could explain this approach. Organisations want to get the job done competently by expatriates who have proven themselves through recorded measures of attainment. Ruben (1989) stresses that such an approach is the determinant for failure rather than the key to success. Expatriates need to able to built relationships and respect the traditions of the host country in order to be successful. One that thinks building relationships is a waste of time and who is more interested in getting the job done is determined to fail. Especially in country such as China with its long tradition and beliefs can such an approach be devastating for the business. Webb (1996) for example points out, "Conducting business in a different culture requires adaptation to the value systems and norms of that country. Respecting another culture and its customs and etiquette is not only good manners but also good business" (Webb 1996, p41). It is therefore important that international human resource managers recognise the need for more "soft" skills when selecting the right expatriate candidate for the international assignments. Simply relying on technical skills or previous work experience cannot be the way to success. <heading>Cultural Implications</heading>One of the most influential writers in the area of national culture and what impact it has on the way people manage and work together in organisation is Geert Hofstede (Groeschl and Doherty 2000). His book "Cultural Consequences", first published in 1980, was based on survey involving employees and managers from IBM in 40 countries (later extended to over 60 countries). Hofstede (2001) defines culture as "the collective programming of the mind that distinguishes the members of one group or category of people from another" (Hofstede 2001, p9). The survey found that "national culture explained more of the differences in work-related values than did an individual's position within the organisation, profession, age or gender" (Barham and Oates 1991, p45). Hofstede's findings suggest that national cultures can be divided in four dimensions: individualism versus collectivism; uncertainty avoidance; and masculinity versus femininity. These four dimensions provide a useful characterisation of Chinese culture (Table 1). <table/>It is important for companies to understand these cultural influences in order to create an international spirit within the organisation. Kaye and Taylor (1997) for example argue that communication plays a significant role in the Chinese culture, and Western expatriates need to have basic knowledge of the Chinese language. This view is supported by Selmer (2000) who argues, "Not being able to interact with the host country nationals in daily life makes expatriates ignorant about local thinking and character which influences their ability to assess work situations and make them develop wrong assumptions about people they are managing" (Selmer 2000, p16). <heading>Culture shock </heading>Many factors can contribute to the feeling of homesickness and culture shock when starting an international assignment. Adler (1997) defines culture shock as "the expatriates reaction to a new, unpredictable, and therefore uncertain environment"(Adler 1997, p264). This is further developed by Kaye and Taylor (1997) who state, "Differences in expectations, language, foods, ways to eat, the concept of personal space, etc., are often stress producing because they may seem neither understandable nor ethically 'correct'" (Kaye and Taylor 1997, p497). Even the most effective experienced expatriate managers often suffer from severe culture shock (Adler 1997). Adler (1997) argues that the adjustment of the expatriate to the new culture can be described in the form of a U-shaped curve (Figure 2). <figure/>It starts with the honeymoon stage were the expatriate manager experiences a great deal of excitement in the initial stage of the assignment, which is then followed, by a stage of disillusionment. This stage is characterised by starting to blame others for the expatriate's problems instead of understanding and recognising that this not useful no matter how tempting it is. The bottom of the curve is marked by the culture shock phase, which is the result from too many new and meaningless clues. Simons et.al. (1993) identifies three responses to culture shock; resistance: the rejection of the new culture and a powerful defence of one's own tradition; assimilation: the complete rejection of one's own values in order to embrace those for the new culture and; acculturation: learning to live with the new culture while remaining rooted in the traditions of one's own. After this phase has been overcome the expatriate starts to adapt to the new culture and feels more positive, works more effectively and lives his/her life more satisfactorily. The culture shock phase is the stage when expatriates decide not to continue their international assignments, because of differences between the home and host countries culture of the individual of which he/she is not able to deal with. Mendenhall et.al. (1995) states, "...many expatriates never get beyond the culture shock stage, and either return home early from their assignments or simply "gut it out" and complete their assignments but are never completely effective in their assignments or happy about living in the host culture" (Mendenhall et.al. 1995, p412). Expatriate managers from international hotel chains however; seem to experience fewer problems during their assignments then other expatriate managers. That does not mean there are no problems, but the expatriates are somehow more excited about their assignments. Gliatis and Guerrier (1994) for example state, "...hotel companies experience fewer problems in the management of international assignments than many other multinational companies. They attract managers who are enthusiastic about an international career and have developed ways of managing careers on a global basis" (Gliatis and Guerrier 1994, p239). However, problems like cultural differences, local staff attitude, lack of local staff competence and government policy changes persist and were perceived the most difficult ones by expatriate managers who work for international hotel companies in China (Feng and Pearson 1999). It is therefore necessary that expatriate managers receive adequate cross cultural training before starting their assignments in China in order to overcome these problems. <heading>Cross - Cultural Training</heading>The literature on cross-cultural training and its contribution to the performance improvements of expatriate managers is extensive (Hodgetts and Luthans 2000; Barham 1989; Mendenhall et.al. 1995; Harris and Kumra 2000). Cross-cultural training is believed to have an impact on the expatriate's productivity and for generating greater satisfaction in their foreign assignments (Webb 1996). The training is designed to help expatriates with the adaptation to the new culture and to teach appropriate behaviours that are necessary within the new culture. This includes for example, gradual development of familiarity, comfort and proficiency in dealing with the expected behaviour, values and assumptions inherent in the new culture (Webb 1996, p41). It also seeks to provide information and guidance by using for instance, cultural specific trainings, assimilators, readings, films, role-plays, case studies and interactive language training (Harris and Kumra 2000; Mendenhall et.al. 1995). The culture assimilator for example, requires the trainee to respond to a number of given culture scenarios. The trainee learns here how to react in certain situations and to behave accordingly in the new culture. The assimilator gives also feedback on the trainee's performance (Mendenhall et.al. 1995). However, in order to understand foreign cultural influences it is important first to understand one's own culture. Only than can the individual realise that that his/her culture or behaviour is not universal and starts to recognise other values and beliefs. There are three main theoretical frameworks for cross-cultural training, which are designed to test the expatriate's effectiveness. Each of these three models takes a slightly different approach. Tung's (1981) framework for example, identifies two main dimensions that should be used: the degree of interaction required in the host culture and also the similarities between the expatriates host home culture and the host culture. This framework was the first to outline the selection for cross-cultural training. Mendenhall and Oddon (1986) developed Tung's framework and included a more complex relationship between training method and the two variables. This framework assumed again a cultural specific orientation, but in addition indicated that a mix of experiential training might be appropriate for the expatriate depending on the level of rigour required. The last framework for the selection of cross-cultural training for expatriates was developed by Black and Mendenhall (1989)(Please see Figure 3). <figure/>This model is based on a social learning theory. It clearly links the variables of culture novelty, the required degree of contact with the host nationals, job novelty and the greater need for cross-cultural training. Mendenhall et.al. (1995) notes that, "...each of these three dimensions are not equal; research suggests that adjusting to the host culture and interacting with host nationals are more difficult tasks than adjusting to the overseas job"(Mendenhall et.al. 1995, 451). While these models are well known amongst academics, few human resource managers actually use them, which can be the result of various reasons. Some managers may think that the training is a waste of time and ineffective, others can simple not afford the training expenses. One factor that needs considering however, is that the frameworks, developed by Tung and others, did not include any hospitality organisations. This aspect is critical as the hospitality industry requires more relation skills and expatriate managers must understand the host countries culture in order to deal with a diverse customer base. In a study conducted by Shay and Tracey (1997) only 25 percent of the expatriate managers working in the hospitality industry had received cross-cultural training upon their arrival, which shows that the use of these frameworks is not much used in practise. The authors suggest therefore, to apply a rather different approach for cross-cultural training programs, which delineates objective and subjective characteristics of culture. This would help managers to ".... understand what to expect in their daily routine and the social dynamics they will encounter. The information should create an awareness of the general dimensions on which cultures differ and the likely effect of the differences on expatriates"(Shay and Tracey 1997, p34). Feng and Pearson (1999) also stress the importance of cross-cultural training for hotel expatriates. From their point of view is the understanding of the Chinese culture as well as stress management the most important factors managers need to consider when selecting expatriates for international hotel assignments. Therefore, the failure to provide expatriates with cross-cultural training leads inevitably to the culture shock phase were the individuals is unable to cope with the cultural influences and behaviours of the host country. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This research has shown that much of the reasons for the high percentage of expatriate failure in foreign assignments starts of with poor selection in the early stages of the recruitment process. Many international human resource managers rely on 'hard' technical skills and previous work experience, rather than selecting candidates who have skills in building long lasting business relationships and who are culturally aware. It is these skills however, that are needed when working in a country, such as China, which is totally influenced by its old traditions and beliefs. Expatriates that will not be able to adjust to the new host culture will be more likely to fail in their assignments than someone who has received cross-cultural training. Especially expatriates from international hotel companies need to be aware of the new culture and the way people behave and feel, as it is important to comprehend the needs of a diverse customer base. Unfortunately the use of cross-cultural training selection methods is not widely spread across the industry and many managers believe that the training is a waste of time and money. This belief being a misconception was shown in this research, which showed that the investment in cross-cultural training could have saved many companies millions of dollars. Therefore, managers from the hospitality and other industries, that consider expanding their business in China, need to recognise the need for adequate cross-cultural training for their expatriates. Its not only the responsibility of hospitality schools to contribute to the fair share of global hospitality managers, but also every company that acts globally (Kriegl 2000). It will cost money, time and effort, but no company in this increasingly global environment can afford to fail to invest in the skills of their expatriates, because the next competitor is just around the corner, ready to live up to the challenge. <heading>Recommendations</heading>Although the literature provides many examples on the cross-cultural training theory, statistics or case studies on how the training improves the performance of expatriates in the real life environment is almost non-existent. Therefore, more research is needed in this area. 