<heading>SITUATION ANALYSIS </heading><heading>Visiting Friends or Relatives (VFR) Market </heading>Visiting Friends or Relatives (VFR) is an important form in travel and tourism market. It is found to be one of the most frequent reasons for domestic pleasure travel especially in Europe and US (Lehto, Morrison and O'Leary, 2000; Paci, 1994) and the major reason for family travel trips (Mason, 1987). VFR comprises a considerable number of international travels, especially for countries with 'a strong immigration tradition' (Paci, 1994; Seaton and Palmer, 1997). In addition, Hay (1996) and King (1996) propose VFR travel is developing more quickly than other forms of travel in mature travel destination such as the UK. VFR market is used to be neglected in both tourism marketing and academic research (King, 1996; Morrison and O'Leary, 1995; Seaton, 1994), Moscardoal. (2000) point out the view has been changed, instead, there's a rising trend to notice the increasing market. It is reported that VFR accounted for a large portion of 42% of all domestic trips in British tourism (Denman, 1988). Up today Seaton and Palmer (1997) found that VFR market is becoming a rapid growing category in UK tourism industry. Research shows international VFRs to the UK grows 18% from 1998 to 2002, and it is the only category that not be affected growing in the wake of food and mouth disease and 11 September in 2001 (National Statistics, 2003). Statistics also show that both international and domestic VFRs contribute more to towns or cities outside London and less seasonality (Visit Britain, 2004). As Jackson (1990) identifies that VFRs representing a segment of international travellers that bring significant benefits to local areas and communities. Clearly, VFR is becoming an important market to British tourism, and some characteristics have been drawn by scholars and help understanding. It is examined that host plays a significant role in inviting VFR visitors, planning itinerary, deciding where to stay and what to do (Seaton and Palmer, 1997; Paci, 1994; McKercher, 1996). Many ways are suggested to segment the market (Seaton and Tagg, 1995; Yuan et al., 1995; Meis et al., 1995; Braunlich and Nadkarni, 1995; Hay, 1996; White, 1996; Morrison et al.,1995; King, 1994, 1996; King and Gamage, 1994). A widely recognized one is a typology of VFR developed by Moscardoal. (2000). It summarized five essential variables which are VFR as a travel activity or motive (sector), domestic/international VFR (scope), short-haul/long-haul VFR (effort), staying with friends or relatives (AFR)/staying in commercial accommodation establishments (NAFR) (accommodation used), and VF/VR/VFVR (focus of visit). Furthermore, VisitBritain (2004) provides an insight to the VFR market in Britain. This is a youth market based on the fact that 59% of international VF trips were made by people around 25 - 35 years old and majority of visitors are female. 60% VFR visitors are from Europe, Canada and USA are big VFR market to the UK due to the tradition of immigration. <fnote>VF, visiting friends; VR, visiting relatives; VFR, visiting friends and relatives </fnote>The report notice there's one of the biggest obstacles for people not making a VFR trip is they are not sure what to do even though they are invited by host. It is suggested that if there's an event during visiting, more potential VFR tourists will come. The problem brings up a niche market to capture and marketing implications to consider. <heading>The Treasure Houses of England</heading>The Treasure Houses of England are ten most magnificent privately owned historic estates in England, offering visitors a living history of the great families, culture and landscape for 1000 years (Treasure Houses of England Website). Most houses are still homes of the families. The SWOT analysis shows problems they have. <figure/>VisitBritain (2003) investigated that the reduction of oversea visits becomes one of the biggest problem that affecting visits to attractions, particularly US and European markets. And the followed factor is competition. So the Treasure Houses must find themselves a unique proposition and target a niche market - VFR market. <heading>TARGET AUDIENCE </heading>The marketing campaign has two target audiences: Host - resident of England, including local resident, who live within about half an hour's drive from the site; regional residents, who live from a distance of two hours' driving or more, make day visits away from home Overseas VFRs from North America and Europe, 25-34, VF/VR/VFVR, VFR is not the sole purpose of travel but a travel activity. <heading>OBJECTIVES </heading>To build a image of the Houses are treasures of England and make local residents to be proud of To increase the frequency of local visits, by 10% in tourist number in one year time To increase visits of host and VFRs to different Treasure Houses through the Treasure House of England joint promotion programme To improve the communication between oversea visitor's by Internet and motive their VFR trip to visit To build the database of local residents and reach more oversea VFR visitors via host <heading>STRATEGY </heading>For VFR purposes, oversea visits to England (excluding London 42%) accounts for 49% of the total number in the UK (VisitBritain, 2003). Thus, strategic objectives of the campaign are primarily to encourage visits from host and VFRs in England to the Treasure Houses, at the same time help the Treasure Houses capture this niche VFR market. Beioley (1997) recommended that active promotion to local residents is a way to gain VFR visitors to attraction and Poriaal. (2003) pointed out that people are more likely to visit a heritage site again if their emotional experiences were involved. Thus, in this campaign, the key is to create emotional ties between attractions and visitors. The strategy is to enhance emotional bond between hosts and treasure houses; the other one is to create emotional ties between VFR visitors and treasure houses through hosts. "From Home to Home" - It has two meanings: to host, be advocate of their local houses, see it as their own home; to VFRs, they leave home to home in England, and then visit 'home of the great families' - the Treasure Houses of England. It creates a sweet perception to VFR trip and visit. <heading>ACTION PLANS </heading>With a theme 'from home to home', marketing activities will be conducted from the aspects of product, pricing, distribution and communication mix. <heading>Product </heading>Product is the visitor experience, and it starts from impression before visit (Johns and Clark, 1994). However, many tourists barely know something about the place (Middleton with Clarke, 2001). Thus, Treasure Houses should begin visitors' satisfactory experiences by providing aesthetic and informative brochure and website about the attractions and helpful information such as how to get there. During visit, quality of services is essential such as friendly tour guide, nice gift shop assistants, as well as facilities etc. To manage a good customer relationship, attraction can keep contact with tourists (if they like) after visits, informing what happens at houses and inviting them to come. Moreover, Strauss and Lord (2002) indicated 'history is a popular theme for recreational travel'. To make the historical attraction young and fun, Treasure Houses can bring a history of authenticity alive by different events, shows. Finally, a good brand image is aimed to set up, like National Trust, English Heritage Properties. <heading>Price </heading>Average standard price of the Treasure Houses for adult is £11.27. It is slightly higher than other historic properties and attractions. Even though it is acceptable to most tourists for first time visit, it seems not favourable to repeated visitors and host accompanying VFRs. Besides this short - term promotion, some annual pass ticket can be promoted to increase frequency of existing visitors. <heading>Distribution </heading>ICT becomes the theme of distribution in tourism. So it is suggested to redevelop the website of Treasure Houses before campaign. The advertising on VisitBritain will drive many visitors to check Treasure Houses' site; unfortunately, the current website is very empty and can only leading visitors to its member's site without any other information. It makes visitors feel incoherent and lack of trust. Furthermore, the site should build a database of customers in order to better segment audience and conduct direct marketing (on line) in future. <heading>Communication mix</heading><heading>Advertising - gain awareness </heading>Website promotion. VisitBritain is the official website for visiting Britain especially to international tourists. For the first three months, a horizontal banner will be located at home page. It encourages visitors to click into, register and get monthly newsletter. One month gap, then another two months advertising located in 'Enjoy England' to encourage VFR trips in summer. Then, when the houses start to open, advertising is on to promote VFR trips for the second year. Regional newspaper promotions. To build a local flavour, local daily newspaper is chosen, such as Oxford Mail in Oxfordshire. Ten days' coverage with half page coloured advertising to show one house per day, emphasizing the brand 'The Treasure Houses of England' and drive readers to their websites. Visitors can order free brochure from website or through phone. When summer comes, advertising appear weekly on newspaper to encourage local people day out to these places. Local radio. It will be start the same as newspaper for 20 days periodically. When there're other big activities, it stops. It is not a very powerful tool in this communication, but also important as a reminder. <heading>Public Relation </heading>Each member of the Treasure Houses to provide news ideas to their regional / local journalists for press release. It will be released on each member's website as well as the Treasure Houses of England. Support from VisitBritain can be obtained to promote the campaign. Press of this campaign will be released at their 'media centre' online. This is aimed to build image and awareness for oversea visitors. PR Campaign - Open weekend for locals. From the second campaign month, each member selects a weekend to invite local residents visit their houses for free. This pulls the visits of local non-users. It will be reported. Local residents need to book ahead and register, it is for keeping record of host visits and database <heading>Sales Promotion</heading>In summer, ten houses will launch a 'Treasure Houses Pass', which can save up to 40% of admissions, encouraging the visit to visit all treasure houses. Annual Pass is available to purchase with special offer. <heading>Direct Marketing</heading>During summer, direct mails are sent to local residents, encouraging them to invite friends and relatives to visit England in the best season. <heading>BUDGET</heading>The financial objective is to both catch the attention of local residents and raise awareness of oversea potential visitors by using budget sensibly. The details of each cost are in the following table and it goes along with each activities. Total cost is within the budget, and allowing for a contingency cost. <table/><heading>TIME SCHEDULE & DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITIES</heading>This campaign runs from 1 st May 2005 - 30 th April 2006 and the progress can be seen in Appendix. Website communicates directly with oversea visitors and goes through the campaign, as well as web newsletters. Local communication tools are used extensively to catch attention at the beginning for 10 and 20 days. Radio advertising will be dripping during the whole campaign. As audiences get awareness, the PR campaign will take place in June 05. To keep the trend, there is the sales promotion from the ten houses lasting for 3 months. In August and October 05, local newspapers promote visits before some houses close in October; and March 06 announce reopen. Direct mails are sent in summer and before Christmas as the best time for VFR trip. The campaign begins with diagnosis. Treasure houses need to identify problems first by themselves, given the problem to marketing research manager to conduct a research to analyze problem in its current business environment. Before conducting campaign, financial manager need to figure out how much budget is available for the campaign. An advertising agency will be chosen to work with. Treasure Houses communicate objectives with account manager. The agency will be responsible for creating ideas, media purchasing, advertising production etc for advertising campaign. Local journalist of each house is invited to write press release for PR, and VisitBritain offers help for PR. Production. <heading>MONITORING, EVALUATION & CONTROL</heading>The result of a marketing campaign is expected to achieve objectives, in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and economy (Pender, 1999). First of all, the total number of visits can be measured by ticket sales. The number of repeated locals is hoped to get by database built during campaign. Other indicators such as annual pass, special local offer may be able to recognize host group. Secondly, qualitative research is needed. Questionnaires can be designed to investigate the media effect. To existing visitors, they are distributed very simple questionnaires that focus on the purpose of visits, communication channel and frequency of visits. To potential visitors communicated through Internet can be assessed by sending email questions checking their intentions to come. Besides newspaper and radios, focus group can be applied to evaluate the result of PR. Thirdly, concerning sales promotion, consumer's sales response to joint promotion can be measured from flow of booking, enquiry and ticket sale; it also requires comparison of figures before and after a campaign. Finally, it is very necessary to check actions of competitors and any other environmental factors that may influence the outcomes (Pickton and Broderick, 2005) 