<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>There's a saying: Xiao Tze, they are either in Lijiang or on the way to Lijiang (Tianjiao, 2002). Recently, the trend of Xiao Tze visiting Lijiang becomes more and more popular in China. Lijiang is named as 'Paradise of Xiao Tze' and regarded as the most typical Xiao Tze destination by public (Seven years itch of Lijiang, no date). It is really interesting to find out the reason behind this noticeable societal phenomenon, especially for Lijiang Tourism Bureau manager. They should learn why Lijiang and Xiao Tze are bonded and take this opportunity to better understand their characteristic customers, satisfy them, facilitate tourism industry and finally benefit Lijiang tourism industry. This essay begins by introducing the consumer group and the tourism destination. Then marketing segmentation is used to analyze the tourist characteristics and the framework of Purchase-Consumption System Model (Woodside and King, 2001) is applied to explain consumer behaviour in leisure travel. During discussion, a series of recommendations is presented to Tourism Bureau manager. Let us begin with the two 'leading actors': Xiao Tze and Lijiang. <heading>XIAO TZE</heading>Xiao Tze is a very popular term used in Chinese society nowadays. It represents a newly emerged lifestyle that no academic literature has discussed ever. Given the remarkable tendency, the topic was raised by newspapers, magazines and such publications. For example, the behaviour of Xiao Tze is discussed in a 'comic sociology' - Various facets of the life of Xiao Tze (2001) by People's Daily Newspaper Online (a large Chinese publication) in Reading Section of their website. It gives a comprehensive description of Xiao Tze. Accordingly, Xiao Tze are people around 25-35; well-educated, most have studied overseas and been influenced by western culture. They live in big cities such as Beijing, Shanghai; have stable job with secure income. They work hard and know how to enjoy life using disposable income and time. Even though they are not wealthy, they are not hesitated to spend money in things they really like, such as travel. Most of them are web surfer, so Internet is a necessity in their life for keeping touch with friends, searching information etc. Like the American 'Yuppie' of the 1980s was defined by Rolex Watch, Gucci briefcase (Solomon, 1994), Xiao Tze define themselves by certain ways. For example, using brand products such as LV bags; having 'elegant' interests, such as watching classic films. It is difficult to say how this lifestyle has come out; however, it is not a unique phenomenon so far. In 2000, a similar group 'Bobos' was heralded by an American journalist David Brooks in his book - BoBos in Paradise: The New Upper Class and How They Got There. David named the new upper class 'Bourgeois Bohemians' that mixed '60s-style liberalism' with '80s-style conspicuous consumption'. (Brooks, 2000) The Bobos is quite similar to Chinese Xiao Tze, when west meets east, Chinese 'Bourgeois Bohemians' are what we see now - Xiao Tze. <heading>LIJIANG</heading>Lijiang is a famous tourist destination for five main attractions: Jade Dragon Snow Mountain, Tiger Leaping Gorge, The First Bend of the Yangtze, The Baisha Murals and The Ancient Town of Lijiang. Especially the old town, which was named as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1997, is the ancient capital of the Naxi people who have a long history and rich cultural heritage, in terms of Dongba music, script, architecture and clothes. Lijiang is 'a dreaming garden for people longing for a haven of peace different from today's modern cities'. (Ancient City of Lijiang, 2004). People who have visited give comments like this: "Lijiang seems to have a magic power to attract me there; I will never be tired of it." "A short stay in Lijiang refreshed my spirit and gave me new vigor to everyday life." "Tired of city life's hustle and bustle, I especially love the peace and quiet of Lijiang." "Naxi people and their Dongba culture, the strong cultural atmosphere makes Lijiang special." (Sina travel forum, no date) Tourism in Lijiang has developed quickly in recent years and a dramatic increase in domestic tourism contributes to 93-96% of tourists to Lijiang. (Duang, 2000) Today, tourism has replaced agricultural industry become the backbone of Lijiang local economy. And the output of culture tourism occupies a big amount of the total tourism income (Wu, 2003). Needless to say, tourists are economic source of Lijiang, and the performance of destination manager directly leads the development of local economy. <heading>TOURIST SEGMENT</heading>Berry et.al (1991; cited in Bieger and Laesser, 2002, p68) emphasized the importance of marketing segmentation as a helpful tool in developing marketing strategy. By dividing the market and grouping consumer with same characteristics in terms of needs and wants, marketing segmentation helps manager to identify customers' need and want to meet their expectation. (Middleton and Clarke, 2001) There are different variables of categorization. Kotler (1994) summarized four main variables in terms of geographical, socio-economic, psychographic and behavioural for generic market segmentation. In tourism market, seven ways are defined by Middleton and Clarke (2001), which are purpose of travel; buyer needs, motivations, and benefits sought; buyer behaviour/characteristics of product usage; demographic, economic, and geographic profile; psychographic profile; geodemographic profile; and price. In this study, the tourist segment is mainly based on tourist psychographic profile. Given each method has both strengths and weaknesses and many authors suggest using more methods in order to predict tourist consumer behaviour accurately. (Robinson, 2000; Middleton and Clarke, 2001) Some other variables will also be considered. As there's no primary research for this specific tourist segment, statistics of Xiao Tze cannot be provided here. Therefore, their characteristics are summarised from Various facets of the life of Xiao Tze. <heading>Geodemographic Profile </heading><list>Age: 25 - 35Family life cycle: young, single; young, married, no childrenOccupation: various but all have stable job position and incomeEducation: highly educated such as college/university graduates, most have oversea study experiencesLocation: big cities such as Beijing, Shanghai</list><heading>Psychographic Profile </heading><heading>Social Class - Xiaokang </heading>A Lifestyle Segmentation of Chinese Consumers Research (CMMS, see appendix) classified Chinese urban consumers to three social classes based on education level, possession of durable products (e.g., home appliance car, computer) and financial products (e.g., credit card), which reflect consumer power of purchase. Xiao Tze belongs to 'Xiaokang' class, in which people live in a satisfactory condition, with sufficient possessions for a comfortable living. <heading>VALS Lifestyle - Fashion directed </heading>The research also defined four psychological directed groups on value and lifestyle, which includes tradition directed, zhongyong directed, achievement directed and fashion directed. The psychological characteristics of fashion directed group are: sociable, sensitive to advertising and promotion, ambitious, show-off, impulsive, like fashion and style. <heading>Fashion Follower</heading>According to its characteristics, Xiao Tze can be located in the slot 'Fashion Follower', which is quite similar to the 'Outer-directed' group mentioned by Middleton and Clarke (2001). <figure/><table/><heading>Motivation</heading>'Set of needs which predispose a person to participate in tourist activity' (Pizam et al, 1978) and is usually identified as socio-psychological forces that promote tourists to travel (Iso-Ahola, 1982; cited in Baloglu and McCleary, 1999). Crompton (1979) summed up six motives for pleasure tourists and suggested usually more than one motive influence tourists' decision. To Xiao Tze: Fasionability Swarbrook and Horner (1999) suggested it can be a major consideration when choosing a holiday destination, which applies to fashion-directed Xiao Tze. 'Consumption constellations' Solomon (1988; cited in Woodside and King, 2001, p5) revealed that individual consumption behaviour expresses a specific lifestyle, they purchase a certain products to define, communicate and perform their social roles. Escape and Relaxation (Crompton, 1979) "Lijiang City is the right place for you to enjoy a peaceful life, where the ordinary scene of high buildings, noisy cars and foul atmosphere in most cities under industrialization is seldom seen," said Tang Xingsheng, a painter from Guilin. (Ancient City of Lijiang, 2004) Cultural motives Tourism is considered as a way to enlarge knowledge, enhance self-cultivation and conduct cultural exchange in Chinese traditional culture, which are psychological motives for Chinese people to travel. (Zhang, 1997) The cultural heritage of Lijiang is an important motivator. <heading>PURCHASE-CONSUMPTION SYSTEM IN LEISURE TRAVEL</heading><figure/>The use of Purchase-Consumption System (PCS) in travel and tourism enhances understanding of travel behaviour before, during and after trip, as well as the relationship of variables involved in the three stages (Woodside and King, 2001). This model is chosen because it involves tourists' consumption behaviour during trip, which is not noted in other models. Given that tourism is the backbone of Lijiang economy, tourists' spending behaviour during trip that gives directly benefit to local economy must interest tourism manager. There are 19 variables (V) in the model, including 8 personal and environmental factors in pre-trip stage (BOX 1), which influence decision making and planning before and during trip; 8 variables in during-trip stage (BOX 2), which are the elements formed a trip; 3 variables in post-trip stage (BOX 3), which are the outcomes of the experiences and influence future travel. The three stages are interactive, BOX 1 decision triggers BOX 2, the experience in BOX 2 results evaluatioin and satisfactin in BOX 3, finally evaluation becomes an important personal influence in BOX 1. Woodside and King (2001) believe a relevant theoretical construct in this model is image. It plays a significant role in influencing tourist destination choice (Beerli and Martin, 2004) and Baloglu and McCleary (1999) pointed out overall that image of a place is formed by cognitive and affective evaluations and dependent upon individual attributes. Additionally, information source and socio-psychological motives are found to be two important components in building a destination image. Information source emphasizes cognitive evaluation and socio-psychological motive is related to affective attributes of image. Furthermore, perceived image after visit influences satisfaction and intention to repeat the visit, which depends on if destination can fit the image customer perceived and meet their expectation. (Chon, 1990; cited in Beerli and Martin, 2004, p623) <heading>Pre-Trip </heading>Providing 'Paradise of Xiao Tze' has already been the public image of Lijiang with peacefulness, relaxation and cultural heritage, it is a very positive influence related to Xiao Tze's psychological characters in decision making. Associated with a social image, tourist destination attracts tourists from the same class (Pearce, 1982); the more similar between tourists' self-image and their image of visitors to the destination, the more motivated they are to visit the destination (Sirgy & Su, 2000; cited in Beerli and Martin, 2004, p627). So in this stage what destination manager should do is to enhance positive image, beware and reduce negative one using appropriate information source (a considerable factor in all stages). As Xiao Tze are open to media persuasion, V3 can catalyze or consolidate them to choose Lijiang. The choice of media and distribution channel (V5) should be effective. For example, Internet is important for Xiao Tze to gather information, so Lijiang must have a visitor website with abundant information. <heading>During Trip</heading>After chose destination, tourists select the tourism products in BOX 2, where 3 levels happen in sequence and previous one triggers the subsequent. Most consumers see destination as a DIY kit rather than a finished product, they can choose a range of way to make their own experiences. (Swarbrook and Horner, 1999) The way of travelling doesn't affect what they choose in the kit. For instance, a Guangzhou resident travel research (2001) showed that 49.1% urban residents choose package holiday and 41.2% like to travel independently, but no matter which way they choose, 82% of them will decide their itinerary first rather than simply follow package holiday (Source: Oriental Consultation Group). <heading>Suggestions on Level 1 & Level 2</heading>Tourism bureau had better make all travel-related industries in Lijiang work together to provide qualified DIY kit. Typologies can be created by using qualitative comparative analysis to maximize the possibilities of finding (Becker, 1998; cited in Woodside and King, 2001, p5). For example, 2 attractions, 3 accommodation types, 4 route options can make up to 24 possible plans. According to tourist segment, destination manager can help tour operators design such possible decision paths into holiday package. Most tourists visit Lijiang for both natural scenery and cultural environment. It is said enjoying Naxi Classic Music and visiting the Mu Family Mansion and the Baisha Murals are three musts (Wu, 2003). Meanwhile, research shows that people in 'Xiaokang' class are more interested in the place with strong cultural atmosphere (source: SMI research a life style toward Bobos). For example, a 'Naxi culture tour' may meet Xiao Tze's interests and expectation. Likewise, different tours can be designed to meet different benefits sought such as adventure tour, tour of relaxation. What's more, accommodation and activities are two key ingredients. Today's tourists do not take accommodation just as a place to stay (Johnston-Walker, 1999; cited in Thyme and Lawson, 2000), the hotel choices are usually influenced by 4 psychographic concepts: value, lifestyle, vacation style and benefits (Zin, 1998); as well activity choices are influenced by tourists' value (Madrigal and Kahle, 1994). Then the cultural tour is better to have Lijiang representative local accommodation rather than modern hotels, and more cultural activities the people can learn something and participate in. The purpose is to give more than expected, so that tourist can be fully satisfied and their intention to return will be triggered (V19). <heading>Suggestions on Level 3 </heading>Level 3 is an area without plan before trip, but tourist purchase of gift or other products do happen during trip. It is showed that high information visitors, those with prior search, spend more, participate more, more positive and more intent to return compared to low information users and nonusers (Woodside and King, 2001). Fodness and Murray (1999) emphasized information search is related to length of stay, number of attractions visited and entertainment expenditure. It is recommended that Lijiang destination provide more external information (Crotts, 1999) such as booklet about local shopping, activity, dinning so as to stimulate the spending of tourists and eliminate coercive consumption. Tourism bureau manager must realise that this is a revenue generated stage directly benefit local economy. Providing right and sufficient information makes tourists spend willingly. <heading>Post-trip </heading>It is usual for customer to purchase a brand that they are satisfied (Blackwell, 2000) What about in tourism? If what has been done previously can make satisfied customers, will customers visit again? Crompton (1979) revealed that cultural motives in tourism based on novelty or education, so tourists prefer to go to unvisited place and probably will not re-visit. Xiao Tze are good customers in spending. Lijiang welcomes them to visit repeatedly. Affective image influences word of mouth and repeated customers (Baloglu and McCleary, 1999), so the idea of perceiving Lijiang as a place escape everyday environment and relax can be added during trip. Afterward, manager needs to develop new tourism products for repeated visitors and to ensure them gain new experiences. At the same time, new ways to visit old destinations can be developed for first time visitor. (Frommer, 1996) Apart from these, one thing worth noting but not mentioned in the model is seasonality; this is a critical factor in Chinese domestic travel market. Most people travel in three 'China Travel Golden Week' - Labour Day, National Day and Chinese New Year, what causes terrible travel peak seasons. Obviously a peak season can hardly satisfy Xiao Tze who wish to escape, knowing this manager should provide 'best travel time' especially to Xiao Tze. It can both minimize mass tourism impact on destination and create more satisfied tourists. <heading>CONCLUSION </heading>Associated with motivation, psychological characteristics, destination image and information source, Xiao Tze travel behaviour is better understood during discussion using marketing segmentation and PCS as tools. The last recommendation is to conduct a primary research of 'characteristic customer' because Xiao Tze and Lijiang are strongly bonded. 