To be successful in the hospitality industry, besides the satisfaction on the provision of physical products, the delivery of high quality services is also important. Though quality service in the hospitality industry is difficult to measure, it could be argued that the behaviour of employees considerably influence their ability to give high quality service. This essay seeks to initially define the concept of genuine hospitality. Specific evidence as to the possible motives of the employees in providing hospitality will then be given. After following a little description of service quality, the ability to deliver high quality products and services with the motives discussed before will be evaluated. In the commercial hospitality sector, Jones (1996) suggests that it is made up of two distinct services: "the provision of overnight accommodation for people staying away from home, and the provision of sustenance for people eating away from home." Like the private sector, it comprises a two-way exchange process, however, which is based on money exchange. <quote>"The method of production by which the needs of the proposed guests are satisfied to the utmost and that means a supply of goods and services in a quantity and quality desired by the guest and at a price." Tideman's (1983, p.1)</quote>Clearly, with the concern of financial reimbursement, the guest use money as a way for mutual obligation, instead of being a provider in return, and for the host, they may have ulterior motives when serving, therefore, Telfer (2000) suggests "This kind of hospitality is not very hospitable." Is it meant there is no genuinely hospitable in this industry? It is surely far too simple. Before discussing how to perform genuine hospitality, we should firstly examine the concept of it. By semantic definition, "genuine", when focus on describing a person and their emotions, means "free from affectation or hypocrisy" (Oxford English Dictionary) and "honest and sincere" (Cambridge online dictionary). It is clear that a person is genuine when he acts all from his heart. For instance, when his friend loses a book, he tries his best to find it, what he wants at the end, is not to gain any recompense, nor to impress his friend, but is that his friend can get back the book. The Good Samaritan hospitality is another good example which shows a genuine person does not have ulterior motive. Similarly, for a host to be genuinely hospitable in the hospitality industry, he should have appropriate motive. According to Telfer (2000, p.42) <quote>"If behaviour is to count as genuinely hospitable, it must have an appropriate motive"</quote>People are attracted to the industry with different motives. We cannot discuss them all whether it is appropriate, but it is true that to be genuinely hospitable, the host should be other-regarding, provide comfort, and do his best to ensure the guest's both tangible and intangible needs are fulfilled, and the guest feel pleased and satisfied. Apparently, the service provided should be customer-oriented, and the host's self-interested motives should be predominating, it is noted that a truly hospitable person should behave hospitably in private as well as professional life (Telfer, 2000). We can conclude it by using the Ritz-Carlton Credo, which promises to provide the best services and facilities for their guest, fulfill even the unexpressed wishes and needs, to ensure that they will enjoy a warm, relaxed, yet refined ambiance. So what are the motives of employees in the real situation? Unlike private hospitality, a commercial host cannot have the right to choose how often to entertain or to choose the guest, Telfer (2000) claims to put emphasis on the reason why the employees choose this occupation and their performance when delivering a service. We shall now discuss the first part, using the research carried out by the HCTC (1994) on employees' attitude. The majority of respondents (14%) were attracted to the industry by accident. These people do not think of working in hospitality industry before and may not have a clear mind what they want to do when they find a job. They just go to apply different kinds of all possible jobs and finally, they gain a position in this industry. A problem may arise is that these people may misfit to the industry as they enter the industry accidentally, they do not know much about the industry, what their responsibilities are, surely lack of work experience in this sector as well. The second largest proportion of respondents gets a job because they want to work with public. Hospitality business is a labour intensive industry, many work positions, especially the front-of the house, involves face-to face- interaction with the guests everyday. A possible explanation for this group of people attributes to get bored with working on their own to deal with tons of paper work repeatedly everyday. Since customers are unique and have different needs, the employees need to perform differently towards each guest. Another major reason is easy to get job. Except chefs who need relevant craft certificates, qualifications in most of the positions in the hospitality industry are not being important comparing to other businesses (Wood, 1997). That's why over a long period, women remain the majority of employees. The Hotel & Catering Economic Development Committee report (HCEDC, 1976) claimed that due to the domestic nature of the hospitality work, women mostly have gained this knowledge before already; employers can thus recruit them without launching extensive training which results reducing on the cost of training. Riley (2000) summarizes the attractiveness of unskilled work in the hospitality industry as "convenient, easy to learn, has variety, and can meet people." The factor of "social aspect" also contributes to the industry's attractiveness. These employees are socially and/or psychologically marginal in some ways and want to meet people to enlarge their social circle through work. This is what Whyte (1948:13) comment: <quote>"Apparently, there are many people who require a high rate of social activity and changes in physical activity in order to be happy in their work, the restaurant fills this need for them."</quote>What about the profit motive? Only 8% of respondents think it is important. Though, some people choose to go to the hospitality industry to earn a living, or managers want to gain profit and aim for repeat businesses, profit motive is not the main focus by most managers. And for the employees, Mars and Mitchell (1976) points out these workers can obtain satisfaction which can only be gained in this service industry, for which this kind of satisfaction can outweigh low earnings. Up to now, we have defined the concept of genuine hospitality and the possible motives of the employees, now we will move on to the services delivered. Obviously, in the hospitality industry, the intangible factors are more important than the tangible ones, especially the high quality of service is considered as the essential determinant or a successful business. Service is "an organization that provides for a basic public need" (Cambridge Online Dictionary) which focuses on delivering quality. Quality, in this customer oriented sector, is defined as" satisfying customers' requirements" "fitness for purpose" (Ghobadian, Speller, Jones, 1994) Customers usually judge quality by comparing their received perceptions with their expectations before receiving the service. It is thus also a measure of the extent to which the service delivered meets customers' expectations. So how to ensure the service is of high quality? Inevitably, it should be higher than what the customers expect. Since customers are participated in the delivery process, the perception of quality is influenced by both the "service outcome" and the "service process" (Ghobadian, Speller, Jones, 1994), which relates to the attitudes of employees, it is important for all of them work towards customer satisfaction. Different motives of the employees will turn out to different quality of services. We shall now examine the performance of the employees, according to the reasons they are attracted to the industry as discussed before. For the people who enter the gain a work accidentally, two groups of people may appear. One group find themselves suit the job while the other does not. Employees who are interested in their work, though they only know a little about the hospitality industry, they have a desire to please the guest and try to make themselves getting involved into this circle of life by finding what is going on in the industry. From the very beginning, this group of people cannot deliver a high quality of service, despite the employees show a positive attitude towards their job as they need a period of time to adapt to the working environment. However, they are enthusiastic and willing to seek improvement. If they make mistakes to customers, they will apologize and correct their fault. Through experience and practices, it is believed that a perfect service is delivered and a loyal customer relationship can be delivered. On the other hand, the other group of people usually works with poor service quality. They find themselves do not get the right job and behave totally different from the former. These employees are not knowledgeable of the service and cannot help much when the guest seeks help and advice. These employees work for just to keep their job and may be some want to leave the industry - - no long term commitment. They only do the minimum responsibilities, indifferent the guest's needs and cannot recognize their faults clearly. It is sure that the guest's expectations are not met, which made customers dissatisfied and do not enjoy the service delivered. This kind of employees, are viewed to have self-regarding motives and not being genuinely hospitable. The employees with a desire to work with public and meet people offer high quality of service. With the willing to help and serve customers, employees often stand at the customer's side and think what they need and probably they possess an out-going personality and are more talkative. Through face-to face interactions, the host try to find out what pleases the guest and avoid offering that the guest dislike. This kind of hosts are genuinely hospitable, with courtesy, respect, compassion and friendliness, their performance are usually exceed the guest's expectations. Thus customers are fully impressed and feel welcome. Problems may arise when employee's motive of meeting friend become dominant. If there is a friendship between the employee and the guest, it is probably believes that the employee will treat this guest much better than the others. Sometimes it may threaten other customers' welfare since his friend receives more benefits on the same task. Although other customers may not realize they are treated unfairly, this host is not genuinely hospitable. While the host pay more attention to their friends, other customers' needs are neglected which leads to poor service quality. That is why Visser (1991) suggests formality is a better way than friendliness in the host-guest relationship to reduce role stress. The first perception of the motive of "easy to get job" is being viewed as self-regarded, assuming the employee take the job only to earn a living and have a desire to keep job. If it is the case, surely these hosts do not perform genuine hospitality and poor service results. However, employees may have mixed motives instead. For instance, they have a desire to earn a living as well as enjoy serving people. They carry out their responsibilities carefully even more than the job required and show concern to the guests. These employees are considered as having appropriate motive and hospitable. Telfer (2000) comments that the employees genuinely want to please the guest or they aspire to the hospitality work. Therefore, these employees can also be a good host with well behaviour Likewise, if the profit motive becomes dominant, customers mostly receive poor service. Some of the employees with this ulterior motive will only view the guest as valued customer and will only carry out the tasks where customer's expectations are exactly met even overcharge them. These hosts' goals are not help the guests to have an amazing experience, but to turn a profit and keep repeat business. An excellent service is provided when maximizing profit is not the main motive. From the research, only a minority of respondents aim for making money. We can say that to explain why the poor quality of service is delivered, it cannot only blame to the profit motives of employees, there must be other important factors. In conclusion, the motives of the employees are important in providing high quality experience for guests in the commercial sectors of the hospitality industry. Once the services meet customer's requirements and expectations, the company can keep and win their loyalty. Thus it is vital for employee to understand the value of a loyal, life long customer and treat every customer as individual and unique with an appropriate motive. It should also be noted that in order to have satisfied customers, it is important to ensure the one who serve them are satisfied firstly. The Ritz-Carlton Hotel sets a good example which claims all their employees are Ladies and Gentlemen, who are serving Ladies and Gentlemen. This encourages the employees by giving them a strong sense that they are not merely servants, but are meaningful and respected. Therefore, management needs to give employees responsibility, authority and empowerment. By this, surely the employees become more enthusiastic and confident in their work, which results high quality services, positive word of mouth and hence lead to successful business. 