I disagree with the claim that God's existence can be proved. This essay will attempt to show that it is not possible to prove the existence and will use the Teleological argument/argument from design to illustrate why. For it's advocates, the argument from design (as it will be referred to from this point) can, at best, infer the existence of a being that is considerably more limited than our conception of God. For those who oppose the argument from design however, evidence is not provided to eliminate the possibility that the universe is ordered by chance. This essay will examine whether God is a more plausible explanation for the order observed in the universe and what that "God" would then be like. This essay will then also consider the position that this order can be explained by chance. The definition of some key terms must first be undertaken. The "God" whose existence is being explored is the God of philosophical theism, with all of the qualities (often problematically) attributed to God. The second term that requires explanation is that of proof. This is in no way a simple term as there is much debate over what proof is. <quote> "Proof is a complex notion. In simplest terms, a proof is a valid argument with true premises. This is the standard notion of proof in logic."(Yandell, 1999 p.169)</quote>This definition requires knowledge that the premises are indeed true. Further explanation is required then to account for what it takes to deem a premise true. Verification is thus defined as: "Removal of grounds for rational doubt."(Hick, 1971 p.54). It is this definition that shall be used to judge if there may be proof of God's existence. Teleological arguments are based on examples of (apparent) purposiveness or design found in the world (Garcia, 1997). This essay will first examine whether God is a plausible explanation for these cases. For much of what we are able to observe in the world, there are scientific explanations (and often fairly simple formulas) (Swinburne, 1992) or relationships - the inverse square law of gravity for instance. While science is able to define many of these relationships, it is not capable of explaining why they exist (Garcia, 1997). These very relationships (producing the order in the universe) are said to be very varied and causally independent (Garcia, 1997). For science to explain these varied relationships it would need to postulate many theories to describe why each of the relationships has occurred. To postulate the existence of God (and indeed a singular God) is therefore said to be a simpler explanation (Swinburne 1992). This explanation does indeed appear to be simpler, and if the use of the principal of Occam's Razor is applied, the postulation of God should therefore be the idea followed. This however implies that proof is provided by the simpler theory, if there are two conflicting accounts of a situation/phenomena. This does not however remove grounds for rational doubt, as though the postulation of God may be simpler than the complex answers science may give, there is no evidence to show that it is in fact more likely. There is even reason to consider this argument for God from simplicity to be fallacious because it is not in fact more simple: <quote> "the organising capacities of an infinite mind would be just as much in need of explanation as the organised material world that results from it's activity."(1997, Garcia p.343)</quote>To suggest the existence of God may indeed make the order of the world more easily explained, but this God itself requires so much explanation that in fact this idea is not any simpler than the answer offered by science. If the argument from design is to be accepted as proof of God's existence, what kind of God is indeed inferred? This method of argument infers the existence of a designer from the evidence in the world. Care must be taken to not infer attributes that are beyond the evidence in the premises. This is well illustrated by Hume's point that if we are able to see one side of a scales, we may know that on the other side, there must be a weight of more than 10lbs. We cannot however infer what that weight is or how much more than 10lbs it may be (Clack & Clack, 1998). To describe another way, we may postulate the existence of entities, as long as these entities account "simply and coherently for the characteristics of the effects" (Swinburne, 1992). The evidence that we are provided with is that there are elements of design in the world. Elements of design in animals and plants may be accounted for entirely by evolution and so will be excluded from this debate. If these other examples are accepted as design and not attributed to evolution (in part or it's entirety), the inference is that they were designed by a designer (Davis, 1993). This tautology serves to illustrate that it does not infer God. The universe may be too complex for a human to have designed, but this in no way suggests that it was created by an omnipotent, God (Mill, 1992). Hume is often credited for his objections to the design theory being fatally wounding (Hick, 1963). The objections of Hume (1948) do indeed illustrate the picture of a designer from the argument from design as being very different to the God of philosophical theism. The argument is not enough to suggest (without the use of Occam's Razor) that there is only one designer. It is not enough to suggest that God is not corporeal, though this is refuted by reason that if God were corporeal, God would be responsible for it's own creation (Davis 1993). This objection however leads to further problems as it demonstrates that again the argument from design does not propose a designer's purpose or a reason for that designer's existence. The argument from design has been shown to be unable to prove the existence of the God of philosophical theism. It can however infer the existence of a designer. The best argument to explain the observable order in the universe without recourse to a designer is proposed by Hume (1948), that the universe is ordered by chance. There are periods of order and disorder and we exist in the period of order. One of the basic premises of the argument from design is that the level of order in the universe is so improbable that it must have been designed. This argument, particularly, the argument given by Paley (1992) is massively damaged by Darwin's theory of Evolution (Clack & Clack 1998) as an explanation for the intricacies of human organs/plants is possible without calling upon God. Reference to animal or plants in terms of design appears to now be useless to supporters of the argument from design. Davis (1993) asserts that some (such as Geach) do not consider evolution to be an adequate account of the changes involved in species. This would appear to infer that the designer is continuing to interfere with the world that would suggest that it is closer to God. This point regarding evolution is however far from accepted and so will be disregarded. To eliminate this debate, this essay will focus on other areas of the universe that appear ordered and designed. If the examples of order are not contentious, then it is not the premises that can be disputed but rather a debate between the existence of God (or as has been shown, merely a designer) and that the universe is ordered purely by chance (Garcia 1997). To ask the question of why the universe is ordered seems backward to some who would prefer to state that we are only able to make judgements regarding the world because it is indeed ordered and we are able to exist (Hacking 1987). Hacking (1987) addresses some fairly trivial points regarding the argument that the ordered universe is in existence through chance. He points out that despite the age of the universe, an ordered universe is not inevitable, but maintains that the ordered universe could arrive by chance. This chance is very small, but that it is very small is not enough to disprove its truth. Hence, this 'ordered universe through chance' argument is enough to provide reasonable doubt to the argument from design. Promoters of the design argument seem unable to accept this chance. This is demonstrated by Swinburne's analogy of a person being kidnapped and put in a room with a machine that selects a card from each of ten packs of cards. If all cards are the Ace of hearts, the person lives but if any other combination occurs, the room is detonated killing the hostage (Davis, 1993). The outcome is ten Aces of heart cards. While the hostage is surprised, the kidnapper explains that this is the only outcome the hostage could have seen. This analogy is very good at illustrating our viewpoint in the ordered universe. What is more interesting however is that Swinburne still refuses to accept that this may have occurred through chance and continues to look for a reason for that selection of cards (Davis, 1993). This essay has shown, with reference to the argument form design, that God's existence is improvable. It has outlined what is required as proof and that that is the removal of reasonable doubt. It has then showed that the type of creator that the argument from design does infer is not necessarily God. Finally it has shown that the counter argument that the reason for order in the universe is nothing more than pure chance is too strong, and hence provides "reasonable doubt". <heading>Bibliography</heading><heading>Clack, B. & Clack, B. (1998) The Philosophy of Religion, A Critical Introduction Cambridge : Blackwell</heading>I used this book as my introduction to the topics for this essay. Though there are only approximately eight pages devoted to the argument from design, the key theories and theorists are outlined in a straightforward manner that is easy to understand. I found this book to helpful in the early stages of preparation for this essay and when concepts arose that related to other areas in the philosophy of religion. This book was helpful for clarifying ideas from other books that were not expressed as clearly or simply. <heading>Davies, B. (1993) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion Oxford : Oxford University Press</heading>I consider this to be on of the most useful books in the formation of this essay. It was vast both in terms of the number of theories and ideas covered and the detail in which they were discussed. This book covered in depth Hume's criticisms of the argument from design and some responses to these criticisms. It also featured some interesting ideas put forward by Swinburne. I was not able to include Swinburne's thoughts about time and the Kantian response to this, but I found his particularly colourful analogy to a kidnapper with a machine determining the fate of his victims both very entertaining, and in fact fairly accurate an analogy. I was able to use the summary of this analogy and Swinburne's conclusions to illustrate a point regarding how believers respond to this analogy compared to non-believers. <heading>Garcia, L. (1997) 'Teleological and Design Arguments', in: P. Quinn & C. Taliaferro (eds.) A Companion to Philosophy of Religion Oxford : Blackwell</heading>This paper in many ways expanded on points mentioned in "The Philosophy of Religion" by Clack & Clack. The two points in particular that were of great use were the sections regarding "Probability and World Hypotheses" and "Is the Designer God?" as these arguments were the main one's I chose to prove that the argument from design is unable to prove the existence of God. Ultimately, I was not able to use all of the arguments I found to be strong in this essay (particularly some of Hick's points stand out). I also found this paper to be well written, with ideas presented quite simply compared to my past experience of Blackwell Companions to Philosophy. <heading>Hacking, I (1992) 'The Inverse Gambler's Fallacy: The Argument from Design, The Anthropic Principal Applied to Wheeler Universes in Readings', in: B. Brody (ed.) Readings In The Philosophy of Religion, An Analytic Approach 2 nd Ed. New Jersey : Prentice-Hall</heading>I found the title and introductory paragraph of this paper to be very interesting as I was to be arguing that the argument from design was countered by a theory that said: the order in the universe is ultimately attributed to chance. The argument was not actually useful in the way that I had expected. The fallacy that Hacking was focusing on was not one that I had encountered or included. It is one that I believe only a small number of theorists would make and one that may be rectified quickly and easily. Within this paper, there was a lot of detail regarding how this argument of order from chance works. It was of great benefit to my understanding of the area and I was able to use some of his points to strengthen my line of reasoning. <heading>Hick, J. (1971) 'Theology and Verification', in: B. Mitchell (ed.) The Philosophy of Religion Oxford University Press : Suffolk</heading>I was initially apprehensive about the paper by Hick featured in The Philosophy of Religion as the name suggested to me that it would be focused on language. It in fact was very useful as it addressed one of the major presuppositions of this essay title. It provided good reasoned debate over what is required of proof. It raised interesting points about the involvement of human verification in the process. A large portion of the paper however focused on the idea that after death, God's existence may or may not be verified. This line of thinking was not something I was interested in following, but the initial discussion regarding proof provided me with a frame with which to address this essay. Hick, J (1963) Philosophy of Religion Prentice-Hall : New Jersey Hume, D. (1948). Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Aiken, H. (ed.) New York : Hafner Mill, J. (1992) 'XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX', in: B. Brody (ed.) Readings In The Philosophy of Religion, An Analytic Approach 2 nd Ed. New Jersey : Prentice-Hall Paley, W. (1992) 'Natural Theology', in: B. Brody (ed.) Readings In The Philosophy of Religion, An Analytic Approach 2 nd Ed. New Jersey : Prentice-Hall Swinburne, R. (1992) 'Philosophy 43', in: B. Brody (ed.) Readings In The Philosophy of Religion, An Analytic Approach 2 nd Ed. New Jersey : Prentice-Hall <heading>Yandell, K. (1999) Philosophy of Religion London : Routledge</heading>This book was particularly useful for me in explaining one of Hume's criticisms of the argument from design. The explanation that it is in fact an inductive argument and that care should be taken to not infer that the designer is not given attributes beyond that which is fair to attribute to it from the premises. I used this book much less as an overall guide to the particular topic and the Philosophy of Religion as a whole, but the chapter: "Arguments for Monotheism" was ideal for this use for this essay. I was able to use the section discussing "Proof" and especially the criticisms of the argument. The book covered less in terms of the number of criticisms than The Philosophy of Religion (Clack & Clack) or the paper by Garcia but it was slightly more in depth and detailed in the points it did make. 