It is my view that there is not a good alternative to the tripartite theory of knowledge and that the alternatives only show that the tripartite theory is sound. The alternatives either serve to clarify terms or concepts used in the original tripartite theory or are unsound for reasons I shall show. I will discuss why I do not think there is any need for an alternative theory and that it is not the theory that needs to be changed to fit with the public perception of knowledge, but the public perception that should change. I shall begin by outlining the key terms I shall be using and any assumptions I have made. The type of knowledge I will discuss is Propositional Knowledge (to know that a proposition is true). This is opposed to Ability Knowledge (to know how to drive a car) and acquaintance knowledge (to know a place person etc). The Tripartite theory of knowledge is also known as the 'Justified, True Belief Theory of Knowledge'. It is as follows: S knows that P if: <list>P is trueS believes that P, andS is justified in believing that P</list>Often the senses are doubted in investigations into knowledge (notably in Descartes' Meditations) I shall assume that despite their fallibility, that generally they should be trusted. I shall also assume that we are in fact living in a 'real world' as opposed to some 'Matrix' style computer generated false reality or a brain in a vat type scenario. I will therefore be able to discuss both Empirical Knowledge (knowledge gained through use of the senses) and A Priori Knowledge (knowledge that can be acquired without recourse to experience). A particularly important element of this theory is that of 'Justification'. This is the part of the theory that has always been attacked by sceptics. What is adequate justification for S to be justified in believing that P? When is the evidence so strong that it is justification? If conclusive proof is required, this will limit the amount of cases of knowledge that we have. The description that I will use is to have 'proof with an absence of doubt'. This will be too strong a description of justification for many peoples' tastes, as it does seem to limit our cases of knowledge. If the knowledge is empirical and so from the often-unreliable senses, I will use the benchmark of "would this be considered reasonable in a law - court?" This benchmark will later be used to show faults with a Gettier case. The Tripartite Theory was generally accepted from its conception until 1963 when Edmund L. Gettier believed that he had found cases where each of the three conditions could be fulfilled for a person, but they would not have knowledge. This doubt caused the alternatives that I shall be discussing. There is a modification of the Tripartite theory where a fourth that says the belief may not be a 'false belief' condition is added to allow the existing theory to not be affected by the Gettier cases. There is also the Causal theory that says that S' belief in P must be caused by the fact that P. The Gettier cases are cases that depend on coincidence and it is argued that because they show cases where all conditions are fulfilled and yet it is clear that a person does not have knowledge. "For the examples to work, it must be possible for a false belief to still be justified" J. Dancy p.26 (1985). I will show that in these cases the false belief is not justified. I shall show the fourth condition of the theory that eliminates 'false beliefs' to be (although sound) redundant and only effectively, a part of the definition or description of what 'justification' is. The Causal theory does not suffer from the problem that the Tripartite theory does. It is not limited by the description of justification because it does not require justification. It actually limits our cases of knowledge in a different way, and possibly to a greater extent. A 'Gettier case' actually given by Edmund Gettier himself is that of two men (Smith and Jones) applying for a job. Smith has strong evidence for the following conjunctive proposition: (d)  FORMULA  Proposition (d) entails: (e)  FORMULA  In actual fact, it is Smith who will get the job and unknown to him; he also has ten coins in his pocket. In this case, (e) is true. Smith believes (e) and he is justified in his belief. The conditions of the Tripartite Theory are fulfilled, but it is clear that Smith does not have knowledge. E. L. Gettier (1963). I find this case to be absurd. (e) is true purely by coincidence. If the proposition about ten coins was replaced with "is a human being" or "has blond hair" or "is six feet tall" and each of these facts happened to be true for both men, we would have the same outcome. It is argued that in this case, each of the three conditions is met. I disagree. I think that, just as justification requires extra explanation, in this case, belief also requires extra attention. Smith believes that the man who will get the job will have ten coins in his pocket. He believes this because he believes that it is Jones who will get the job. (e) is not specific enough. (e) should instead include the clause (because that man is Jones). I do not believe that in a case like this that it is possible to separate the conjunctive proposition. Another example of a Gettier counter example given by Brian Garrett and quoted by J. Dancy (1985) is as follows: Henry watches the Wimbledon men's finals. He watches McEnroe beat Connors. Henry therefore believes: 1.  FORMULA  He infers that: 2.  FORMULA  In fact, there is a problem with the filming and so footage of last year's game is being shown. J. Dancy (1985) My problem with this case is of justification. Henry was obviously not giving the game his full attention or he would have noticed the dates mentioned or any other clues given that it is not in fact the live game. This would not fit my description of justification of 'proof with an absence of doubt'. It would also not stand up to my benchmark of being considered reasonable in a law court. Though Henry was watching the game, he was obviously not watching close enough for him to be a reliable witness (in the courtroom sense) to the game. As I did not find the Gettier cases to be a problem, I do not find the fourth condition added to prevent 'false beliefs' being used. I consider this extra condition surplus to requirements. The condition is: "Nothing can be known which is inferred from a false belief" J. Dancy (1985). This is something that I do not believe is a separate issue from Justification. Adequate justification removes the chance that a belief may be false. The condition is also fairly useless in practical applications. A false belief is only recognisable to someone who is external (this is therefore an "externalist conception" J. Dancy p. 46 (1985) and removed from the situation. The Causation Theory does not have a problem with the Gettier cases. It also adds a fourth condition to the existing Tripartite Theory. It is: The fact that P should cause S's belief in P. The first problem with this theory is: what is a fact and how can it affect the physical world? <quote>"we may find it hard to suppose that facts can cause anything; surely they are too inert to affect the way the world goes, even where the world is the merely mental world of beliefs."J. Dancy p.33 (1985)</quote>If facts are able to cause belief, I must then question how is it they cause beliefs? There is the question of what is causation in a priori knowledge? <quote>"One problem is how to apply the basic idea- that what underlies the truth in question is a causal factor in the grounding of the belief of that truth - to a priori knowledge."R. Audi p. 222 (1998)</quote>I think that the ability of facts to cause knowledge is too questionable to provide a good alternative, and it is also surplus to requirement as good justification provides that knowledge is based on the truth. One reason that the Tripartite Theory of knowledge is unpopular is the problem with justification. It seems that people are afraid that if knowledge requires a fairly or completely conclusive justification, we are left with very few cases of actual knowledge (particularly empirical). I would say that this is true. In many cases we may claim to have knowledge when in fact what we mean is that we are sure to a degree of certainty, rather than being absolutely certain. The problem that we are facing is that philosophy is searching for a theory that gives us much more knowledge than we actually have. What needs to be changed is the attitude that is held by the general public and the language that we use: "I know that" to "I am fairly/very/almost certainly sure that". I have shown that some of the various alternative theories either do not give us an accurate definition/description of how we gain knowledge or are merely help us to clarify points such as justification in the original theory. I have given a clarified idea of what justification is and why this makes the tripartite theory sound. I have also tried to address the point that the justification means that we have a reduced number of cases of knowledge. 