<heading>Explanation on how to maximise room revenue on Wednesday 25th May 2005</heading>According to the "realistic view of final demand" for May 25 th shown in Table 1, the total demand forecasted adds up to 342 rooms. As the hotel only has 300 rooms available, a solution on which room requests to turn away has to be found. In order to maximise room revenue, the goal is to sell the rooms for the highest rate possible to the highest paying customers. However, the aim is also to increase occupancy during the "shoulder days" by offering special discounted rates to guests who are willing to stay for two, three or even more nights. With 183 rooms already booked for the night, 117 rooms are left for sale. Below, the decisions that have been made for the different segments are explained. Generally the Rack Rate is available for Wednesday, May 25 th to customers from any segment even if only staying for one night. <heading>Independent Business Traveller (IBT)</heading>As business travellers generate the highest room revenue it has been decided to offer 128 rooms to this segment. This means that the forecasted 128 business travellers would all be able to stay at the hotel and nobody would have to be turned away. Rate B will be offered for guests staying for one or two nights, while customers staying for three days or longer will benefit from the cheaper IBT rate C. As demand does not exceed the number of rooms on offer, it has been decided not to adopt a too aggressive pricing strategy for the IBT segment to ensure that all designated rooms will be sold to Independent Business Travellers. <heading>Corporate & Association Conference (CAC)</heading>The rooms demand forecast chart shows that it is unlikely that any further bookings will be made within the remaining 75 days. Therefore no rooms will be blocked for this segment. However, should there be enquiries the following rates apply. As the hotel is aiming at filling up Thursday and Friday rate E will be offered to potential customers staying at least two nights while rate F will only be open to the CAC segment if guests reside for three nights or more. If bookings come in, the hotel would profit from the effect of getting business for Thursday and possibly Friday. <heading>Independent Leisure Traveller (ILT)</heading>This is the segment paying the lowest rate and thus contributing the smallest amount to room revenue. With 300 hotel rooms available overall, 183 current bookings, 109 of the remaining rooms blocked for Independent Business Travellers and none for Corporate & Association Conferences, 8 rooms remain to be sold to Independent Leisure Travellers. This means 42 enquiries from the ILT segment will have to be turned down. Having this number in mind, a slightly more aggressive pricing strategy can be applied as demand is expected to be high. Only the Rack Rate will be offered to ILT customers who want to stay for just one night, all other rates are closed. However, rate G will be given to guests staying for two nights, rate H will have to be paid by customers staying three or four nights and rate I will be open for travellers staying at least five nights. It is hoped that this pricing method will tempt Independent Leisure Travellers to stay for two or more nights which would present a solution to the hotels low booking situation for Thursday and Friday. Furthermore, it might bring in valuable business for the weekend as well, which is why rate H is offered for three or four nights. On the other hand, given that the hotel is in Edinburgh, leisure demand on the weekend might be relatively high which would suggest implementing a high ILT rate. However, it is not known whether the hotel specialises on either the business or the leisure market in particular. <heading>Issues of yield management in the hospitality industry</heading>To effectively apply yield management in hotels a number of issues need to be considered. This essay will look at two important elements involved in marketing and customer relationships; firstly overbooking and secondly rate fences as a method of pricing. With reference to relevant literature these will be explained and evaluated. The essay will also make suggestions of how to guarantee effective appliance of yield management at the 300 room four-star hotel in Edinburgh (Hotel E). Overbooking has been defined by Vallen (1991) as vending a higher number of rooms than the hotel actually possesses. According to Enghagen and Healy (1996) it is a commonly used practise in the hospitality and tourism industry in order to maximise room occupancy and thus revenue and profit. By overbooking, companies are trying to prevent being afflicted from no shows, late cancellations and early departures (Huyton and Thomas, 2000). The revenue manager has to identify how many more reservations to take than rooms available, considering a determined drop out rate based on historical data (Lefever, 1988). However, in reality it does happen that more customers show up than forecasted. Therefore every hotel needs to have a plan of action in place to deal with the situation in the best possible way, which means, with the least possible adversity for the guest and ultimately for the business itself. Boella (2000) identified two aspects that have to be considered; maintaining the customer's loyalty and prevent any possibility of breaking the law. The hotel has to offer compensation equal or superior to its own proposal to indemnify for not being able to fulfil the contract. This includes locating an alternative establishment, paying for any costs that arise for the transport and providing complimentary benefits for future stays to the dismissed customer. Even though it may seem as overbooking can be practised without emergence of any major problems, there are disadvantages to be considered. Enghagen and Healy (1996) have identified additional costs, failing to meet marketing objectives, loss of guest loyalty as well as moral and ethnical issues to be the main downsides of the case. They also mention possible negative affects on employees who, if constantly faced with having to walk, customers might decide to resign due to high levels of stress. Hotel B should not disregard these arguments when further developing their overbooking policy. However, taking another look at the problem of additional costs, Wirtz, Kimes, Ho and Patterson (2003, p223) state "if the cost of customer displacement can be reduced, companies can be more aggressive with their overbooking policies while maintaining (or increasing) customer satisfaction". Due to the large number of four-star hotels in Edinburgh (Edinburgh and the Lothians, 2005) hotel E should be able to make arrangements with some nearby competitors for the case of overbooking and thus reduce their displacement costs and take a more aggressive approach. Moving on to the second important topic of yield management, the practise of setting rate fences and deciding on what prices to charge to which market segment at what time and for how many nights (Coltman, 1994). This is the chance to adjust prices to market drives, which, therefore, should be analysed in detail (Donaghy, McMahon and McDowell 1995), Hanks, Noland and Cross (1992) point out that many hotels operate with rate fences, but seem to have trouble assimilating them into the reservation process. As Kimes (2002; p92) explains "rate fences can be physical or non-physical in nature" and differentiate why various rates have to be paid. Material characteristics like type of room, location of the room and special in-room equipment available, fall under the description of physical rate fences. These can only be offered to a limited extend as there is not an infinite number of rooms available which feature the aforementioned qualities. For example, not all rooms of Hotel E will feature a nice view over the city, the castle or the park. Non-physical rate fences mainly comprise customer behaviour. Length of stay and amount of money spent in the different outlets of the hotel are examples for criteria which have to be considered when setting this type of rate fences. They are offered to guests who belong to organisations of a certain size which obtain a considerable amount of bargaining power, but also to return guests, customers above a particular age or staff members. Another type of rate fences consider transaction attributes; price that is offered depends on time and place of the reservation or on cancellation restrictions. Only providing a limited number of rooms for a certain price, thus setting a margin, would also be a transaction method. Wirtzal. (2003, p200) state "the more restrictions the customer is willing to accept, the deeper the discount available". However, Kimes (2002) warns not to alienate customers by making rates fences too obscure. Obviously, they also should not be too easy to get around. Bennett (1984) agrees and points out that guests will acknowledge openly displayed and explained rate fences, and will thus not feel deceived. Nevertheless, as Wirtz and Kimes (2004) discovered, customers who are less familiar with the concept of rate fences and revenue management are more likely to react negatively to the applied price differences. Further, comparing new rate fences with those of competitors before implementing them is also of primary concern. As the first proposal is not always the best, customers might be sceptical about the new proposal, which could result in lower business. Often, up to 95 per cent of services are offered to various discounted prices in companies within the hospitality industry (Wirtz et al., 2003). Wirtz et al. (ibid.) explain that if hotels set relatively high rack rates, they will be able to offer more discounts, which pleases customers. As has been shown above, there are positive and negative aspects of overbooking and rate fences. Hotel E should continue applying yield management, but should not disregard the dangers that come with it: the possibility of customer disappointment. As Hotel E has only adopted systematic revenue management at the beginning of this year, there might be a lack of historical data which is needed to practice overbooking successfully. However, over time, the accumulation of data will forecast future best case scenarios. Rate fencing can be applied sooner taking into account the above mentioned techniques and explaining them to customers as well as employees to ensure perceived fairness. 