<heading>1. Introduction</heading>Branca is a Mediterranean Restaurant situated in Jericho, an affluent area with many bars and restaurants in Oxford. Dishes on Branca's menu are Italian although it can not be classified as typical Italian cuisine. The restaurant has 32 tables and a small bar located at the front. Guests are served by fourteen waiting staff, which are managed by three managers, including a General Manager, a Restaurant Manager and a Bar Manager. To gain more information on the restaurant, the General Manager Jeevan Perinpanayagam was interviewed. For a transcript see appendix 1. The restaurant targets three different markets including business customers, singles who live locally, and families. Business customers are aged between 30 and 50 and are very loyal as their place of work is in the same geographic location. Their psychographic profile consists in them combining lunch with business meetings. Singles are aged between 25 and 35 and are part of the upper socio-economic class. Again they live in the same location as the restaurant. Their behaviour is characterised by them seeking convenience eating out. The final target market is full nesters with children aged from infants to teenagers. The full nesters are residents of Oxfordshire and look for a family friendly atmosphere. Being families with younger children places them in the demographic segmentation variable. For more information see appendix 2. The following report will include a PESTE analysis, a competitive analysis, and a SWOT analysis. Recommendations will be drawn from the findings of these analyses. Performance measurements will be introduced to examine the accomplishment of the recommendations. Finally, a conclusion will be developed. <heading>2. PESTE Analysis</heading>Every business is affected by external factors, may it be in a positive or a negative way. These external factors are referred to as the macro-environment which includes "political, economic, socio-cultural, technological and environmental forces [...] and is therefore known as the PESTE environment" (Bowie & Buttle, 2004: p16). According to Bowie and Buttle (2004) the external influences can affect businesses severely and consequently it is essential that managers are aware of the macro-environment. The following section will discuss factors influencing Branca. <heading>2.1 Political</heading><heading>Smoking Ban </heading>According to Baldwin (2004) a ban on smoking in restaurants might be implemented after the next elections. An American Express ('American Express says', 2004) survey shows that this will attract more customers to restaurants. As Branca has a non-smoking area it will not be difficult for them to switch to a smoke-free establishment. However, through these changes, they could lose smokers from their loyal customer base. <heading>Disability Act </heading>The Disability Discrimination Act, in which changes are coming into force on the 1 st October 2004, "aims to end the discrimination that many disabled people face" ('Changes to the Disability', no date). These changes will make sure that restaurants will provide every necessary physical feature for disabled customers and employees. Branca has disabled toilets; however, since they are at the back of the restaurant access might be difficult at busy periods. <heading>2.2 Economic</heading><heading>Disposable Income </heading>In the last year there has been an increase on disposable income and according to Mintel (2004a) "more consumers today eat out than ever before" (Mintel, 2004a). See appendix 3 for figures. Branca will be able to benefit from this as according to Mintel (2004a) customers are especially interested in pizza and pasta restaurants. <heading>Exchange Rates</heading>The Pound is becoming stronger against the Dollar, but weaker against the Euro (See Appendix 4). From observations there are a lot of European tourists in Oxford. According to the General Manager, Branca is mentioned more and more in Restaurant Guides, and as a result they will benefit from the Euro getting stronger. Tourists will be likely to spend more on food if they get a good exchange rate. <heading>2.3 Socio-cultural </heading><heading>Demographic - Average Age</heading>"Generally, the UK population is getting progressively older as birth-rates fall and as those born during the post-war 'baby boom' reach retirement age" (Mintel, 2004a). Branca's target market has increased over the last six years (35-44 by 7.8%) but the age group following (25-34) has decreased significantly (See Appendix 5 figures). This means the sector they are targeting will become smaller and smaller during the next few years. The family sector is also getting smaller (-1.9%, See Appendix 5) which is unfortunate as it is one of Branca's main target markets. <heading>Healthy Eating Habits</heading>According to Mintel (2004b) "two thirds of men and almost 60% of women are classified as overweight" (Mintel, 2004b). As Mintel (2004b) reports, healthy eating is becoming more important and low-carb diets are becoming increasingly popular. This could decrease demand for Branca as it is a pizza and pasta restaurant. The management of Branca should be aware of these factors and devise their menus accordingly. <heading>2.4 Technological</heading><heading>Chip and PIN System</heading>From 1 st January 2005 the new Chip and PIN system will come into place. "Restaurants are being advised to introduce portable Chip and Pin terminals as a way of improving customer service" ('Restaurants advised to', no date). From then on, should any fraud take place it is the liability of the restaurant. Branca will have to change its Point-of-sale system to link to the Chip and PIN System. <heading>Internet</heading>The internet is becoming ever more popular and "helps to add extra value to existing products and services" (Laudon & Laudon, 2005: p 119). Although most customers, according to Bertagnoli (2004), still use the phone to reserve tables, the internet could be used for out-of-hours. Even though Branca has a web page, bookings can only be made over the phone. <heading>2.5 Environmental</heading><heading>Recycling</heading>"Waste minimisation pays. Most companies can achieve savings of at least 1% of turnover through waste minimisation" (Waste minimisation, no date). With more demand for recycling it is important for restaurants to help the environment. At present neither Branca nor any of its close competitors recycle. <heading>Local Food Sourcing</heading>"More and more people have started asking where the food on their plate comes from" (South East Food Group PartnershipSite, 2004). According to Mintel (2004c) this is due to the many food scares such as BSE and Avian flu which have increased over the past few years. By sourcing food locally consumers know where their food came from and at the same time are helping the local economy. Restaurants need to be aware of these issues. Currently Branca, whenever possible, buys its ingredients from local suppliers. <heading>3. Competitor Analysis</heading>Kotleral. (2003) define a competitive analysis as "an analysis of the primary strengths and weaknesses, objectives, strategies, and other information relative to competitors". (Kotler et al., 2003: p781) According to Bowie and Buttle (2004) competitors are businesses that: <list>Are visited by the same type of customerOffer the same productHave a similar locationAre in the same price range</list>As could be seen in the introduction, Branca targets three different markets. For the single and business customer market, the two main competitors are Loch Fyne and Le Petit Blanc. As they are in the same location they are direct competitors. For the third target market, families, the primary competition consists of Quod and Portobello. They offer similar products and prices and attract the same clientele. Lewis and Chamber (2000) highlight that it is essential to not only look at the physical feature of the competition but also look at the service they provide. According to Kotleral. (2003) this should include looking at the "service level, cleanliness, staff knowledge and the responsiveness of the sales department" (Kotler et al, 2003: p 758). As explained, the real advantages of an establishment are the things noticed by the guests and that convince them to buy the product. The purchase attributes that Branca's different target markets look for can be seen in appendix 2. Information about Branca and its competition was gained by visiting the different establishments. (See appendices 6, 7 & 8). Additional knowledge about Branca was obtained through completing a customer audit trail. This was executed to rate the service paying guests receive. The strengths and weaknesses are summarised below, for a detailed description see appendix 9. The main strength of the restaurant is the friendliness of the staff before and during service. Through being recognised at the door the customer feels special and welcomed. The staff are also very attentive and happy to fulfil special wishes e.g. extra bread. A weakness of the restaurant is that once the bill has been paid, the friendly service ends as customers do not part from the restaurant with a farewell. <heading>Business Customers</heading>In comparison to Loch Fyne and Le Petit Blanc, Branca is the cheapest both for lunch and dinner. This is especially important for business customers who eat out on a daily basis and therefore might be more price sensitive. However, since the menu is only changed once a year customers might opt to spend more in a different restaurant to have a wider variety of dishes. All three restaurants provide a quick service and the opportunity to make reservations; therefore it can not be seen as a competitive advantage. A positive feature of Le Petit Blanc is it being a non-smoking restaurant. Should the smoking ban be implemented they will not have to make any changes. <heading>Single Customers</heading>The changing of the menu and the quickness of service was analysed above. Branca offers fewer wines than the competition; however, it has twelve different cocktails on the menu which might appeal especially to the young singles market. Again, none of the restaurants have an advantage through location as they are all in the same neighbourhood. Le Petit Blanc is the only restaurant that has been awarded two AA stars. However, all three restaurants have good reviews in various newspapers and the internet. <heading>Families</heading>The smoking area and the price were analysed above. However, where Branca was the cheapest before it is now the most expensive compared to Quod and Portobello. All three restaurants are child friendly, which can be seen by them providing facilities for children and special children's menus. Branca has a competitive advantage in this sector through being voted in the Independent's top ten children friendly restaurant in the UK according to Branca's General Manager, Jeeven Perinpanayagam. From observational research it was established that the competitive set was in outstanding condition and clean. Therefore, there is no differentiation between the three of them. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Looking at Branca's competitors in both target markets there are no key factors that distinguish Branca from its competition. As can be seen in the 'Positioning Map', appendix 10, the only restaurant in the competitive set standing out is Le Petit Blanc as it is the most expensive but offers the least variety. This can be seen as a competitive advantage for the other restaurants. Nevertheless, as Jeeven Perinpanayagam pointed out during the interview, customer demand has not fluctuated through new restaurants opening in Oxford. This suggests that there are enough customers for each restaurant. <heading>4. SWOT Analysis</heading>"The overall evaluation of a company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats is called SWOT analysis" (Kotler et al., 2003: p93). Strengths and weaknesses are always internal factors and opportunities and threats are external factors. <table/><heading>4.1 Strengths & Weaknesses </heading><heading>Low Staff Turnover and Flexible working hours for staff</heading>The restaurant has a very low turnover of staff due to the management allowing staff to work around other commitments, e.g. families. The employees are very motivated and enjoy their job which reflects on the whole atmosphere of the restaurant. <heading>Reputation</heading>The reputation of the restaurant is documented in newspaper reviews. According to the General Manager, since opening, Branca has been reviewed as one of the best restaurants in Oxford. It is also included in the Good Food Guide 2005 as can be seen in appendix 11. <heading>Cheapest Lunch, Early Dinner Promotion & most expensive for families</heading>In comparison with its direct competitors, Branca offers the cheapest lunch promotion. Being the only restaurant that offers an early dinner promotion, Branca has a competitive advantage. However, the restaurant is the most highly priced in the competitive set for the family market. <heading>Loyal Customer Base</heading>Branca benefits from a loyal customer base which helps them to save costs. As Laudon and Laudon (2005) explain, "the cost of acquiring a new customer has been estimated to be five times that of retaining an existing customer" (Laudon and Laudon, 2005: p99). <heading>Location </heading>The location can be seen as both a strength and a weakness. Being situated in Jericho, an affluent area of Oxford, the restaurant attracts professionals with a high disposable income. However, by being located out of the town centre, the probability of customers walking by is less likely. By being located in a residential area, the parking is extremely limited. <heading>No empowerment</heading>From observations, it was noticed that employees do not seem to be empowered when dealing with complaints in the restaurant. At hectic times this could result in problems if the managers are busy in other areas of the restaurant. <heading>Menu changed seldomly </heading>The menu is only changed once a year. Since there are a lot of customers who visit the restaurant several times a week, the menu could be perceived as boring. <heading>Location of kitchen in restaurant is upstairs</heading>The kitchen at Branca is situated on the first floor thus making it more challenging for the waiting staff to serve. <heading>4.2 Opportunities & Threats</heading><heading>Smoking Ban</heading>The smoking ban can be seen as both an opportunity and a threat. Non-smoking customers might visit Branca more often as they would not have to walk through the smoking area of the restaurant to get to their table. However, Branca could experience a decline in demand from its loyal customer base who smoke. <heading>Disposable Income</heading>Being located in a wealthy area, Branca will benefit from the steady rise in disposable income. See appendix 3. <heading>Exchange Rates</heading>As mentioned in the PESTE Analysis it has been observed that there are many European tourists in Oxford. Having received a good exchange rate for the Euro, tourists will have more pounds disposable to spend on food and drink in restaurants such as Branca. <heading>Average Age</heading>As can be seen in appendix 5, the main age group that Branca targets (mid 30's) will decrease drastically in the future. Thus their target market will become smaller which may result in lost revenue. <heading>Change in Eating Habits</heading>Due to pressure in today's society to eat healthily, customers expect restaurants to offer appropriate dishes on their menus. Being a pizza and pasta restaurant makes it difficult to offer healthy options resulting in Branca being threatened by this new trend. <heading>Chip and PIN System</heading>Through the changes in the Chip and PIN technology, Branca will have to invest a large sum to bring their Point-of-Sale system up to the required standard. Failure to do so will make the restaurant liable for any fraud committed. However, once this investment has been made, the service staff will benefit from using a quick and easy billing system. <heading>Internet</heading>With the internet becoming more popular Branca could use this to its advantage to win new customers. Not using the internet to its full extent could result in Branca losing out to its competitors, such as Le Petit Blanc who take internet reservations. <heading>5. Recommendations</heading>The following recommendations will follow the approach of the marketing mix. The marketing mix is "tools that marketers use to influence demand" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p26). In the literature the marketing mix mostly consists of seven different elements, however, Bowie and Buttle (2004) have created another factor by dividing 'place' into 'location' and 'distribution'. The report will analyse each aspect individually and bring forward recommendations for Branca. <heading>5.1 Product/service offer</heading>"A product is anything that can be offered to satisfy a need or want" (Kotler, 2003: p15). According to Bowie and Buttle (2004) to satisfy said needs and wants, the guests have to be the key element for any decisions regarding the creating of new and changing of existing products. As identified in the SWOT analysis, the seldomly changed menu is a weakness of Branca. The restaurant is also threatened by the new trends in healthy eating. As Branca's competitors change their menu more often, Branca needs to adopt a similar approach. From March 2005 a new menu should be offered for each of the four seasons. If it is seen that this increases demand, the restaurant should consider varying the menu on a monthly basis. This menu should be advertised by signage in the restaurant which will increase the spend on marketing communications. However, according to the General Manager, the main communications tool is through word-of-mouth. Therefore, there will hardly be any cost of advertising a new menu. <heading>5.2 Price</heading>"Pricing decisions influence demand, are crucial in driving profitability, and play an important role in presenting the 'image' the hospitality firms wants to project to customers and stakeholders" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p27). Branca's current approach on pricing decisions can be seen in Appendix 12. They use product bundling and promotional pricing to increase demand and psychological pricing and up selling to increase revenue. A promotion is used during the week, but as shown in Appendix 13, it was identified that on Saturdays and Sundays between 4 and 7 pm there is an excess of capacity. Branca should extend their 'Early dinner promotion' offered during the week to the above mentioned times on the weekend. Again, this would need to be advertised within the restaurant to encourage the regulars to communicate the new offer through word-of-mouth. Yet again, the cost of advertising will be kept to a minimum. <heading>5.3 Location</heading>"Choice of location is the first and crucial marketing decision for hospitality companies" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p27). According to Kotler et al (2003) a good location can be a major advantage against the competition. As mentioned in the competitor analysis, Branca does not have an advantage from its location, as all the competitors are in a similar position. However, according to Jeevan Perinpanayagam, the next step for Branca is to expand the business into other towns. At the time of choosing sites, it is recommended to look for locations with car parking facilities to attract a larger family market and therefore be more competitive. It is advisable not to expand within Oxford to avoid losing customers to the new location. <heading>5.4 Distribution</heading>Bowie and Buttle (2004) explain that the distribution is "concerned with how the company can make it timely and convenient for a potential customer to book hospitality products directly from the hospitality company." (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p28). As seen in the PESTE analysis, the internet is becoming more and more important. At the moment this is still an opportunity as well as a threat for Branca. To avoid it becoming more of a threat, it is essential that Branca increases the use of the internet. They should encourage taking reservations through e-mails, even if this involves more work. It could help to win new customers, especially when these customers want to contact the restaurant out of hours. Initially a special promotion, such as a complimentary glass of wine, could be offered when booking over the internet. This product bundling would help to increase demand. <heading>5.5 Marketing communications (Promotion)</heading>"Marketing communication covers all the tools that hospitality firms can use to communicate with customers, employees and stakeholders" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p28). Recommendations for promoting special events have been made in Appendix 14. The main objectives of the promotions are to establish the reputation with existing customers and win new ones. To be effective the marketing communications should follow the AIDA model. According to Bowie and Buttle (2004) this means to seize the customer's Attention, stimulate the Interest, fuel the customer's Desire and lastly, motivate them to Action and purchase the service or product. Once the customer wants to take action it is essential to provide the means to do so. Therefore, all the signage and advertisements need to display the phone number and internet address of the restaurant. The total cost of the suggested promotions would equal £ 729.00. Included in this price is a monthly advert in the "In Oxford" Guide which can be used to attract tourists, as this guide is available in hotels. Should the Euro keep getting stronger against the Pound in the following year, the tourists would be particularly desirable customers for Branca. Depending on the marketing budget, the management of Branca should also consider investing in an advertisement in the local newspaper. This could be especially helpful to increase demand in slower months such as January (see appendix 13). <heading>5.6 Physical environment</heading>"The physical environement constists of the tangible features of the hospitality offer - the external appearance of premises and the internal layout" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p28). Due to the structure of the building, it is not possible for Branca to change the weaknesses in the internal layout. The main disadvantage is the location of the kitchen on the first floor. This makes it harder for waiting staff to carry food. However, according to the General Manager, staff prefer carrying full plates downstairs rather than upstairs. The other weakness is the sitation of the disabled toilets. It must be ensured that there is sufficient space between the tables to allow access to the toilets for disabled customers. If Branca decides to buy other properties these factors should be considered to avoid making similar mistakes. <heading>5.7 Process</heading>According to Bowie and Buttle (2004) the inseparability of "the production and consumption" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p28) of products and services make the processes in hospitality businesses very important for achieving customer satisfaction. "Service delivery has to be efficient, customer friendly and competitive" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p28). To increase the efficiency of the service, all the necessary amendments to the wireless Chip and PIN system should have been made by March 2005. This will enhance the speed of service as customers will not have to wait for their credit card to be taken and brought back to the table. The wireless system will allow waiting staff to have more time to see to the needs of other customers and therefore increase customer satisfaction. <heading>5.8 People</heading>"Hospitality is a service where the interaction between customers and employees is [...] a critical element of the customer experience" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p28). Regarding the employees, the management should keep up the flexible working hours they offer to their staff as this seems to decrease staff turnover. However, the organization needs to empower their employees, as already stated in the SWOT analysis. This will ensure the smooth running of the restaurant, especially at busy times, resulting in contented customers. The waiting team should be trained to see to the needs of the customer right through to departure to avoid the customer getting a bad impression at the last minute. See customer audit trail, appendix 9. Concerning the customers, it is advisable to seat all business and family guests in separate areas of the restaurant to avoid disturbance of the business clients. The host should be trained and aware of the different types of customers to make sure every guest feels comfortable. <heading>6. Performance Measurement</heading>"The balanced scorecard is a management system that enables organisations to clarify their vision and strategy and translate them into action" (Balanced Scorecard Institute, no date). According to Kaplan and Norton (1996) the benefits of the balanced scorecard is that it not only measures financial aspects but also the customer perspective, the internal business processes and the learning and capability of the organisation. Therefore it gives a wider picture of the actions of the business. The balance scorecard in appendix 15 shows how Branca can measure the performance of the recommendations that were made earlier in the report. The best way to look at how customers perceive the changes is through questionnaires. It was considered for Branca to employ a consulting company to measure customer satisfaction. However, it was decided that the cost implied would be too high for a non branded restaurant. Therefore a questionnaire incorporating questions on all changes should be designed to avoid customers being over exasperated. It is hard to measure the learning and capability of the organisation. Most of the recommendations do not involve employees having to be trained as there will not be any changes to the service procedures. Quality and service recovery can not be measured in financial terms. For the other recommendations it should be calculated if revenue increases to supervise the effectiveness. This is especially important for the change of the menu as it was suggested to do this four times a year. If it is seen that there is no significant increase, it should be considered to only alter it twice yearly. Should the restaurant make any future changes, these should be monitored to assess their effectiveness. This should include financial as well as the other introduced measurement perspectives. Through examining these modifications continuously, management is able to detect any discrepancies that should occur and take appropriate action. <heading>7. Conclusion</heading>It is essential that the business is aware of changes in the macro-environment. It is also important for Branca to monitor its competition. These issues can result in opportunities and threats to the business, just as any internal influences can become strengths or weaknesses. From analysing all these aspects recommendations have been drawn. Branca should implement various changes, the main two being the following: the menu needs to be changed more frequently and the internet should be used to its full extent. This will result in Branca gaining a competitive advantage, having satisfied customers and increasing revenue. 