<heading>Introduction</heading>Emotional labour has become an important component in the delivery of service quality. The behaviour of front-line employees can make or break the experience of customers. This is especially important in industries where service is the only component that distinguishes one business from another. Having employees who are willing to perform emotional labour in order to give the guests a good experience has become a crucial competitive advantage. Globalisation has added another challenge in the delivery of good service. As the industry is becoming more culturally diverse, it is important to be aware of this diversity and its implications. On the one hand customers might be expecting the same service they would receive in their home country when they are abroad. On the other hand the workforce is becoming more and more diverse and rules and regulations that work in one country might be difficult to implement in others. The aim of this article is to investigate if specific national cultures perform emotional labour with more ease in service encounters than others. In order to do this, the perceived behaviour of the employees in the Disney theme parks in the United States and France will be analysed. The notion of emotional labour and its impact on service quality will be discussed. The work culture of the Disney theme parks in both the United States and France will be explored and the different attitudes of the employees there will be examined. The reasons behind the different behaviour will be analysed in regards to cultural differences. Characteristics of French and American employees will be given. The findings will be discussed and the question if specific national cultures perform emotional labour with more ease than others will be answered. <heading>Emotional labour</heading>Emotional labour has been defined in different ways: "Emotional labour is labour that requires one to induce or suppress feelings in order to sustain the outward countenance that produces the proper state of mind in others" (Hochschild, 1983; p: 7). Morris and Feldmann (1996) on the other hand defined emotional labour as "the effort, planning and control needed to express organizationally desired emotion during interpersonal transactions" (1996; p: 987). The concept of emotional labour was first introduced by Hochschild (1983) in a study of the emotions required by bill collectors - putting pressure on the debtors - and airline crew members - being friendly to the customer. She demonstrated the expectations of emotional labour from employees who are in direct contact with the public. In order to guide the employees through these interactions, many companies implement so called display rules: "Display rules [...] are directed to what people should try to appear to feel, irrespective of what they actually feel" (Abiala, 1999; p:209). Through these rules the management governs the behaviour of the employees during customer contact: The staff is required to perform emotional labour. Bolton and Boyd (2003) explained that through using the word 'work', or in this case labour, "it stresses that it is something that is done actively to feelings" (Bolton and Boyd, 2003; p: 292). According to Mann (2004) there are three different states of feelings, which he used to explain when emotional labour is needed: "emotional harmony", "emotional dissonance" and emotional deviance" (Mann, 2004; p:208). Emotional harmony occurs when the felt feelings are the same as the ones required by the display rules. Emotional dissonance is when the employees display the emotions that are expected of them, but do not actually feel them. Lastly emotional deviance explains the situation when the employees show the feelings they have, which, however, are not in accordance with the display rules. Mann (2004) explained that emotional labour mainly arises with emotional dissonance. According to Hochschild (1983) there are two ways of expressing the desired emotions: through surface acting and through deep acting. When employees perform surface acting, they outwardly show the feelings that are expected of them while at the same time they might be feeling something completely different (Hochschild, 1983; Ashforth and Humphrey, 1993; Sharpe, 2005). As Ashforth and Humphrey (1993) explained, this may involve the tone of voice or the expression on the employee's face. Deep acting, in comparison, is when the employees are actually trying to feel the emotions which are expected of them (Hochschild, 1983; Ashforth and Humphrey, 1993; Sharpe, 2005). According to Grandey (2003) surface acting provides a bigger challenge for the employee, as feelings that are not felt have to be displayed. Hochschild (1983) and Pugh (2001) argued that employees can suffer from stress through extended periods of emotional labour. According to Grandey (2003) this can result in emotional exhaustion. She explained that this exhaustion is more likely to occur through extensive surface acting. Ashforth and Humphrey (1993) on the other hand reasoned that this does not have to be the case. If employees have higher job autonomy and are able to manage their own emotions, emotional labour can even have positive consequences (Pugliesi, 1999; Wharton 1996, cited in Pugliesi, 1999). If the employees enjoy the work and identify with the role that is expected of them and with the company, accomplishing the required work will result in a positive state of mind and increase job satisfaction (Ashforth and Humphrey, 1993; Pugliesi, 1999). <heading>Emotional labour in the service industry</heading>The service industry is a very competitive industry. As Bryman (2004) explained, often the only element which distinguishes one company from another is the quality of service the customers experience. This quality is achieved through good customer service, which highlights the importance of the front-line employees who are the representative of the organisation (Ashforth and Humphrey, 1993). Therefore it is essential that these employees manage their emotions well in order to offer a good service (Constanti and Gibbs, 2005; Lovelock, 1992; Pugh, 2001). According to Grandey (2003) "positive affective displays seem to be vital to quality service" (2003; p: 94). For this reason many organisations now implement display rules to guide their employees through the customer contact. Disney is one company that is known to enforce particularly strict rules to ensure the uniform quality experience of their customers. <heading>Disney Theme Parks</heading>The idea of the Disney theme parks was born when Walt Disney wanted "an amusement park that grown-ups as well as children would enjoy" (De Ross, 1963; p:61). This was the foundation of the first Disney park: Disneyland in Anaheim, California, which opened its doors on the 17 th of July 1955 (The Walt Disney Company). Walt Disney was quoted to say that "Disneyland will never be completed as long as there is imagination left in the world" (The Walt Disney Company). However, this park was not enough for him and he started the planning of a bigger theme park: Walt Disney World which opened its gates in Florida, Orlando in October 1971 (Gomery, 1994). Since then development has never stopped. The first park abroad was opened in 1983 in Tokyo and was to be highly successful (Spencer, 1995). A third continent was conquered by Disney when Euro Disney, later renamed Disneyland Paris, was opened in France in April 1992 (Curwen, 1995). Today Disney has a total of 10 theme parks on three different continents (The Walt Disney Company). <heading>Emotional labour and service quality at Disney Land and Walt Disney World</heading>"The ever-smiling Disney theme park employee has become a stereotype of modern culture" (Bryman, 1999; p:40). When customers go to Walt Disney World or Disney Land they expect to see friendly and smiling employees who seem to be enjoying working and are having fun at the same time (Bryman, 2004). Therefore Disney has to make sure they employ the right people and put certain rules and regulations into place. The first step to this is to use the right recruitment and selection process. As Anh and Kleiner (2005) explained, "all theme parks are looking for friendly, out-going people with excellent communication skills" (2005; p:102). They described how potential employees of Disney have an introduction session to the Disney culture in the beginning of the recruitment process. This way the future employees will know right from the start if they are able to adapt to the Disney culture or not. During the training time, the fact that good customer service is essential is further highlighted. Bryman (2004) pointed out that "the first guideline for guest service is 'make eye contact and smile'"(2004; p: 108). There are strict rules and regulations in place to ensure that every staff member behaves like they should do (Bryman, 1999; Anh and Kleiner, 2005; Lovelock and Morgan, 2001). With other words, it is expected of the employees to perform emotional labour. They are always supposed to be happy and smiling and be friendly to the guest. The fact that Disney is aware of the expectations on the acting abilities of their staff is highlighted by the fact that they refer to them as "cast members" (Bryman, 2004; p:103). However, Bryman (2004) argued that through the training programme, Disney tries to ensure personal commitment from their employees, who therefore will not find it as hard to perform emotional labour. Through committing to and identifying with the company, the employees do emotional labour not because they have to, but because they see that it is necessary. It is well known that in the Disney theme parks in the United States this concept has been employed successfully, but does it also work in a different country? <heading>Disneyland Paris</heading>The theme park Disneyland Paris opened just outside of Paris in April 1992 (Curwen,1995). It is essentially a "pure transplant from the USA" (Curwen, 1995; p:15), as it is developed around the same themes and ideas. However, the park turned out not to be as successful as its creators had hoped for (Spencer, 1995; Curwen, 1995; Lovelock and Morgan, 2001). Besides being more expensive than planned, having less visitors than expected and suffering from bad weather, one of the reasons for its failure is claimed to be the 'Disney-unlike' employees (Bryman, 1995, Lovelock and Morgan, 2001; Curwen, 1995). In comparison to the staff in the parks in the United States, the employees in the French park are less inclined to follow the display rules set out by Disney. "The level of customer service established in Disney World was not easily reproduced in Euro Disney" (Herbig, 1998: p37 cited in "The Antidote). Many of the employees were not willing to follow all of the guidelines set out by the company (Leehrsen and Gleizes, 1992; Bryman, 1995) and therefore Disneyland experienced having dissatisfied employees which led to a very high staff turnover (Lovelock and Morgan, 2001). It has been shown that emotional labour is one of the key components in the perception of quality by customers. If the employees are displaying positive emotions, i.e. are friendly and are apparently enjoying their work, the customers will value the service as of higher quality. On the other hand if the employees are unfriendly and are showing their own negative feelings, the customers are more likely to think of the service as bad quality service. So what could be the reasons that the display of emotional labour and therefore the perceived quality of service is so successful in the Disney parks in the United States, but less so in France? Could the reason for this be that French employees are less willing, or even less able to display emotional labour to the same standard as the staff members in the United States? <heading>Cultural differences </heading>"Each cultural world operates according to its own internal dynamic, its own principles, and its own laws - written and unwritten" (Hall and Hall, 1990; p:3). With other words, each culture is different and therefore the members of cultures act differently to one and another. According to Testa (2004) this can be seen in how people behave at their work place. There are differences in how they react to supervision and how they handle being given certain rules. "Regional and national cultures have been shown to have different norms for emotional expression" (Grandey et al., 2005; p:895). Therefore the members of different cultures also have different views on how the display of emotions at work should be regulated and what can be expected of them (Cooper et al., 2003, cited in Grandey et al., 2005). It is essential for managers to be aware of these cultural differences in order to avoid potential problems and ultimately gain a competitive advantage through effective cultural management (Schneider and Barsoux, 2003). In their work Grandeyal. (2005) differentiated between two different types of cultures: "more institutionally oriented" and more "impulsively oriented" (2005, p: 895) cultures. The institutionally oriented cultures have a more firm view of what kind of behaviour and what kind of display of emotions are acceptable in public. The impulsively oriented cultures on the other hand are more reluctant to display emotions that they do not feel and therefore are more acceptant of showing negative emotions, if that is what is felt. As examples for these types of cultures Grandeyal. (2005) named the United States as a more institutionally oriented culture and France as more of a impulsively oriented culture. This view can be supported by the characteristics of the American and French that many authors have identified: Hall and Hall (1990) described Americans as "open, friendly, casual and informal in their manner" (1990; p: 177). They point out that Americans place high emphasis on being liked by other people. Schneider (1981, cited in Grandey et al., 2005) went further in commenting that in order to leave a good impression, Americans might be inclined to display positive emotions and therefore hide contrary feelings. This carries on into the service industry, where the importance of friendliness and smiling while serving is indoctrinated into the employees. The French on the other hand are said to dislike expressing emotions that are not being felt (Grandey et al., 2005; Hall and Hall, 1990). Hallowellal. (2002) showed that the French refer to the American culture as 'la culture Mickey Mouse' (Hallowell et al., 2002; p:19). They went on to explaining that many French employees dislike being told by the company how to feel, or at least what kind of emotions to display. Hall and Hall (1990) also emphasised that French employees find it harder to identify with a company and therefore can be less committed. It can be seen that there seems to be quite a difference between the American and the French culture. Therefore it can be expected that this will have an impact on the behaviour of employees in any workplace. So what kind of implications does this have in particular for the Disney company? <heading>Discussion </heading>It has been shown that Disney places a high emphasis on the behaviour of their employees and that they encourage the performance of emotional labour. The Disney Cooperation has recognised the positive correlation between good service and the perception of service quality: positive employees who are friendly and smiling make customers enjoy their visit to the theme parks and the guests will hence leave with the conviction that they have received good value for their money. In order to ensure this good experience and to control the behaviour of their employees, Disney use extensive training methods. The employees are expected to identify with the company and therefore perform emotional labour with ease. There is a high emphasis on training methods throughout the company. For the Disney Cooperation it is important that there are uniform standards of service quality in all their theme parks, may it be in the United States, Japan or France. Therefore the employees around the world are receiving the same training standards. However, as has been explained, the service quality in the parks does not appear to be the same. The training being the same implies that there has to be another reason behind this. As the parks are in different countries, it is logical to assume that the different cultures of the employees could be that reason. It has been established that culture is a key component of a person. It is what forms an individual and has a big impact on the values and believes. Therefore it is just natural that this will also have an impact on the behaviour of employees in the workplace. As has been identified by Grandeyal. (2005) the culture of a person influences their regard for emotional labour. So what does that mean for the employees of the Disney theme parks? As explained, the United States are a nation that place a big emphasis on delivering service with a smile. Therefore American employees are aware that smiling and being positive when working in the service industry is a given requirement. Through their nature of being "open and friendly" this will be not very hard for them to achieve: emotional labour seems to come easily to them. This of course then reflects on the service quality. As has been shown, the friendly, smiling employee is a stereotype of the Disney theme parks in the United States. Customers know when they go there, they will be treated friendly: employees will be displaying positive emotions. The huge success of the parks in America seems to demonstrate that the customers perceive to be receiving good service quality, delivered by the employees. This indicates that the employees there obviously cope well with the emotional labour expected of them. The theme park in France - Disneyland Paris - shows a different picture. Customers there have complained that the employees are not as friendly as they would be expected to be by working in a Disney park. The reason for this appears to be the reluctance of the French employees to display emotions that they do not feel. As long as the felt emotions are positive, this does not affect the service encounter significantly. However, the problems start when the employees are not feeling positive - for example when they are irritated or in a bad mood. If there is a reluctance to cover up those feelings, by acting and therefore performing emotional labour, the service received is bound to leave a negative impression on the customer. Bryman (2004) stated that one of the ways that Disney is trying to ensure the good behaviour of their employees is to encourage their commitment to the company. However, as Hall and Hall (1990) explained, French employees at times have problems with identifying with their company and committing to it, which again makes them less likely to be willing to perform emotional labour for it. All this of course reflects on the experience of the customers when visiting the theme park. If the staff members there are reluctant to cover their feelings and are in a bad mood and not seem to be enjoying what they are doing, the customer will perceive the quality of the service, and therefore probably of the whole park, as negative. This behaviour can be further explained by looking at the different national cultures the staff belongs to: Since the staff in the United States are part of an institutionally oriented culture they are more willing to perform emotional labour in order to provide good customer service, which is reflected in the good service quality provided in the Disney Parks in California and Florida. The French on the other hand are from an impulsively oriented culture and are therefore less willing to follow the display rules and hide their real feelings. Hence the service provided in Disneyland Paris at times lacks the smiling and friendly atmosphere known from the theme parks in the United States. It has been shown that culture influences the willingness to perform emotional labour, which then has an influence on the quality of a service received. The perceived quality at the Disney theme parks in the United States appears to be superior to that perceived in Disneyland Paris: the employees there are friendlier and conform more with the stereotype of the "ever-smiling Disney theme park employee" (Bryman, 1999; p:40). This leads to the conclusion that American employees seem to perform emotional labour with more ease than their French counterparts. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Emotional labour has become an important component in the service industry. Managers encourage their staff to show positive feelings in order to enhance the customers' experience. This can be done either by surface acting or by deep acting. The strain on the employee is harder when performing surface acting as the true feelings have to be covered up: the person has to show feelings and behave in a way that does not correlate with the own emotions felt. It has been argued that continuous performance of emotional behaviour can lead to emotional exhaustion. However on the other hand it has been claimed that through identification with, and commitment to a company, this effect can be lessened. In order to ensure that the staff is behaving the way the organisation wishes them to display rules are implemented. These guide the employees through the customer transaction by prescribing certain behaviour. Emotional labour is especially important at times of these customer intercourses: In a competitive environment service is often the only factor that distinguished one company from another. Therefore providing good service quality and positive customer experiences gives a competitive advantage. In order to give good service though, a certain extend of emotional labour is necessary. The Disney company is very aware of this necessity. They have rigorous recruitment and selection processes as well as high training standards with the aim of having employees who are friendly, smiling and seem to be enjoying their work. This has been very successful in the theme parks in the United States, but less so in France. It was implied that the reason for this could be the cultural differences. It has been shown that different cultures react differently to the request of emotional labour and displaying 'false' emotions. The Americans, an institutionally oriented culture, place more emphasis on displaying acceptable emotions and providing service with a smile. The French on the other hand, more of an impulsively oriented culture, with a dislike of faking emotions, prefer to show the emotions that are truly felt. In the theme park industry this therefore has an impact on the behaviour of the employees, and hence the quality of the service provided. The staff members of the Disney theme parks in the United States have the reputation of always being friendly and smiling and are said to be one of the reasons of customers enjoying their visits there. The employees of Disneyland Paris in France on the other hand have quite a different reputation: They are said to be reluctant to follow the display rules set by Disney and to fake emotions just because it is expected of them. Therefore the service quality in the park in France appears to be of lower standard than in the United States. As the training provided for Disney employees is the same in both the United States and France it is logical to conclude that the reason for this must lay in the differences in the culture of the staff members. All the arguments stated above therefore lead to the conclusion that specific national cultures perform emotional labour with more ease than others, as has been shown by analysing American employees and their French counterparts. 