"Yield management is the practice of maximising profits from the sales of perishable assets, such as hotel rooms, by controlling price and inventory and improving service" (Liebermann, 1993: p 36). Yield, or revenue management started in 1970s in the airline industry (Kimes, 1989) and in the beginning of the 1980s was implemented by the hospitality industry as well (Choi and Mattila, 2004). This essay will discuss the perceived fairness of yield management, and how it can be improved by rate fences. It will then move on to explain the practice of overbooking, and its effects on customer satisfactions. Recommendations for the hotel in Edinburgh will be made and conclusions will be drawn. Nowadays almost every hotel business segments its customers. According to Hanksal. (1992) this is done to "charge them different rates based on their different needs and behaviour" (Hanks et al., 1992: p 17). The problem which occurs through this, is that customers might think they are being treated unfairly if they find out that another guest is paying a cheaper price for what seems to be exactly the same thing (Wirtz et al., 2003). With the immense competition in the hospitality industry this can provoke the loss of customers. Therefore, as Kimes (1994) points out, it is important that the guests feel like they are being treated fairly. She explains the principle of dual entitlement: "most customers believe that they are entitled to a reasonable price and that firms are entitled to reasonable profit" (Kahneman et al., 1986 in Kimes, 1994: p 24). Kimes (1994) and Wirtzal. (2003) suggest different ways of making customers feel treated fairly: By increasing the rack rate and giving discounts on it, the guests will feel lucky because they are paying less. The second way they state is product bundling: by adding on another service or product to the price, customers might feel that they are getting value for money. The last, most effective way, is setting so called rate fences: "logical, rationale rules or restrictions that are designed to allow customers to segment themselves into appropriate rate categories based on their needs, behaviour or willingness to pay" (Hanks et al., 1992: p 21). Examples of fences can be the view from a bedroom or the size of a hotel room (physical fences) or booking lead time, cancellations and change penalties or length of stay restrictions (non-physical fences) (Kimes, 1994; Wirtz et al., 2003; Vinod, 2004; Choi and Mattila, 2004). Through using said fences, Hanksal. (1992) explain, the business can maximise its profit by offering discounts at time of low demand and closing these discounts during high demand times. However, to avoid the perception of unfairness, customers need to receive information about those fences, e.g. that a room can be reserved at a lower rate if the customer agrees to stay over a Sunday night. "Information moderates the negative effect of demand-based variable pricing on the fairness perception" (Choi and Mattila, 2004: pp 309-310). By providing information at the time of the booking, the business gives the choice to the customer who can then decide if they are able to take advantage of the discounts. The Edinburgh hotel should therefore obey the following rules for future bookings: the rack rate should be increased so that a discounted rate can be given (e.g. New rack rate: £200, discounted rate £180). The customers will therefore feel that they are receiving a cheaper deal. Rates should also be linked to certain restrictions: e.g., the further in advance the rooms are booked, the lower the rate could be. Cancellation and changing penalties, as well as length of stay restrictions should also be considered. It is important to provide the customers with information on these restrictions at the time of the booking, to ensure that they feel treated fairly. Once the bookings have been made, no matter with which rate, hotels face the next problems: no-shows, cancellations and early departures. If a hotel only takes reservations for rooms they have available, they face the risk of having empty rooms on a night they thought they were fully booked. Therefore hotels must "inevitably engage in some level of overbooking to help ensure that those potentially unsold rooms are filled" (Toh and Dekay, 2002: p 79). This of course provokes another problem: what happens if all guests do come, and not enough rooms are available? Toh ( 1986) explains that guests then need to be walked: the hotel has to accommodate them in a different hotel. This can have significant costs for the hotel: Besides the cost of paying for the other hotel, the transportation there and the cost involved in training the front desk staff in what to do in case of overbooking, the highest cost is the bad marketing the hotel receives (Enghagen and Healy, 1996). Wirtzal. (2003) and Vinod (2004) explain that through customer dissatisfaction the hotel might loose future business and is also likely to receive bad word-of-mouth. To avoid this, it is essential to have a good yield management system. Donaghy and McMahon (1995) explain that a good system calculates overbooking level "after a detailed analysis of what has happened in the past and prediction of what can be expected to happen in the future" (Donaghy and McMahon, 1995: pp 59-60). Lefever (1988) explains that this kind of system has to be constantly reviewed to be able to keep customers satisfied by preventing walking them. For the Edinburgh hotel it is important to use the yield management system to predict the level of overbooking by taking the history as well as present events into account. Should it happen anyway, it is essential, as Abbott and Lewry (1991) and Taylor and Thomason (1982) point out, that the person facing the customer is fully trained. The hotel should make a reciprocal arrangements with a nearby, same class hotel, to work with it in case of overselling. Overbooking will always exist in hotels, however through properly performed yield management and well trained staff, it will be easier to control, and therefore to satisfy customers. It will probably still take a while before revenue, or yield, management, and the issues concerned with it, will be totally accepted in the hospitality industry. However, Choi and Mattila (2004) explain that "there are indications that customers' acceptance of revenue management practice may increase over time" (Choi and Mattila, 2004: p 305). As long as customers feel they are being treated fairly, and do not have any major disadvantages through the practice of yield management, they will in time accept revenue management. 