<heading>C ookies</heading>The internet term "cookie" refers to a piece of information that is sent and stored by a Web server (i.e. website) on a visitor's computer hard disk. This operation is done by the web browser (IE, Netscape, etc...) and its purpose is to help the browser to remember specific information. For example, cookies may contain information such as Login, Registration, Online shopping cart, User Preferences, etc... The sources used were "Cookies - Simon St-Laurent" (book) and internet references " URL " & " URL ".  Web designers often use cookies in their website because it is the most accurate way of gathering information such as counting visits on a website. It can also provide the designer with information about what has been visited, for how long and how often. It also offers the following advantages: <list>It can store user's preference (login, passwords, etc...). If you have more than one site, you can track visitors going from site to another.</list>To remove cookies from your hard drive, you can either delete them manually from the directory where they were stored or you can also do this from your browser options or preferences (depending on browser). With IE 5.5+, to remove manually, open the internet options (from menu: Tools Internet Options) and press the "Delete cookies" button. Finally, you could also use a program (i.e. Content Cleanup) that would do all this for you. Cookies might contain considerable personal information that you do not wish to share, could be used to track every move you make on the internet and become a threat to your "Internet privacy". Also, such information could be sold to advertisers or other companies, just as mailing lists are sold to mail order catalogs. For these reasons, you may want to remove those cookies. 0Note: Book ISBN No: 0070504989 <heading>E IDE & S CSI Buses</heading>EIDE (Enhanced Integrated Drive Electronics) is an improved version of the IDE interface, used to connect up to 4 drives such as mass storage hard drives or CD-ROMS to a PC. The controller is integrated in the drive and the transfer rates are about three to four times faster than the old version. It is very cheap and it is also sometimes called "Super IDE" or "ATA-2". SCSI (Small Computer System Interface) is used to attach a wide range of peripheral devices (up to 8 including host controller) to computers and can provide really fast data transmission rates (up to 80mb/s). There are varieties of SCSI (FAST SCSI, Ultra SCSI, FAST Wide SCSI, ULTRA Wide SCSI). It is more often used by Apple Macintosh computers. SCSI devices can also be used on PC's with a SCSI board. The sources used were "The SCSI Bus and IDE Interface: Protocols, Applications, and Programming - Friedhelm Schmidt" (book) and internet references " URL " & " URL ".  EIDE is the standard interface for any modern computer. It is cheaper and unlike SCSI, it doesn't require a card adapter as the interface is built on the motherboard. Although, SCSI bus has a faster transfer speed of data and allows a larger number of devices to be connected. SCSI would be ideal for instance for a server that requires a lot of storage space. Using it, the computer server will be able to connect much more devices (Hard disks, CD-Roms, etc...). In a case like this, it might be worth the extra cost. EIDE is very cheap and perfectly adequate for personal workstations. For this reason, individual users in need of a computer often go for this type because it usually offers what they need in terms of transfer speed, storage possibilities and costs. 0Note: Book ISBN No: 0201175142 <heading>R eflective C onclusion</heading>It was quite easy to find information about each of my topics, especially to find definitions. Although, the language used became quickly technical and difficult to understand for EIDE and SCSI. For cookies, it was very easy and straightforward to find information in books or from the internet. I already knew EIDE & SCSI buses. This work allowed me to learn the main differences between them. Secondly, I was not familiar with cookies at all. My researches taught me what it is, what it does, and how to manage them. It was quite difficult not to overcome the 300 words limit. I would have included much more information if the reports could have been longer. As required I used two types of sources but also used the internet a lot. Then, from all my findings, I selected the information that was important and mentioned in almost each source. 