<heading>Introduction </heading>While our own species continues to expand exponentially wild populations of nonhuman primates are experiencing a global crisis (Leakey and Lewin, 1995, Diamond, 1985). Almost half of today's two hundred and fifty primate species are thought to be of conservation concern in all of the ninety-two countries in which they occur (Rowe, 1996). Even more alarmingly, one in five primate species are classified as being endangered or critically endangered by the Primate Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union (IUCN), suggesting their viable extinction within the next two hundred years (CITES, 2002). The threat facing primate populations is not evenly distributed. Results show a strong positive correlation across the continents, between extinction risk and human population growth (Wright and Jernvall, 1998), (see Appendix, figure 1). It has been found that those primates most at risk of extinction live in regions where human figures exceed 0.28 humans per hectare (Wright and Jernvall, 1998). While disease, predation and famine influence species densities the impact of human activities are so profound that they appear to over ride all other factors. Four anthropogenic activities (known collectively as the "Evil Quartet", Diamond 1984, 1989) are largely held responsible for the diminished primate populations apparent today (Struhsaker, 1997). These factors are: the introduction of exotic species, secondary extinctions, habitat destruction and hunting (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). As a result of an increasing demand for food from humans and the potential for generous economic gain, hunting currently poses a particularly serious threat to primate species. In this paper I will discuss how the effects of hunting has led to extinctions in the past and currently threatens primate populations today. I will then suggest reasons why some primate species may be more vulnerable to hunting pressures than others, concentrating mainly on hunting for food and trade, habitat disturbance and proximity to human populations. <heading>What caused extinctions of the past</heading>Hunting by man is not a new phenomenon. It is thought to have been the main determining factor pushing many of the prehistoric mega fauna to extinction. It is thought that the ancient, giant, grazing baboon, Theropithecus Oswaldi, was eradicated through hunting some six hundred thousand years ago by prehistoric man (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). In just the last one thousand years human beings have been responsible for the elimination of the orang-utan (Pongo pygmeus) in Java, and fifteen species of giant lemur in Madagascar (e.g. Archaeoindris) (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). These species may have been particularly easy prey for hunters as their bulk would have made them slow (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000), most were diurnal; so could be found fairly readily, and living on the ground made capturing them a simple task (Godfrey  et al. 1997). More recently local extinctions have also occurred as a result of heavy hunting pressures with the impending loss of many more primate species looming in the not so distant future. There is a wide range of evidence suggesting the susceptibility of colobine monkeys to hunting (Haddow, 1952; Struhsaker, 1981; Howard, 1991; Kano 1997). For example, Miss Waldron's red colobus (Procolobus badius waldroni) is thought to be extinct across its entire range in West Africa and Eastern Cote D'Ivoire due to a high level of shotgun hunting (Wright and Jernvall, 1998). The inconspicuous, social nature of this species may have made them easy for hunters to track and led to a dramatic loss in numbers and eventual total elimination. After being eliminated in the Semliki Forest of Western Uganda Elliot's red colobus (P.rocolobus badius ellioti) exists only in Western Zaire, and Preuss's red colobus (Procolobus badius preussi) is also under serious risk due to over hunting. There have been reports that colobus monkeys are favourable targets for many hunters as they do not run and hide when hunted (Struhsaker, 1997). There is also evidence that colobines favouring highly fibrous diet may be disproportionally endangered compared to other species due to their solitary dependence on leaf matter (Wright and Journal, 1985). In addition, between the 1980's and 1990's the mangabey (Lophocebus aterrimus) was hunted to extinction in the Wamba area of Zaire (Struhsaker, 1997). The grey-cheeked mangabey (Lophocebus albegina) exisits in an extremely limited patchy distribution due to local extinctions caused by hunting (Struhsaker, 1997), and, in Bia National Park, Ghana, the roloway guenon (Cercopithecus diana roloway) and the white-naped sooty mangabey (Cercocebus atys lunulatus) both now face the risk of total extinction having succumbed to heavy hunting pressures (Oates et al, 1996; McGraw, 1998). <heading>Why some primate species are currently under threat</heading>Evidence suggests that mass extinctions of the past were severe, wiping out a huge range of species over relatively short periods of time. However, the development of new technology and modern hunting equipment, together with an increased demand from an ever expanding human population have all played a role in maintaining a comparable current rate of extinction loss. One in three of the world's apes, monkeys, lemurs, and other primates are endangered (National Geographic, 2002 - Conservation International (CI) and IUCN, 2000) and there are suggestions that we are currently experiencing the sixth mass extinction in history (Leakey and Lewin, 1995). According to a recent list of "The World's Top 25 Most Endangered Primates " compiled by experts from around the world, a variety of different primate species are currently threatened with extinction (see Appendix, figure 2). There appears to be no obvious trend suggesting why the primates on the list should be prone to extinction, so what are the under lying causes behind what makes some primates more vulnerable than others? <heading>The effects of hunting for food</heading>Many indigenous people rely on primate meat as their main or only source of protein. For example, In the North of Cameroon bushmeat supplies more than fifty percent of the population its principal source of animal protein (CITES, 2002). Oates suggests that the main threat to most primates of tropical rainforests is that imposed by humans hunting them for meat. Evidence to support this has been found for two "edible" lemur species in Madagascar. Results show that population density of the two species increases as the distance from villages increases (Tomiuk  et al. 1997) indicating a direct cause for this may be hunting by humans. There is evidence that hunters show a greater preference for larger prey (Bodmer, 1995). According to the Optimal Foraging Theory large bodied animals will be hunted in favour of small-bodied species, as the energy gained from the catch will outweigh that utilised during the hunt. Hunting therefore tends to have extremely detrimental effects on the larger species from a given area (Rigamonti, 1996). Oates suggests that it would take only a few hunters with shotguns to drive an entire population of relatively large-bodied primates towards the brink of extinction (Falk, 2000) as demonstrated by the recent eradication of Miss Waldron's red colobus across its entire range. The fact that large-bodied species tend to have decreased rates of reproductive output and increased inter-birth intervals exacerbates the effects that hunting has on them (Menav, Stallings, Regalado and Cueva, 1999). As a direct result of discriminative hunting larger bodied species in both Africa and Madagascar are endangered (Wright and Jernvall, 1998), (see Appendix, figure 3). Small-bodied, discrete primates may be hunted less as they are less profitable and increasingly difficult to find. For example, Campbell's monkey (Cercopithecus Campbelli) appears to be more resilient to hunting than the other guenons with which it shares the forest, as it is more cryptic in colour and smaller in body size (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). It has also been found that secretive species such as the Aye-aye (Daubentonia madgascaris) and the dwarf lemur (Microcebus spp.) are the only lemur species not affected by local hunting (Ganzhorn et al., 1997). Some Cercopithecine species will purposely reduce alarm calls and hide in thick bush in response to human encounters in order to be more inconspicuous (Stuhsaker, 1997). Cultural and religious beliefs will influence the susceptibility of primates being hunted for meat. For example, gorilla meat is also highly sought after in many parts of Africa and appears to be of principal importance for a number of ceremonious events. The Bishop of Bertoua is regularly offered gorilla hands and feet at festivities, as it is believed to bestow strength and power to those who consume it (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). In contrast, Hanuman langurs (Semnopithecus entellus) escape the pressures of hunting in Jodhpur where they are thought to be sacred (Rowe, 1996). In parts of Western Cameroon in the 1960's all primates except chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) were hunted because they were thought to share too many similarities with people (Struhsaker, 1997). Such influences may be highly influential in shaping primate communities; Kibale is home to a rich diversity of primate species as a result of the local tribe having never hunted them (Struhsaker 1997). Hunting by non-human primates may also pose a threat to other primate species. Indeed, high levels of predation by chimpanzees on red colobus monkeys have led to a reduction in colobus numbers by half over the last twenty-five years at Gombe (Struhsaker, 1997). It is thought that predation by chimpanzees may be amplifying human hunting pressures playing a part in driving the red colobus to local extinctions. <heading>The effects of commercial hunting </heading>A huge threat challenging the survival of many primates is the professional hunters who kill large quantities of wild fauna to sell on international and national markets. Mass culling does not allow time for populations to recover and thus makes hunting unsustainable. For example, it has been reported that in the Congo Basin mammals must produce ninety three percent of their body mass, annually to balance current extraction rates. Sixty percent of these mammals are primates (Fa and Peres, 2000). Bushmeat may be far less expensive for consumers to buy than domestic meat making it an attractive purchase, keeping demands high and species hunted for bushmeat vulnerable. It is thought that this trade alone might well pose the biggest threat to the survival of many primate populations in West Africa (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). . Primate parts are traded for medicinal, superstitious and ornamental purposes, (e.g. chimpanzee skulls are carried open like a cup during periods of drought to encourage rainfall. Peterson and Ammann, 2003). While small scale hunting for personal use poses no serious threat it is the huge global market for monkey and ape body parts that have an impact on primate population densities. With the trade in traditional medicines increasing across China and Asia, due to an increased demand from a rapidly growing human population, the situation appears to be getting worse for many primate species. The pet trade, hunting trophies and souvenirs such as novelty gorilla hand ashtrays, fur rugs and stuffed body parts also threaten the extinction of a number of primates. For example, the huge trade in colobus skins during the late 1800's and again in the 1970's can be linked directly with the species absence in parts of East Africa today (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). All five sub-species of gorilla are currently under threat largely as a consequence of being hunted for body parts (Rowe, 1996). In Cameroon alone eight hundred individuals are taken each year. Due to their large size and slow reproductive rate it is near impossible for this species to recover from heavy hunting pressures. Most of these sub-species now exist in small isolated populations resulting in devastating effects on population numbers. As a result of hunting the mountain gorilla (Gorilla gorilla beringei) now faces the greatest threat of extinction, existing in only a small area around the Uganda, Rwanda, Zaire border, with just four hundred to six hundred individuals remaining (Morgan, 2002). <heading>The effects of habitat disturbance</heading>The destruction of the rain forest increases access to primates. Thus habitat destruction exacerbates the effects of hunting and can have a dramatic impact causing primate populations to plummet (Dunbar and Cowlishaw, 2000; Struhsaker, 1997; Wright and Jernvall, 1998). Therefore primates living in disturbed, fragmented or modified forest areas are likely to be more vulnerable to the pressures of hunting. For example there have been a high number of local extinctions of the woolly monkey (Lagothrix spp.) in Havea habitats as result of the rubber tappers hunting them for food while working in the forest (Peres, 1991). Forest size and habitat heterogeneity also influence primate group size and distribution (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). Hunting and habitat loss will cause populations to decline in size. Small isolated populations are increasingly vulnerable to intrinsic factors, such as demographic and environmental stochasticity and the loss of genetic diversity (Leakey and Lewin, 1995). Except for a few exceptional cases extinction is a multi-stage process occurring patchily as populations are lost at different times and locations (Struhsaker, 1997). The extinction of a species occurs when its final population has vanished (Andrewartha and Birch, 1954) thus, species existing in small unstable populations stand a high chance of becoming extinct. The ability of a primate species to adapt to a new environment will strongly influence to what degree habitat degradation intensifies the effects of hunting pressure on that species. Primates such as red colobus monkeys and chimpanzees prefer old-growth forest areas and so are less able to adapt to habitat change and thus are more vulnerable to hunting (Struhsaker, 1997). On the contrary the cercopithecines tend to be highly adaptable colonists, equipped to survive in a wide variety of habitats, and therefore often escape the limitations of living in a damaged habitat where hunting takes place. <heading>Living in close proximity to human populations</heading>Primates that live near human settlements often become agricultural pests (Boulton and Horrocks, 1996; Else, 1991; Sprague, 2002). Traditional control strategies focus on attempts to eradicate pest species (Else, 1991) leading to the loss of some species from certain areas altogether. This can be fatal for primates in need of conservation. For example, it has been reported that pest control in the Arabuko-Sokoke Forest in Kenya, is occurring at a level beyond the sustainable extraction rate for both the blue monkey (Cercopithecus mitis) and the yellow baboon (Papio cynocephalus) (Fitzgibbon, Mogaka and Fanshawe, 1995). In addition primate species that humans feel threatened by may be specifically targeted and hunted to such a degree that extinction becomes plausible. This has been witnessed in Africa where gorillas believed to be responsible for taking human babies have been actively hunted (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). <heading>Conclusion </heading>From the examples discussed in this paper it appears obvious that a range of factors play a part in deciding the fate of primate populations across the globe. During the 19 th Congress of the International Primate Society in Bejing, China, in 2002 it was decidedly agreed that primates are under threat of extinction mainly as a result of rapid habitat loss and exploitation for food and body parts by humans (National Geographic, 2002). Indeed Leakey and Lewin predicted more than seven years ago that: "if unchecked human activities will continue to result in an upset balance of species interactions of altered ecosystems and extensive habitat and species loss." Hunting at a sustainable level may prove to be an effective conservation strategy for many species. However, recent reports suggest that current sustainable rates of harvesting gorillas and chimpanzees may be just 1% and 4% respectively (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). Therefore for primates, sustainable hunting may not be a realistic option. As a result of the diminishing natural environment it has been calculated that further losses in primate diversity could occur as soon as within the next twenty to fifty years (Kudla, Wilson and Wilson, 1997; Struhsaker, 1997). If predictions are accurate, large, highly conspicuous, specialized, terrestrial primate species inhabiting areas prone to habitat degradation are most likely to be lost first. While religious, cultural and traditional beliefs protect certain species from hunting pressures, people's personal views and attitudes towards primates will, in addition, shape the future of their communities. Throughout history humankind has decidedly influenced the diversity and distribution of primate species and will continue to do so for as long as the two co-exist. Ultimately it is the rate at which the human population continues to grow, combined with species-specific resilience to anthropogenic pressures that will decide the future of remaining primate populations. 