<heading>Introduction</heading>Species evolve to survive their specific niches and have intrinsic social and biological needs as a result. When forced to live outside of their familiar environment and placed in captivity (by which animals are confined within an area of well-defined boundaries; Poole, 1990), individuals adapt to their new surroundings to different degrees (Gaspari et al., 2000). The captive animal may acquire routines beneficial to life in confinement, or adopt 'abnormal behaviours' aiding survival in no apparent way (Poole, 1990). Abnormalities and disturbed behaviours reflect a poor fit between the species adaptations' and the alien captive environment (Miller-Schroeder & Paterson, .....psych wel). This appears particularly evident among the highly intelligent and social old world primates (Yerkes, 1925; In Dickie, 1998). Psychological problems associated with captive primates impose a marked change from the original behavioural baseline of the species resulting in abnormal behavioural 'stereotypies', thus observing an individual's behavioural repertoire in captivity may be used to assess the animal's mental experience of its housing environment (Wemelsfeder, 1999). Increased aggression, lethargy, hair plucking, self mutilation, coprophagy, reingestion and regurgitation all provide evidence of poor welfare, indicating an attempt by the individual to cope with an intolerably unstimulating environment over which it can exert little control (Poole, 1990). For most animals stereotyping can be greatly improved if their environment improves, suggesting they retain the capacity for normal behaviour (Tudge, 1991). Numerous studies have provided evidence that nonhuman primates, specifically the great apes, share many elements of our own mental processes (Bramblett et al., 1975). Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) have evolved a brain structure permitting complex cognitive abilities and demonstrating a capacity to learn, think, feel and express a range of emotions believed to be uniquely human (Balls, et al., 1988). They appear vulnerable to depression, boredom, fear, sensitivity and anxiety (Goodall, 1968). Although there is no compelling evidence that chimpanzees have an awareness of their own existence, the possibility must not be overlooked, especially when making a comprehensive evaluation of a primate's well-being, in response to the effects of captivity (Bayne, 1989). Human awareness of the sentience of other species and our ability to empathize with suffering leads us to a responsibility, recognized by our society to treat primates with compassion. In view of our close evolutionary relationship to the nonhuman primates it is our duty to make determined attempts to ensure that their mental needs are satisfied in every captive situation. This essay will consider how captivity affects the psychological well-being of primates, with specific reference to the restricted conditions of zoos and laboratories, as these tend to be the commonest conditions of captivity and represent the greatest departure from the natural state (Poole, 1990 ). Using chimpanzees as a specific example, the guidelines compiled in order to minimise mentally detrimental effects will be examined, and methods in how to best achieve these goals discussed. <heading>Requirements of Captivity</heading>Zoos and laboratories should strive to carry out environmental enrichment providing an interesting, varied and stimulating environment for the primates to encourage natural patterns of exploratory behaviour and social interactions. Recommendations to improve the psychological well-being of captive chimpanzees have been formulated. A number of enrichment procedures are suggested highlighting the importance of providing; space for vigorous activity, frequent social contact with conspecifics and human caregivers, the opportunity to establish social bonds among a group of mixed age and sex, the presence of intellectual stimulation and a variety in basic routines, including diet, objects for manipulation and social setting, (International workshop of captive chimpanzee professionals. In: Balls et al., 1988). These will now be looked at individually with suggestions as to how these goals might be achieved. <heading>Environmental enrichment through the Physical Environment </heading>All parameters of the primate's physical environment should be enriched, including enclosure design, substrates, furnishings and novel objects; the aim being to create an artificial habitat that lies within the adaptive range of the species allowing individuals to respond appropriately and thrive in their new surroundings. Quantitative evidence suggests that a complex, enriched and more naturalistic setting for captive primates discourages the development of abnormal behaviour and promotes psychological well-being (Fox, 1968). <heading>Size and Complexity</heading>Size has been found to have a significant effect on the psychology of captive primates (e.g. doubling the size of an enclosure can reduce the frequency of stereotypic behaviour among chimpanzees by 70% within 6 months; Juno & Maple, 1982. In Fox, 1968). Small, sterile environments lead to psychological stress among nonhuman primates (Dickie, 1998). It has been suggested that what is in the space and how it is used that is of greatest importance to captive primates, not the absolute space available, (e.g. increasing cage dimensions made very little difference to the behaviour patterns of marmosets where as introducing 'cage furniture' reduced stereoptypical outcomes; Gaspari et al., 2000). The challenge, therefore, is to try and bring some complexity to this space encouraging normal behaviour patterns and psychological health (Dickie, 1998). In captivity the opportunity to physically escape aggressors by emigration is eliminated. The captive environment must allow room for privacy and separation from the social group if desired, as well as ample space to exercise and play vigorously (Poole, 1990). Visual barriers and multiple divided areas can assist in allowing individuals to avoid one another when they desire. This is vital for many primate species that lack the ability to control aggression (e.g. Cercopithecus exhibit increased trauma as a result of overcrowding in captivity; Kapler, 1968). Natural vegetation and topographical features within an outdoor environment providing climatic variation promote positive psychological responses to captivity (e.g. apes exhibit much calmer behaviour when given the freedom to move in and out of doors; Rumbaugh, et al., ). The outdoor area should be larger than the indoor area to permit running, brachiation and leaping (Balls, et al., 1988). Dividing the enclosure into two areas with a continuous circular path will encourage games of chase and play (Rumbaugh etal.,,..). Adding woodchip or straw to the floor, significantly decreases undesirable behaviours and encourages foraging and play (Chamove et al., 1982; in Dickie, 1998). Tall perches or trellices fixed to the walls will increases the three-dimensional space of the enclosure and hanging mesh netting or branches from the ceiling encourages the use of vertical space (Traylor-Holtzer & Fritz (1985), In Fouts et al., ..). <heading>Enrichment through the Social Environment </heading>Primates are generally social animals, thus the opportunity to interact socially is critical to their psychological well-being (Fouts et al., ). To develop properly primates need to be housed in species-typical groups and to have the opportunity to play with conspecifics; vital to the psychological and neurophysiological development of young primates (Mason, 1965; Macaca mulatta: Harlow & Harlow, 1962; Liebermann, 1965; Homo sapiens). Housing chimpanzees in social groups in large outdoor areas positively affects their psychological well-being as conspecifics provide a wide variety of species-typical stimuli that serve a therapeutic function. Appropriate socialization leads to a significant decrease in abnormal behaviour (Rumbaugh, etal., ...) indicating the important role of conspecifics in promoting the mental well-being of captive primates. Housing in isolation or small cages will have negative affects (Fouts et al., ...). Isolated caging is likely to engender idiosyncratic behavioural response patterns such as self-directed social behaviour, juvenile behaviour, and self-directed aggression shown in figure 1 (Pereira et al., in Box, 1991). It is essential, to promote social interactions at all times, even during the process of quarantine, to ensure the mentality of chimpanzees (Erwin, et al., 1993). In laboratory conditions chimpanzees must be housed in compatible groups of at least two (Balls et al., 1988), but life in a larger group more representative in complexity to sociological structures seen in the wild will promote well-being further (Poole, 1990). <heading>Peer Interaction and the Mother-Infant Bond </heading>Adult behaviour is influenced by early life experiences for most animals, therefore, every effort must be made to raise primate infants in multi-mother groups alongside compatible adult males (Balls et al., 1988). Chimpanzees have a long childhood during which they acquire the skills, through other group members, required to succeed in adulthood (Balls et al., 1988). Peer interactions are crucial for proper social learning (e.g. abnormal sexual development occurs among chimpanzees and rhesus macaques deprived of early peer experience; Nissen, 1954. In: Sackett, 1968). Infants should remain with their mothers at least to the age of 18 months as the mother-infant bond is essential to their normal psychological development (Balls, et al., 1988). Coprophagy, repetitious pacing and self-harm, are common signs of separation-induced depression among infants weaned from their mothers prematurely (Fox, 1968). Many aspects of normal behaviour depend upon the individual receiving particular types of stimulation at critical developmental stages of life (...). In monkeys and apes past experience may result in permanent abnormalities spanning the entire behavioural repertoire which cannot be corrected later on in life (e.g. chimpanzees reared in social and environmentally deprived conditions exhibit behavioural abnormalities absent among chimpanzees reared by mothers; Futs etal., ..). Environmental enrichment will effect individuals in different ways according to their past experiences and species specific behaviours, thus it is essential to consider any permanent anomalies within the animal itself when considering methods to improve psychological well-being. <heading>Human Caregivers</heading>If separation from the mother does occur and fostering to another lactating female fails a substitute human caretaker may be provided as a last resort. Human caregivers have the potential to exert a profound impact on the quality of life of the primate they are mothering. It is essential that all those working with captive primates receive specific training so they are familiar with species-specific behaviours and can easily recognise abnormalities and signs of distress (Balls, et al., 1988). The infant will require care around the clock for several months so caregivers must be prepared to attend to the chimpanzees physical and psychological needs continuously, dedicating huge amounts of time and empathy to each individual (Balls, et al., 1988). Chimpanzees raised without this close contact exhibit stereotypies such as eye-poking, rocking and bobbing (Rumbaugh et al.,..). Human rearing will only be a success if adequate and sufficient caretakers are supplied all of whom are well acquainted with chimpanzees and have a good relationship with the other individuals of the group. It has been suggested that for every chimpanzee under the age of 7 years old a minimum of 10 caregivers should be provided (Balls, et al., 1988). In addition, adopted individuals will require regular contact with other chimpanzees (Rumbaugh etal.,...). Building a strong and trusting bond between caretaker and chimpanzee is a process that can take many years (Rumbaugh, etal ., ...) and any variation in this relationship can be a highly stressful event. Attempts to switch back to care by a conspecific must be done gradually enough to ensure the transfer of emotional attachment from one carer to the next (Balls, et al., 1988). Where relocation is unavoidable the familiar caregiver should remain with the individual until they have begun to adjust to their new surrounding and formed new attachments with new staff members (Balls, et al., 1988). Training with the caretaker may reduce stress during handling by the use of positive reward techniques to modify behaviour avoiding the use of intrusive technology or isolation (Balls et al., 1988). Nonhuman primates are distinguished by the variety and complexity of their social lives. In the wild, chimpanzees live in complex fission-fusion systems exhibiting high rates of temporary dispersal by males and a strict dominance hierarchy (de Waal, 1998). Fluctuating social bonds and relationships within the group manipulate the running of the colony, influencing individual welfare as well as serenity among the entire group. Forcing individuals to be within each other's sight all the time may place extreme stress upon captive chimpanzees and cause abnormally increased levels of aggression (e.g. two male chimpanzees at Arnhem Zoo killed a third conspecific in response to a lack of choice over companionship; de Waal, 1998). It is necessary to provide for unpredictable complex social interactions in captivity, and allow individual's to have a choice over companionship (Dickie, 1998). Frequently altering group arrangements and providing a complex enclosure may provide a solution (Ball, et al., ...). <heading>Enrichment through objects </heading>Primates exhibit a natural tendancy to invent, manipulate and investigate (e.g. chimpanzees of the Tai Forest spontaneously use stone anvils to crack open 'ramy' nuts; Boesch, 1997). In captivity opportunities to exercise these mental abilities can be provided through object manipulation or feeding devices. Adopting enrichment strategies as part of daily husbandry schedules, allows both animals and caretakers to become familiar with the expected sequence of activity thus keeping stress levels to a minimum (Bramblett & Drickman, 1982). While nonhuman primates should be provided with a stable environment, there must be sufficient variability in the form of temporally or spatially unpredictable events and objects to provide adequate levels of stimulation (Poole, 1990). <heading>Novel objects </heading>Providing a variety of play objects throughout the day is a simple and effective form of enrichment (Fouts et al., ...). Novel objects such as electronic games, books, whistles, blankets and toys effectively enhance the psychological well-being of socially deprived primates (e.g. the introduction of plastic toys brought about a decrease in inactivity among chimpanzees; Paquette & Prescott, 1988). Without such tasks or play objects chimpanzees become depressed and overly aggressive (Rumbaugh, et al., ..). Enrichment devices should be cheap, easily maintained and most importantly effective for the target species (Dickie,..). <heading>Feeding</heading>Feeding and foraging are the most important, time-consuming activities of wild apes, with chimpanzees foraging for an average of 6-8 hours a day (Goodall, 1968). Typically, far less time is spent foraging in captivity (e.g. 5% in captivity cf. 70% in the wild, for chimpanzees (Lutz & Novak, 1995 and Clutton-Brock & Harvey, 1977). Psychological well-being can be promoted either by replicating foraging patterns experienced in the wild or introducing novel objects in the form of feeding enrichment. Variety in meals is one of the easiest forms of enrichment. In order to meet the nutritional requirements of chimpanzees, and to stimulate interest during feeding a combination of different food items, such as fruit, mixed pulses, vegetables, herbs, eggs and nuts, may be incorporated into the diet (Chivers et al., 1984). Diets replicating more similarly the complexity of food in the wild is essential for the well-being of captive primates (Dickie, 1998). The manner of serving food can also add variety (e.g. primate pellets delivered in thick, paper sacks secured with rope at one end, or inserted into cabbages with holes cut out of them provide innovative ways of delivering food items; Dickie, 1998). In the wild, searching for food provides an intellectual challenge as well as the opportunity to develop motor and social skills (psyc...bokk). In captivity, scattering food items such as peanuts, dried fruits and soaked pulses among a straw substrate increases foraging opportunities for captive chimpanzees whilst overcoming problems of dominant individuals monopolizing food supplies; (Dickie, 1998). Artificial termite mounds, from which sticky foods can be fished with a stick, have found to be effective for both chimpanzees and orangutans as shown in figure 2 (McEwen, 1993; in Poole, 1990). Complexity should also be provided with feeding times (Dickie, 1998). Higher primates, such as chimpanzees, experience a need for spontaneous activity and stimulation. They suffer when kept in an environment that is over predictable and where they have little control (Poole, 1990), thus the most essential element to be incorporated into feeding strategies may be providing captive primates with the choice and opportunity to feed as and when they wish. Equipping enclosures with problem-solving devices and food dispensers provide this (e.g. pushing a series of buttons connected to a computer terminal can provide a drink or a food reward; Balls, et al., 1988). <heading>Considering the Individual</heading>It is important to consider the specific individuals situation as some forms of environmental enrichment can have adverse effects on others (e.g. introduction of novel devices to rhesus monkeys leads to premature rejection by mothers promoting mental unrest; Ventura & Buchanana-Smith, 2003). Chimpanzees who are no longer useful to biomedical research must be retired and rehabilitated allowing them to live out their lives in conditions guaranteeing psychological well-being. No research projects involving the experimental use of chimpanzees should be initiated without prior guarantee of adequate funding to ensure a program of retirement for each subject (Balls, et al., 1988). <heading>Conclusions</heading><heading>Implementing ideas and following up</heading>Behaviour and habitat form a co-adapted system. To remove animals from their wild environment without providing an adequate substitute will prevent them from practising natural behaviours. To ensure the success of breeding programmes and the popularity of captive exhibits every attempt must be made to provide for the psychological well-being of the species in question. The goal of any programmes implemented to measure and improve the psychological well-being of nonhuman primates, must be to develop a management plan with short and long-term enrichment options tailored to animals according to their specific past history and present housing conditions. In order to comply with these standards some facilities may require extensive modification resulting in financial and pragmatic problems (Rumbaugh etal., ..). Objective, quantitative evaluation is critical. Behavioural patterns of all individuals should be monitored on a regular basis and compared with baseline data on arrival, in order to trace development patterns and assess needs for changes in enrichment strategies (Erwin, et al., 1993). 