Traditional dress has always been one way of identifying and clarifying occupational roles... it symbolises to others the power and authority vested in the role of the wearer (Tiffany, 1987 p 40). This statement is very true of the nurse's uniform which is highly identifiable by the public and provokes a positive response (Sparrow, 1986), but as midwives strive to take their place as independent practitioners with an equal status as other key professionals (Schan and Cleary, 1996) the contrasting perspectives of whether uniform or mufti is more appropriate for the role of the midwife will be explored. The history of the uniform we wear still influences public opinion of those in the nursing and midwifery profession, but the uniform is only a strong part of nursing history. The uniform we wear serves to reflect the origins of the nursing profession with strong links being made to religious and military orders which were the primary providers of care at that time. Midwives in the sixteenth century practised autonomously and did not wear a uniform, but as doctors increased their case load to include both normal and more difficult births midwives lost their wealthier client base and so the status of the midwife began to decline. Midwives joined the ranks of the nursing profession in the nineteenth century hoping to gain power over the medical profession, but this ultimately led to the loss of our identity as specialised practitioners. Very similar uniforms are still worn by nurses and midwives in modern day practice, despite the vast clinical difference between the two professions (Pride, 1995). The word midwife means 'with women' and this is one of the main roles that has always been provided by the midwife (Sweet, 2003), but modern day midwifery is changing again from that of a physical carer back to role of an educator, counsellor and supporter of women and their families in a time of changing relationships (Pride,1995). It is suggested by wearing a uniform midwives have forgotten the socio-cultural context of pregnancy, birth and also women centred care, but tend to focus more on the medical context of birth taking it away from the normal physiological process it should be regarded as (Hicks, 1992). The use of uniform is suggestive that we are placing the women under our care in a subservient position, denying them equality in the relationship (Tiffany, 1987), when ethically we should be aiming for an equal partnership in modern day midwifery practice following reports such as 'Changing Childbirth' (1993). A number of the aims being that the service is there to meet the needs and wishes of the women, rather than those of the staff or managers and that women should be at the centre of decisions made about their care. The argument regarding uniform is one which should include the views and preferences of those who are at the centre of our care as many women are no longer willing to be passive recipients of care and expect to participate fully (Sweet, 2003), this theme will be explored within this assignment. However it is readily acknowledged that the use of a nursing/midwives uniform traditionally represents power, confidence, knowledge and professionalism which may benefit our midwifery practice (Tiffany, 1987). Research conducted to determine the views of both the public and staff who are affected by the clothes worn by midwives found that the midwife's uniform is seen as having three main functions which are identified very strongly by both staff and their clients. The most important being to promote cleanliness to protect both the staff and patients, as uniforms are believed to be designed from a strong health and safety aspect. Other points include allowing easy identification of the wearer, and to allow freedom of movement (Alderton 1984). This essay will look at these 'functions' to discover if the uniform we wear is a sign of power, professionalism and practicality or linked to outdated concepts and tradition. This essay will also explore the contrasting perspectives of whether uniform or mufti is more suitable in modern day midwifery practice exploring themes of concepts of risk, normality, legal and ethical issues and the client's perspective. Risk is defined as "possibility of meeting danger or suffering harm; person or thing representing a source of risk; exposed to the chance of injury or loss" (Hawkins 1991 p 447) The concept of risk when considering the argument of uniform versus mufti is a topic which can be examined from many different angles including hygiene issues, security, staff and patient safety. When staff and patients alike were questioned as to the reasons behind nurses and midwives wearing uniform, the idea that uniform was worn for hygiene purposes was a response that was recurring, but not given as a reason for preferring staff in uniform (Schan and Cleary 1996). In modern day nursing and midwifery practice, the risk of cross contamination and hygiene is an issue that is being tackled ever more vigorously due to the increasing prevalence of the superbug MRSA (Templeton, 2005). Women and their babies are becoming infected, sometimes with serious consequences, as midwives we have a responsibility towards those under our care to manage risk factors using research evidence to determine if uniform or mufti is more hygienic. Many of the staff questioned felt that the uniform they wore was protection against what they described as "dirty work", and saved their own clothes from being damaged whilst at work. The traditional uniform appeared to make those wearing them much more complacent about wearing protective clothing to carry out intimate procedures or other high risk tasks (Sparrow, 1991). When staff were dressed in mufti it was reported that they were much more aware of the need for cleanliness and tended to wear gloves and aprons for increased periods of the day for protection and were also more aware of the need to wash their hands more frequently (Sparrow, 1990 Pride, 1995) suggesting the risk of cross contamination would therefore be reduced if staff wore mufti. However swabs taken from staff wearing uniform and mufti at different points during a shift have revealed very little difference in the levels of microbes present or the growth of any organisms on both sets (Sparrow, 1987) revealing no preference for either from a hygienic standpoint. Although a more detailed study would have to be conducted to provide any significantly conclusive results. Although the contamination levels appear to be the same for both uniform and mufti the issue of hygiene is one that needs to be addressed as a risk issue as the levels of microbes have show to be unusually high at the beginning of a shift. This can be linked to uniforms being worn for more than one day due to shift patterns or being laundered incorrectly, this can also be linked to staff wearing both uniform and mufti to and from work (Sparrow, 1991) The argument which is still in favour of wearing uniforms is that they were designed from a health and safety aspect as they can withstand the heavy laundering recommended, removing any risk of contamination when laundered properly (Sparrow, 1991). It is recommended that any uniforms worn by health care professionals should be laundered onsite to ensure that decontamination is complete. This service is not provided in many National Health Service (NHS) institutions but is under taken at home where there may not be the facilities to wash the uniform separately or to use a tumble dryer. If mufti were to be washed to the same extent could it with stand the numerous washes at sixty degrees combined with tumble drying (Oxtoby, 2003) when it is not designed for this purpose. The NHS would provide a clothing budget which is very likely to cost more than supplying a uniform, placing a finical burden on an already struggling NHS. These clothes would have to be changed more frequently to keep them smart and provide the image of the professional we aim towards. As neither uniform nor mufti has been clinically proven to provide greater protection to those under our care another element of risk which will be explored is the way the nursing uniform is perceived by the public. Although in the hospital and clinical environment the uniform we wear is often regarded as a status symbol, highly visible and respected by the public, out side the hospital the uniform we wear may be placing staff at risk of harassment or even attack (Sparrow 1991, Pride, 1995). This has been attributed to the way in which nurses uniforms are portrayed by the media as sex objects despite the reality of the uniform (Oxtoby, 2003). There is shown to be a higher risk of those in uniform being attacked outside hospitals and hospital residences (Pride, 1995). It can be argued that although staff in uniform are more likely to be attacked, they should not be wearing their uniform outside the hospital and to and from work in accordance to health and safety policies (Professional dress code, 2004) and for hygiene issues. But for those wearing uniforms for community visits is it reasonable to place these staff at risk especially when patients have revealed a strong preference for staff conducting home visits to dress in mufti (Pride, 1995). The wearing of uniform outside the hospital environment may also place staff at risk of legal proceedings. As mentioned before wearing a uniform makes staff highly visible to the public. If an accident were to occur medical personnel have no legal duty to stop and offer assistance, although we do have a moral professional duty at all times, but by wearing a uniform in public it can be argued that staff are more obligated to stop as they are instantly recognisable as medically trained personnel. Once involved, staff have a legal responsibility to offer a standard of care which would be expected from others with similar skills and knowledge (UKCC, 1992). If medical professionals offer help it is unlikely that their employer would accept responsibility for their actions and the employee would have to rely on their own insurance to cover any legal proceedings. If they are visible to the public the employee may also be at risk of facing professional conduct proceedings for failing to act (Dimond, 2005). As well as potential injury and legal proceedings from others the uniform we wear is thought to increase the incidence of back injury amongst staff as the A-line dress worn shrinks once washed and is traditionally combined with a petersham belt, the narrow width of the skirt makes proper lifting techniques impossible placing midwives at greater risk of back injury (Pride, 1995). When questioned staff found this outfit to impose restrictions on the midwifes demanding routine (Sparrow, 1987) especially when providing more practical help for tasks such as breastfeeding help and when in delivery suite reducing the provision of care midwives could provide for their clients. This could affect the relationship between midwife and client as they are not free to move and interact on the same level as those in more comfortable clothing. The impractical clothing places the NHS at risk of legal proceedings, as an employer it has the responsibility of protecting employees from injury at work, back injuries affect a large proportion of nurses and midwives (Dimond, 2005). This problem appeared to be tackled with the recommendation and gradually the introduction of a new uniform recommended by the Royal Collage of Nursing (1979). The option of tunic and trousers is much more practical and gives far greater freedom of movement as does the introduction of scrubs on delivery suite; midwives are given free choice as to the uniform they choose to wear. Many of the midwives questioned found this uniform a comfortable alternative and more suited to the job in hand but a large majority still commented that their own clothes were more comfortable and gave greater freedom of movement (Schan and Cleary, 1996 Smoothy et al 1987) Having explored a number a risk implications for both staff and clients the emotional impact of staff wearing uniform or mufti will be examined. Research carried out at Whipps Cross Hospital (Oxtoby, 2003 p23) on both in and out patients found a strong preference for staff in uniform commenting that they wanted someone who "looked in charge, looked smart, commanded authority and had a presence" and someone they could recognise easily and that it was comforting to see staff in a familiar uniform suggesting that the theme of normality was reassuring. Clients expected to see staff in uniform in a clinical setting, by wearing a uniform staff could live up to their expectations. This suggests that clothing can be thought of as a form of non-verbal communication which reflects confidence in ability and judgement, personal behaviour and sense of professional image (Pante, 1984). Staff also claimed they felt more confident when wearing their uniform and that they were seen as more knowledgeable by their patients (Sparrow, 1987) Although the uniform we wear is familiar it promotes a number of responses in the patient one role of the uniform as mentioned is one of authority and encourages those under our care to adopt a sick role and become passive, this may be appropriate for those patients in nursing wards who are ill but pregnancy is not a state of illness and many of the women under our care are healthy and should be responsible for their own care to an extent. Both Sparrow (1991) and Tiffany (1987) noted when staff did not wear their uniform in a hospital setting the roles they preformed became less apparent to those under there care and patients were less likely to adopt a passive role, and were less likely to ask for routine assistance with tasks and were increasingly likely to be independent. In practice I have noticed this effect when wearing my own clothes on community placement. Those under my care were more proactive and more willing to question aspects of midwifery practice they were unsure of. By wearing mufti we, as midwives, are encouraging autonomy in childbirth and an equal relationship to develop (Pride, 1995) From the perspective that clients will be very likely to use different services whilst pregnant and are unlikely to know the midwives who will care for them in labour and the post natal wards the use of a similar uniform in all areas may benefit the client as it may instil confidence in the practitioner and be familiar and comforting if all staff wear the same uniform. This was a recurring opinion in a study conducted by Sparrow (1991). Although the study was conducted on a small scale public opinion was very strong with comments such as 'people feel unafraid when they see nurses in uniform (pp118) and 'they would seem less knowledgeable if not in uniform. The other professionals wear uniform (pp119). Interestingly though a large number of women questioned revealed that they had a strong preference for midwives not to wear uniform when they were conducting home visits suggesting they could normalise the relationship when in their own home, but preferred the midwife in uniform when in a clinical setting (Leventon, 1989). None of the women questioned could justify the reasoning behind their choice again suggesting that it is the idea of normality that is comforting (Sparrow, 1991) Staff in uniform found that by wearing a uniform and being identifiable to their clients it relieved them of having to introduce themselves before touching the client or performing tasks (Tiffany, 1987) and therefore not gaining consent, which is prosecutable as assault under civil law (Jenkins cited in Sweet 2003). By removing the clothes that distinguish them, nurses found that they were much less likely to approach a patient without first identifying themselves (Smoothy, 1991). This nature of care takes account of the ethics of midwifery practice that a patient does not give up there rights once they become a 'patient' (Sweet, 2003). Just as the familiarity of the nurses' uniform appears the give practitioners rights to the patients it also appears to give the wearer passport to all areas of the hospital without question by staff, security or patients. This is a problem when considering the ease with which one can obtain a nurses outfit or a white coat. A member of public gained entrance to a maternity ward and abducted a baby, although she was dressed in a uniform, it was not the uniform of that hospital demonstrating the trust that the uniform we wear instils in the public (Schan and Cleary, 1996). If all staff were dressed in mufti then security would have to be more rigid, as nurses found when dressed in mufti they were asked to identify themselves more frequently and the use of photographic identification came under more scrutiny leading to improved safety for both staff and patients (Sparrow, 1991). It is questionable how stringent staff would be at checking identities if all staff wore mufti when considering the volume of visitors on wards over large periods of the day. The idea that the clothes we wear can be used in a therapeutic nature is an aspect which has influenced the abandonment of uniform in a number of areas as early as nineteen forty seven. Staff working on a children's ward felt that the ward would feel more homey and the children would feel more secure if staff were dressed in casual clothes as it added a theme of normality to an otherwise unusual atmosphere. This idea is also used by psychiatric nursing staff in an attempt to improve relationships between staff and clients (Smoothy et al 1989). This idea could also be related to midwifery practice as the women under our care for a large majority are not ill but going through a normal process. By wearing mufti we are treating childbearing as the normal physiological process that it is (Hicks, 1992). However Taylor (cited in Oxtoby 2003) claims the therapeutic nature of the uniform we wear must not be overlooked, psychologists claim that colour has a crucial part to play in the way nurses and midwives are perceived by the public, the colour blue is seen as calming, pristine but authoritative at the same time. Sparrow (1986) also comments on the therapeutic benefits of colour and noted that when staff wore mufti a majority tended to wear fashionable dark or neutral colours which may add to feelings of unease or stress. The benefits of being able to easily identify staff by the colour they wear adds to a sense of order and security which many patients cling to in a clinical environment (Pride, 1995). From an ethical perspective uniforms are suitable as they maintain the dignity of the staff wearing them, are not offensive to the multi-cultural clientele we are likely to have under our care due to the longer sleeves and length of the dresses. For those midwives from particular cultural and religious practices and groups the Policies and Guidelines (Version 8, 2004) are amendable to take account of particular needs. But the same guidelines also offer advice to those in mufti stating clear rules over standards of dress to be adhered to. It is unlikely that any member of staff wearing mufti would wear clothes that would cause offence, but individuals do have different notions of what is acceptable (Jackson, 1994) In conclusion I feel having explored the contrasting perspectives of uniform versus mufti in maternity care; no definite conclusion can be made, as there are still significant arguments both for and against wearing uniform. But much of the literature examined and personal experience suggests that women feel more at ease and are more proactive when encountering a midwife dressed in mufti, therefore promoting equal partnership in care (Department of Health, 1993). I feel the issue of hygiene is one that needs to be tackled as there is a lack of reliable evidence which confirms if uniform or mufti poses a greater risk of cross contamination, yet this is still given as one of the main reasons why midwives wear uniform (Schan and Cleary, 1996). The benefits of wearing a uniform to instil confidence in both patients and the staff was seen as one consistent advantage showing that what you wear can have a huge influence on the way you are perceived by others and can also affect the way you feel about yourself (Oxtoby, 2003). But we should not have to depend on a uniform to have confidence in ourselves and for other to have confidence in us. It appears that the public opinion demonstrates great respect for those in a uniform but for that respect we place ourselves in danger of attack and harassment outside the hospital, injury due to the unsuitable nature of the clothes we wear, and poorer communication with those under our care. In modern day midwifery we are striving to be seen as independent practitioners as we shoulder more responsibility (Department of Health, 1993). I feel the abandonment of uniform would be a step towards the recognition we deserve and define the unique role of the midwife. 