<heading>Introduction. </heading>This essay critically reviews tourism theory by examining and analysing my own travel experiences and aspirations. The assignment addresses tourist typologies, motivations for travel, tourist identity and travel as a sacred experience since these are arguably the most relevant to the travel autobiography. Extracts from the autobiography are used as supporting evidence and as a result of this assessment of tourist behaviour issues, the implications for tourism management are discussed, bearing in mind the limitations of theoretical models. <heading>Issues, analysis and implications. </heading><heading>Tourist typologies:</heading>Since Cohen in 1972, many authors have proposed tourist typologies in order to better understand the motivations and behaviour of tourists, ranging from the most basic distinctions (institutionalised or non-institutionalised) to post-modernist analyses. Each model draws on and attempts to better previous studies, and while they are all useful for identifying general trends, there are significant flaws in them which limit their usefulness. Cohen's 1972 work makes the basic distinction between institutionalised and non-institutionalised tourists, and further, the organised mass, individual mass, explorer and drifter tourists. He is supported by other authors (who further explore each category and sub-divide them) and also by sections of my travel autobiography. There are certainly areas of Cohen's analysis which parallel my experiences in a broad sense: The explorer "arranges his trip alone; he tries to get off the beaten track as much as possible, but he nevertheless looks for comfortable accommodations and reliable means of transportation. He tries to associate with the people he visits and to speak their language. The explorer dares to leave his 'environmental bubble'..." (1972: 168) [See also: Travel autobiography, p.14]. However, problems arise given that Cohen's definitions of a drifter can also be applied to significant parts of my journey: <quote>"He tries to live the way the way the people he visits live, and to share their shelter, foods and habits... The drifter has no fixed itinerary or timetable...he is almost wholly immersed in his host culture" (1972: 168) "The drifter...often becomes both physically and emotionally involved in the lives of members of the host society." (1972: 178) [See also: Travel autobiography, p.15]</quote>Cohen's first attempt is therefore too simplistic to cope with the ever-changing nature of the tourist. Cole (2000: 78) identifies "merging of tourist types" and problems trying to fit tourists neatly into traditional tourist typologies. Cohen himself, in his 1979 work where he identifies recreational, diversionary, experiential, experimental and existential tourism experiences, admits "Any individual tourist may experience several modes on a single trip; a change from one mode to another may also occur in the 'touristic biography' of any individual traveller" (Cohen, 1979: 103). This movement back and forth between modes is clear in my autobiography. My early travel experiences [1986-1996] would be categorised as recreational or diversionary and myself as an institutionalised tourist, but the experience of living and working with a host family in Argentina, or living, studying and working in Spain for a year would be classified as non-institutionalised experimental or existential experiences. For that reason, Cole (2000) proposes a re-examination of tourist typologies for the post-modern age. She maintains that a variety of factors affect tourists' motivations and behaviour, and all must be taken into account when classifying tourists, including their "levels of knowledge, their experiences and sources of information" (2000: 71). However, it is Cohen's 1979 work which relates best to my experiences, particularly his comments on 'elective' spiritual centres: <quote>"There are many people...who...will not be able or willing to move permanently to their 'elective' centre, but will live in two worlds: the world of their everyday life...and the world of their 'elective' centre, to which they will depart on periodic pilgrimages to derive spiritual sustenance." (Cohen, 1979: 101)</quote>Looking at my experience, that analysis certainly seems to be accurate. Travel to and around Argentina had a profound impact on me, and upon my return, Britain "didn't quite feel like home anymore. I had felt so at home in Argentina, and so comfortable travelling alone for those months, that even back in Britain I felt a kind of 'homesickness'". [See also: Travel autobiography, p.18]. As one of my Argentine friends commented, "you're English by birth, but Argentine in your heart". <fnote>Extract from account of gap year, originally requested by Kent County Council and Gap Activity Projects. </fnote>Despite the criticisms which can be made of them, the accuracy of Cohen's assessment of a very personal element of a post-modern style trip suggests that typologies can provide a useful, basic framework for the analysis of tourists. <heading>Tourist motivations:</heading>Although typologies can be useful in order to predict what a particular tourist might do, it is perhaps more important to ask why they would act in that way. However, this is a particularly complex issue. Often there are 'push factors' which stimulate desire for travel [See Travel autobiography, p.9], but there has been considerable debate as to whether tourists are 'pulled in' by novel and authentic experiences, or are more drawn to familiarity and/or staged attractions. While on one hand, the likes of MacCannell argue that tourists desire authenticity, others (Boorstin, 1971; Finlayson, 1991, in McIntosh, 2004; Kotler et al, 1993, in Hall, 1997) suggest that tourists prefer experiences which meet their expectations, regardless of authenticity. I ended up visiting a number of World Heritage sites, suggesting that I followed a well-worn tourist trail, as Dann would say, being a "chaser of images" (1996: 83), but the idea of rejecting familiarity is emphasised several times in the autobiography: <quote>"as far as familiarity was concerned, it was something that I wanted to avoid. Spain seemed too close to home to make the effort of organising the trip worthwhile..." (Travel autobiography, p.10)</quote>I wasn't looking for 'repeatable and factitious' events as Boorstin would have it. I wanted to avoid "the more or less disinterested, 'sheep-like' tourists that followed their flock from one Lonely Planet recommended site to another" (Cole: 77), but in reality, though recommendations came from local people instead of Lonely Planet, the sites visited were more-or-less the same. It would seem then that motivations are important in terms of knowing how to market a destination or activity to a particular group of people, but the distinction between 'authenticity seekers' and 'image chasers' is not so clear cut. Tourists "like pilgrims searching for the authentic" and others "driven by childlike and hedonistic motives" (Selwyn, 1994, in Dann, 1996: 105) probably visit some of the same destinations, and an individual's motivations may change from one day to the next. In Buenos Aires, for example, at times I was willing to accept my tourist status and all the superficial experiences which that brought, while at other times spending time with local people in their own, authentic environment was the priority [See also: Travel autobiography, p.16-17]. Travelling around Argentina, access to 'back regions' (MacCannell, 1973) was not expected, but in the two cities which I began to feel were 'homes away from home' it was a satisfying privilege "to see behind the others' mere performances, to perceive and accept the others for what they really are" (MacCannell, 1973: 592). Living with Argentine's in their homes gave me that opportunity and it is certainly something I would seek to gain from future travel. <heading>Tourist identity and development:</heading>The search for authenticity is related at least in part to the self-image of travellers. Many people would like to think of themselves as Boorstin's traditional traveller who craved the authentic. Tourism marketers appeal to the side of our personality where we would all rather be intrepid travellers than admit that we are just another tourist, often protected from the reality of the destination and its people. We often remain in 'front regions' (MacCannell, 1973) and inside our 'environmental bubble' (Cohen, 1972: 166), despite desiring a unique, genuine, perhaps life-changing experience. As we gain greater touristic understanding, travel is increasingly used to generate a specific identity (MacCannell, 1973: 602). Teas (1988, in Dann, 1996: 112) proposes that the main reason 'Western wanderers' "take to the road in foreign parts is a desire to exercise control over their own lives. They wish to break out of the constraining authority structures of the home, school, and workplace, and fashion their own destiny." The travel autobiography certainly supports this view (p.9 & 11), demonstrating that I wanted to use travel to become a certain kind of person, while also escaping from the negative elements of life back home: "I was determined to be a person who could say "been there, done that" instead of "I wish..." and "If only...". ...not to have travelled...would have been a terrible waste of an opportunity." Having already built up 'cultural capital' (Desforges, 2000: 928) or a 'stock of knowledge' (Schutz, 1972, in Selby, 2004: 150) through previous tourism experiences, travel offered a natural way of further developing and asserting my personal identity. More than that, given the history of travel in the family [See travel autobiography, p.2 & 9], it offered a chance to emulate past achievements, live up to self-imposed expectations and consolidate my identity within the group. Desforges in particular demonstrates the importance of travel in identity construction. Several of the examples he cites show tendencies remarkably similar to those expressed in my autobiography, demonstrating post-modern tourists' huge appetite for self-development through new experiences. 'Jenny' in Desforges (2000: 936-7) explains "There's too much to do to settle down... There's so much of the world to see and so many things to do." Similarly, "now when I can't travel due to financial or time constraints I suffer from 'itchy feet'" (Travel autobiography, p.2) and "it had dawned on me, that while it may be comfortable and easy, it would also be a tremendous waste to remain in one place, to stay around the people I had always known, to only see a small fraction of it all." <fnote>Extract from account of gap year, originally requested by Kent County Council and Gap Activity Projects. </fnote>Post-modernist motivations such as these are closely related to the search for an ideal identity which we aspire to have and be recognised as having. Travel is recognised as being a powerful tool in any process of re-imaging, and a person's self-image and identity related aspirations have a significant influence on travel behaviour. Whether in terms of deciding to travel in the first place, or related to the mode of travel, travel has become an important aspect of personal development for many people. <heading>Sacred vs. profane; ordinary vs. non-ordinary:</heading>If we accept that travel can be a life-changing or identity-constructing experience, it is not unreasonable to consider it sacred, as opposed to our otherwise ordinary lives. "The rewards of modern tourism are phrased in terms of values we now hold up for worship: mental and physical health, social status, and diverse, exotic experiences" (Graburn, 1983: 28). Gap year travel is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity producing, at least potentially, all those benefits. The extended length of travel perhaps allows for a deeper, more spiritual experience, and classifying it as a rite-of-passage, or even as post-modern pilgrimage, is wholly justifiable. Specific experiences may be almost spiritual in nature and can massively influence a person's choices in later life. Whether it be that an individual sees something that profoundly affects them (e.g. abject poverty in shanty towns on the outskirts of large Argentine cities) or accomplishes something they never thought possible, or simply enjoys the travelling experience, the post-trip effects of tourism can be significant. The tourist can return home a very different person from the one who went away, new directions can be taken and new interests explored. We are, in the words of Graburn (1983: 27), 'recreated' "and, if we do not feel renewed, the whole point of tourism has been missed." This also reinforces the links between ordinary and non-ordinary life. As Jafari (1987) highlights, the two are interdependent; the experiences in one directly impact on our lives in the other. 'Ordinary factors', for example in my case education, upbringing, and my interest in all things foreign, influence our decision to travel, choice of destination and mode of travel. Similarly, influences from 'non-ordinary' life have affected not only my future travel aspirations [See travel autobiography, p.17-20], but also social relationships, free-time activities, education and employment. In fact, in my case, the post-trip effects have arguably been the most profound. Shorter tourism experiences are equally analogous to sacred ritual. Many people make a holiday an annual event, a time of ritualistic relaxation and escape from ordinary life, and an opportunity to spend 'quality time' as a family [See travel autobiography, p.3]. Furthermore, travel experiences are used as rites of passage. Particular trips mark special events [See travel autobiography, p.5] and a change in travel habits may mark a change in family dynamics (e.g. newly independent children choosing not to go away with their family). It would seem then, that the use of words such as 'pilgrimage', 'sacred' and 'ritual' is justifiable for many tourism experiences. It is worth considering, given some evidence in the travel autobiography, the possibility of a non-ordinary experience becoming ordinary; on occasion, the sacred might become the profane: <quote>"I was accepted as part of a host family and spent most of my time living as just another member of the family, considering the city my home and socialising with new friends. Using my placement town as a base I travelled in the north of Argentina and once across to Chile..." (Travel autobiography, p.15)</quote>Having stayed in one place, with a host family and a job, for several months, it could be argued that the original novel and 'sacred' experience became routine and the trips away from my 'new home' represented the new non-ordinary experience. If the length of stay is long enough to allow the tourist, Cohen's drifter for example, to be accepted fully into host society and gain access to 'back regions' as described by MacCannell, there may be a point at which the visitor becomes fully integrated and novelty gradually gives way to familiarity until a new source of novelty must be sought. Cohen (1979) touches on the subject with his assessment of 'pluralists' who develop more than one 'spiritual centre', but the implications of such a multi-layered scenario have yet to be fully explored. <heading>Conclusions. </heading>Tourism is a business dealing in people and experiences and in order that tourists might be sensitively managed, they must be studied. Although it is clearly impossible to determine each individual's motivations or predict outcomes of their travel, theory is useful for identifying general trends. Despite its brevity, this project demonstrates the complexities of tourist behaviour. More issues influence behaviour than those discussed here, but dealing with them in any detail would require many more pages. However, despite the personal nature of some of the experiences, this introduction to tourist behaviour theory suggests that academics' analysis has often been accurate. Some papers are perhaps more limited in their usefulness (e.g. Cohen, 1972) or contain some questionable ideas (e.g. Boorstin, 1971), but such works still add to the knowledge-base on tourist behaviour and assist the industry in marketing their products to particular groups. The essay highlights the weakness of theory that, whether concerned with motivations, experience or identity, it does not take a holistic view of an individual's tourism experience. An individual who is denied access to 'back areas' may later, having won the confidence of the hosts, gain access. A 'mass tourist' may on another occasion be Cohen's explorer or even a drifter. As MacCannell, p.602 highlights, a traveller evolves and may cross from one category to another. Even within one trip a traveller may change. Although few authors make specific reference to this issue, Cole (2000: 76) summarises it well: <quote>"Clearly situational factors will not only determine a tourist's role on different trips as Mo et al (1993) pointed out, but these can change from one day to another."</quote>Seaton (2002: 313) explains, "the modern researcher must constantly be aware of the temporal specificity of the data". Tourists are dynamic individuals with ever changing perceptions, desires, motivations and needs. Tourism theory only functions as a snapshot of one person for one short moment, and a more local, personal view of the individual is needed to fully understand their motivations, desires, expectations and needs. Furthermore, managing tourism products is to manage 'sacred' products. Tourists do not buy, consume and forget as with other consumers and products. Instead, there are lasting impacts. Given the 'spiritual' element, and the significant risks involved, a poor experience will likely have deeper consequences than a faulty product from another industry, hence it is especially important that tourists' expectations are met. Theory combined with real-life experience from travel biographies may help achieve this. 