<heading>Introduction</heading>This project aims to identify the trends that have been observed, and the challenges which have been faced in the destinations sector, in the cities sub-sector and in the City of Buenos Aires, so as to be able to make considered and justifiable comments on what the immediate future might hold for the city. The timescale examined is December 2001 to February 2003, i.e. the last fifteen full months prior to my starting the research. These months were a time of radical social, political and economic change in Argentina, and as the seat of government and national and international financial institutions, Buenos Aires has been hugely affected. With the process of stabilisation underway, now is both an interesting and appropriate time to study and evaluate tourism in the City of Buenos Aires. <heading>Trends and challenges in the destinations sector, city destinations sub-sector and Buenos Aires. </heading>Tourism destinations all around the world had a difficult year in 2002. While all regions except South America enjoyed some positive growth (WTO, 27/01/2003), the effects of September 11 th 2001 and the War on Terrorism were still being felt and the downturn in the global economy added to problems. However, there continued to be development of some largely unexploited areas including rural, ecological and event based tourism (e.g. incentives such as free entry to cultural attractions - on production of a foreign passport - during the 2002 World Cup in Japan/South Korea.) The developing trend of destinations investing in cultural tourism based on heritage, the arts and multiculturalism also continued. Looking at regional trends more relevant to Buenos Aires, according to WTO, in South America all countries except Columbia suffered falls in international tourist arrivals in 2002, caused largely by instability triggered by serious economic crises throughout the region. However, there were signs of recovery towards the end of that year and into the early part of 2003, with a stabilisation and decline in indices measuring economic instability: <enote>The Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBI) is a widely used index in Latin America to illustrate to potential investors the economic health of a nation. Known as the 'Riesgo País' ('Country Risk') in those Latin American countries where it is used, the higher the value, the higher the associated risk when investing in that nation, hence the unhealthier the economy. </enote><figure/>As local economies began to recover (shown by Brazil's EMBI returning to very near its December 2001 level and Argentina's settling, albeit at around double the December 2001 figure), destinations began to see the benefits of renewed stability: <figure/>The December 2002 peak in tourist arrivals in Buenos Aires matches perfectly with a period of sustained stability in the economy, and the July peak correlates with the high-point of the EMBI index. Although this indicates an unstable economy, it follows only a few weeks after the exchange rate of the Argentine peso against the dollar peaked at $3.90ARS:$1US, hence making it the cheapest time for foreigners to visit the country. Paradoxically, the start of Brazil's economic instability in June 2002 matches the low-point in visitors to Rio de Janeiro, due to three major factors: Such instability generally raises doubts about travel (e.g. accessing funds); There was no great fluctuation in exchange rates as in Argentina to help attract foreign visitors; Buenos Aires had just become vastly cheaper than before, so likely took a share of Rio's potential visitors. Therefore, one of the major challenges faced by destinations in Latin America was the poor state of the regional economy and the uncertainties which that brought. With the downturn in the global economy, the prospect (then reality) of war with Iraq, the SARS outbreak, all resulting in less willingness to travel from major tourism generating nations, planning for the future became a real issue for destinations around the world. In Latin America, as in other regions, negative media coverage (such as the scenes of looting and rioting in Buenos Aires in December 2001, the general strike in Venezuela, and the initial doubt surrounding the viability of some policies of Brazil's new President Lula) had to be overcome to prove themselves as safe destinations. <figure/>Cities are increasingly viewed as products, and so image-promotion has become ever more important. Assuring travellers of a destination's security, especially cities', became a major issue over the past fifteen months given the 'cautious attitude' of tourists and their tendency to stay closer to home (Mintel, December 2001). Aggressive marketing campaigns were launched by many city destinations, often focussed on the domestic market. London's recent £4m project launched on 23 rd April 2003 and advertisements run in the Argentine national press for Buenos Aires are just two examples among many. <enote>Translation of advertisement: "Buenos Aires within everyone's reach." Promotion: 7 days and 6 nights in hotels of 1-4 stars (with breakfast and taxes included) Total price from ARS$100 per person (approx. £22) Weekly tariff based on a double room for Argentine residents. Offer valid until 31-3-2003 (Secretariat of Tourism and Sport) </enote>Cities have sought to use tourism as a catalyst for urban regeneration/development (e.g. London Docklands Museum, opened 2003; Samba City, Rio de Janeiro (nine month project constructing shopping, dining and performance areas); expansion of Buenos Aires' already renovated Puerto Madero (restaurants, bars, TIC), plans released March 2003) often using the areas for cultural attractions - museums, theatres, arts centres etc. Such initiatives can help to stimulate interest in a city counter-balancing the many challenges they have faced recently. However, trends in the city of Buenos Aires since December 2001 have gone against those seen elsewhere due to the effects of Argentina's unique crisis. The chaos in the national economy has had two major effects: Business tourism to the city has fallen massively since the peso's devaluation; Devaluation has meant that the city, once the most expensive in South America, is now much more affordable for foreigners. In fact, "the tourists kept at bay by [2001's] social unrest have started flooding back...after a 70% devaluation of the Peso" (CNN, 10/03/2003), evidenced by the huge surge in arrivals to the city in July 2002 (564,060 arrivals, 50% international - see graph on following page), due to a combination of bargain prices and summer holidays in the northern-hemisphere major tourism generating countries. To cope with demand, there was, and continues to be, a flurry of construction of new hotels (4 and 5 stars), and the number of youth hostels has tripled with bed numbers rising from 1000 to 3000 and expected to reach 4000 in the near future. (National Secretariat of Tourism and Sport). Due to devaluation, Buenos Aires became far too expensive for Argentines (hence the cheap breaks offered only to Argentine nationals to stimulate domestic travel to the capital), but paradoxically dropped from 23 rd to 135 th in a list of the world's most expensive cities between 2001 and 2002. Accordingly, tourist numbers have risen almost as fast as the peso has fallen (Telegraph, 15/03/2003). The largest increases came from neighbouring countries, particularly Chile, benefiting from the high-quality-low-price shopping which according to CEDEM (Buenos Aires Centre for the Study of Metropolitan Economic Development), became the primary reason for visits to Buenos Aires in 2002/3. Summer (December-February) 2002/03 broke all records as the peso began to stabilise, promotion paid off, confidence was restored and visitors from neighbouring countries continued to enjoy the benefit of favourable exchange rates: <figure/>However, it was not all good news during the last 15 months. Overcoming negative perceptions of Buenos Aires became a real challenge after the 19 th December 2001 rioting and looting shown on news programs around the world, followed by the debacle of five Presidents in ten days in January 2002. There were genuine security issues to be addressed, leading the British Foreign & Commonwealth Office, for example, to advise against all but essential visits and requesting all British Nationals in the country to register with the Consulate. As a December 2001 Mintel report highlighted, "television is a powerful medium for changing and shaping the perceptions of its viewers". Essentially, there was a sense of uncertainty and insecurity which doubtless discouraged many foreigners from visiting, despite attractive exchange rates. Prices in Buenos Aires rose as the peso fell in value and Argentine nationals suffered banking restrictions imposed by the national Government in an effort to curb spending, a situation known as the 'corralito'. Those measures were successful, but effectively prevented any but the wealthiest Argentine visiting the city. <heading>Analysis of the future for Buenos Aires. </heading>The economic outlook for Argentina improved slightly in late 2002 and early 2003 with the peso falling to its lowest rate against the US dollar since April 2002, and with that economic stability came a renewed willingness to travel to Buenos Aires by tourists from the major generating countries of Europe and North America. In response to this opportunity, Daniel Scioli, Argentine Minister of Tourism, declared in early 2003 that tourism in Buenos Aires has been put "top of the agenda" in order to aid flow of currency, international investment, employment and recovery from the crisis. Seeing tourism as having a major role in the city, the Government of Buenos Aires, hoteliers' associations and the national Government have begun developing a solid strategy integrating tourism with urban planning and economic recuperation. The city's authorities have been collecting statistical data since November 2001 and analysing strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats in order to develop their tourism industry, and have so far responded well to the challenges they have been presented with. <enote>The Sub-secretariat of Tourism of Buenos Aires City Government was awarded first prize in the Official Organisations (Domestic) section of the Argentine International Tourism Fair 2003, based on its success in 2002. </enote>Since the disturbances of December 2001, the city has concentrated on improving its image overseas, taking part in tourism fairs around the world and focussing on its cultural offering, particularly tango. This sensible strategy and marketing campaign, allied with the support of the national government and the attraction of a high-quality-low-cost long-haul destination for visitors from Europe and North America and the boom in domestic tourism in summer 2002/3, means that the outlook is very positive. The economy continues to settle, investment in the tourism industry remains an attractive prospect for foreign companies already with interests in the city (evidenced by Sheraton's announcement in February 2003 that it will spend US$2million renovating and redesigning its Buenos Aires hotel), and state funding continues, all of which seems set to lead to a period of steady growth. However, the visitor numbers seen in summer 2002/03 are unlikely to be sustainable. The opening of the 'corralito' on 2 nd December 2002 meant that Argentines once again had access to their money and could travel in their forthcoming summer break, though exchange rates prohibited overseas trips. The summer, therefore, saw more domestic tourism and as the economy stabilised, the period benefited from pent up demand from those overseas who had put off their visit when the crisis was at its height. Such a boom will not likely be repeated. The city's low prices will continue to attract tourists from Europe and North America, although the cost of flights to Buenos Aires from those areas may prove a negative factor - Buenos Aires is cheap, but it remains fairly expensive to get there in the first place. Business tourism suffered more than any other kind due to the crisis and does not seems set to recover its 2001 levels for some time. It is only leisure based tourism and VFR that is buoyant. Promotional campaigns at home and abroad should help to increase leisure based tourism. The single largest potential problem for the city is the national elections in April/May 2003. Carlos Menem is one of the frontrunners although he is largely blamed for the 2001/02 crisis due to economic austerity measures implemented during his previous two terms as President (1989-1999). Should he return to office, such is the resentment towards him in certain areas, there is a real chance of social unrest which could again cause the EMBI index and the peso to falter, discouraging foreign investment and visitors. Argentine politics does have a reputation of being somewhat volatile, something which would not help the tourist industry in the capital. With the current President only heading an interim government and not running for re-election, the comfortable situation which Buenos Aires finds itself in now could dramatically change. There is, for example, the chance that the new government might not continue investing in tourism in the city at the levels which have so helped over recent months. In general though, given the increases in tourism seen since December 2001, I believe in the short term the low-value peso will continue to fuel rapid growth, and the City of Buenos Aires will certainly be the prime recipient of visitors to Argentina. In terms of its life cycle as a tourist destination (Butler, 1980; cited by Cooper et al, 1998:114), the city is definitely enjoying rejuvenation. Throughout the majority of 2003 I expect the number of visitors to the city to be significantly above 2002 levels, partially due to domestic tourism but more significantly because visitors from abroad have few security issues to worry about. Summer 2003/04 may see a slight reduction in visitor numbers compared with 2002/03 since the pent up demand for travel to Buenos Aires will no longer exist, though Buenos Aires will always see an increase in the summer due to the large movement of people domestically and regionally at that time. Barring a repeat of the violent demonstrations of December 2001, tourism in Buenos Aires in the immediate future should continue to prosper. 