Scenes of violence are relatively common in film, and contemporary Latin American cinema is no exception. However, the type and grade of violence, and the context in which it is portrayed, differ significantly from one film to the next. It is therefore useful - and arguably necessary - to examine each expression of violence on its own merits and in the context of the film in order to really understand what purpose it serves. Several questions stand out as central to this analysis: What manifestations of violence are shown? How is it used by directors/writers? What effect does the violence have on the viewer? How does it contribute to our understanding of the film's story and characters? How, if at all, does the portrayal of violence in contemporary cinema reflect the realities of modern Latin American society? What societal values/views do the films expose regarding violence? These are the questions which this essay will deal with, using as case studies three critically acclaimed films from recent years: <list>Abril Despedaçado [Behind the Sun] (Brazil, 2001), Walter Salles; Amores Perros [Love's a Bitch] (Mexico, 2000), Alejandro González Iñárritu;Cidade de Deus [City of God] (Brazil, 2002), Fernando Meirelles.</list>While the three films all contain violence, the degree, type and context vary considerably, allowing a good general overview of the related issues and the questions outlined above. Although violence is a key part of each of the stories told in the three films, it is not in itself the main focus; all three films are primarily the stories of people, their experiences and their relationships, allowing us a view of society's reaction to the violence. Even within just these three films, there is a staggering array of violence in terms of perpetrator, victim and type of aggression: Inter-family and inter-gang feuds (Abril Despedaçado, Cidade de Deus), domestic abuse (Amores Perros), animal and human suffering (including women and children), horrific bloodlust (Cidade de Deus), controlled - yet no less vicious - assault (El Chivo in Amores Perros) compared with crazed brutality (Zé Pequeno in Cidade de Deus), the idea of honourable death (Abril Despedaçado) or justified violence (Octavio in Amores Perros), and the habituation of violence (all three films). The role of violence in the three films therefore changes depending on who is the perpetrator and who is the victim, but in all cases it is there to make the audience think about the characters in greater depth, beyond the simplicity of 'good guy' or 'bad guy'. Characters who we are inclined to sympathise with commit similar acts of violence as those who we are less fond of (e.g. Octavio in Amores Perros stabbing Jarocho, or asking El Gordo to organise the beating of his brother), yet their actions are somehow more defensible because we understand more about their circumstances and their feelings. The reasons for the behaviour become more important than the behaviour itself, and thus excuse it, at least to some degree. Violence in each of these films is used as a tool to help communicate the beliefs and values of all key characters, rather than as a stigma to attach solely to the less likeable protagonists. Indeed, despite the obvious negative consequences of resorting to violence, the three films repeatedly present aggression as part of a code of honour, a way of gaining respect, as necessary 'street justice' where there is no other real authority. In Abril Despedaçado, the killings highlight the importance of family honour to each of the fathers; in Amores Perros, violence allows us to observe Octavio's and El Chivo's sense of moral justice; in Cidade de Deus Bené's death sparks a violent search for justice of a kind. In each case, the characters prolong the cycle of violence, but see their actions as legitimate in the circumstances. This portrayal, which only to a limited extent excuses some of the violence, suggests a criticism of society in communities (such as Mexico City and Rio de Janeiro where two of the three the films are set) where violence has to some degree become an omnipresent and accepted part of everyday life. By embroiling likable or vulnerable characters (especially Tonio and Pacu in Abril Despedaçado, Octavio in Amores Perros, Buscapé and Angélica in Cidade de Deus) in the cycle of violence, the films shatter any comfortable, rose-tinted notions of society and question our tolerance and ignorance of injustices. Given that several victims suffer in situations not of their own making (principally those mentioned above plus Valeria in the second part of Amores Perros, but it is also worth considering others who's stories are untold, for example the innocent child of Susana and Ramiro [Amores Perros, first part], or the widow of the man shot in the restaurant by El Chivo [Amores Perros, third part]), the films highlight the largely arbitrary nature of violence in the featured Latin American societies and force the cinemagoer to confront the reality that the violence in their communities affects everyone, male and female, old and young, poor and middle class. Hence, while a kind of measured violence represents justice for some characters, for others there is no justice at all. Even for those of us who watch these films but are not part of the societies they present, the boundaries between the acceptable and the unacceptable become more indistinct and in this way the films ask the viewer to reassess their own values. The portrayal of violence in Abril Despedaçado, Amores Perros and Cidade de Deus can then be interpreted as not only a tool for examining and understanding the identity of characters, but also as a catalyst for self-reflection. Through an understanding of how the violence in each film exposes the beliefs and values of the characters and how it moulds them as the stories progress, issues are raised regarding the legitimacy - or not - of violence in certain situations, the morality and sense of social justice of the individual and of the importance placed on honour and justice in Latin America. This goes well beyond simplistic notions of right or wrong actions and into an examination of tolerable/justifiable evil in the pursuit of a greater good. i.e. the power of the dealers in Cidade de Deus, gained through violence and regimes of fear, but - for a time at least - providing security for residents and comparatively prosperous economies; or for example, in Amores Perros, would Octavio organising the assault of Ramiro have been further justified if it had facilitated Susana (and the child) escaping the abusive relationship? The violence in these films therefore has a certain introspective, didactic function; the films invite an analysis of the societies where this violence takes place (whether the violence be entirely fictional [Amores Perros], or based on real events [Cidade de Deus]). As such, it provides a catalyst for the discussion or at the very least consideration of related social issues such as poverty, social isolation, machismo, the role of women, disaffected youth or the absence of authority figures or institutions - issues which are usually all too easy ignored. We grow to like characters like Pacu & Tonio (Abril Despedaçado), Octavio (Amores Perros), Buscapé (Cidade de Deus) and even contract killer El Chivo (Amores Perros) and benefit from a deeper understanding of their history, their current situation, their thoughts and motivations. Often this understanding comes through observing and learning from their experiences of violence. In none of these films is the depiction of violence wanton or uncalculated. Instead, it performs a specific role for the writer and/or director, either introducing a character, evolving that character, or putting events in a meaningful context. The violence itself is not the story, but the background to it; the explanation of who characters are, why they act the way they do and why events occur as they do. For example, in Abril Despedaçado generations of violence have conditioned every aspect of the family's existence and even when Tonio leaves, the reason is as much to reject the violence as to follow Clara. The story though, is one of family honour and asserting one's identity. Similarly, in Amores Perros, Octavio's upbringing in a family where his brother is violent is the central influence on the vast majority of subsequent decisions he makes, but the violence is there to add realism and depth, not simply for the sake of voyeuristic sensationalism. Although at a first viewing some of the violence in Cidade de Deus may seem unnecessary, it is important to acknowledge that the vast majority of it feeds directly into our understanding - albeit limited - of 'favela justice' and of the personal growth of Dadinho/Zé Pequeno and Buscapé. It is their story, not one of glorified bloodshed, and the omnipresent backdrop of violence demonstrates a certain logic behind their decisions and helps us understand them in a way which would otherwise be impossible. We still may not agree with them, but at least we can begin to understand their motivations. In conclusion then, in contrast to some blockbuster films which could be argued to gratuitously use scenes of violence for sensationalist purposes, these three Latin American films highlight, with very different representations of violence, a common trend: that of using depictions of violence not to dehumanise the victims or the aggressor, but rather to humanise all the characters. Likable characters are the victims and the perpetrators of violence. As such, the films present credible situations which engage the viewer and encourage a critical analysis (from outside and from within) of the societies which have produced these cyclical and self destructive manifestations of violence. 