Nocturnal primates of the family Galagidae have recently been under great taxonomic revision due to new discoveries concerning their behavior and morphology. New species are appearing at such a rapid rate that the important process of scientifically identifying and naming species has been put on the backburner. Effective conservation work is dependent on an updated taxonomy in order to acknowledge the width of the biodiversity one is trying to save (Grubbal. 2003; Groves, 2001). The proposed investigation concerns a taxonomic study of one up to four as yet scientifically unnamed primates of the genus Galagoides and Sciurocheirus. The study's main objective will be to compile sufficient amounts of character data, i.e. behavioral, morphological and genetic data, to enable the endorsement of species status independent of species concept (see Groves, 2001, for overview) applied with the specific aim as to publicly name these species in accordance with the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN, 1999) regulations. The data collected will also create the body of a comprehensive database over the known information of the family Galagidae. The research will be carried out in several steps and with different methodologies appropriate for descriptions of new species (ICZN, 1999): An exhaustive literature study where previous descriptions of the target taxa will be researched. The information gathered will provide important background information vital for both the choice of scientific name and for the species description. Characters previously used as means for species description for nocturnal, cryptic species such as penile morphology, facial masks and vocal repertoire will be of special interest but general morphological, behavioral and distributional data will also be investigated. Localize museum specimens (if available) for each species to conduct morphological research. New specimens of primates rarely occur in museums due to export regulations for endangered species (Baillie, 2004), however, the presence of these newly discovered species often exist in museum collections under erroneous names (Bearder, pers. comm.) This means that valuable material is available for descriptive morphometric analysis and historical distribution. Comparative analysis of recent field data including vocal recordings, behavioral data, distribution, morphology and genetics (i.e. karyotyping). Special emphasis will be put on vocal analysis and karyotyping since these features have been shown to be highly significant as diagnostic tools for species specification within the Galagidae family (Bearderal. 1995; Masters, 1986). Vocal recordings and tissue samples from the targeted species are available for analysis (Bearder, pers. comm., 2005). <table/><heading>Funding agencies</heading><heading>Primate Action Fund</heading>Conservation International Awards of US$ 1000-5000 The principal objective of Conservation International's Primate Action Fund is to contribute to global biodiversity conservation by providing strategically targeted, catalytic support for the conservation of endangered nonhuman primates and their natural habitats. Information about application process is given by Dr Anthony Rylands at a.rylands@conservation.org <heading>ASP General Small Grant</heading>American Society of Primatologist Awards amounts range from US$ 500-1500 Grant proposals are invited for general research projects, with preference given to training initiatives, start-up funds, supplementary funding for students, and innovations in animal care and research technology. Information about application process is found on  URL  <heading>Awards for Graduate Student Research</heading>Society of Systematic Biologists Awards range between US$ 1000-5000 Systematics is interpreted broadly to include questions below and above the species level, molecular and morphological approaches, and issues of pattern and process. Funding is not limited to any particular aspect of research, but rather is available for field, museum/herbarium, and/or laboratory work. Information about application process is found on  URL  <heading>The Systematic Research Fund</heading>The Systematics Association and The Linnean Society of London Awards amounts up to a maximum of £ 1500 Provide small grants to support research in the field of systematics. Information about application process is found on  URL  <heading>Grants-in-Aid of Research</heading>The Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology Awards amounts up to a maximum of US$ 1000 The Grants-in-Aid of Research program was established by the SICB in 1996 to provide small awards to graduate students in support of their research in the fields of integrative and comparative biology. Information about application process is found on  URL  