<heading>1. Introduction</heading>Nocturnal primates of the family Galagidae have recently been under great taxonomic revision due to new discoveries concerning their behaviour and morphology (Groves 2001; Grubb et al., 2003). New species are appearing at such a rapid rate that the important process of scientifically identifying and naming species has been put on the backburner. Effective conservation work is dependent on an updated taxonomy in order to acknowledge the width of the biodiversity one is trying to save (Groves, 2001; Grubb et al., 2003). The proposed investigation concerns a taxonomic study of one up to four as yet scientifically unnamed primates of the genus Galagoides and Sciurocheirus. The study's main objective will be to compile sufficient amounts of character data, i.e. behavioral, biogeographical, morphological and genetic data, to enable the endorsement of species status independent of species concept applied (see Groves, 2001 for overview) with the specific aim as to publicly name these species in accordance with the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (IUZN, 1999) regulations. The data collected will create the body of a comprehensive database over the known information of the family Galagidae. Listed below are 50 sources of information that is relevant to my final project with the working title "The naming of new species within the genera Galagoides and Sciurocheirus". The sources are listed under subheadings (with number of sources in brackets next to it) inferring to their relevant area of importance for my project. The subheadings are arbitrarily set and do not set an absolute topic content to the source information. Many sources could, for example, fit under Material and Methods but has ended up under some section in Behavioural Ecology. Each source reference includes the author's affiliation, at publication date, and a short description of the sources content. For some sources, additional information is given as to its relevance to my study. Those sources lacking this information are by no means less important but the relevance of the source is assumed self-evident from the source description. Included as an appendix are further references, in many cases, of equal importance as the annotated, as well as a list of websites and possible and confirmed collaborators to the project. <heading>2. Theory and Methodology</heading><heading>2.1 Species concept and history (4)</heading><heading>Cracraft, J. (1983). Species concepts and speciation analysis. In Current ornithology , Vol. 1 (Ed, Johnston, R. F.) Plenum, New York, pp. 159-187.and Cracraft, J. (1997). Species concepts in systematics and conservation biology - an ornithological viewpoint. In Species : the units of biodiversity (Eds, Claridge, M. F., Dawah, H. A., Wilson, M. R. and Systematics Association.) Chapman & Hall, London, pp. 325-339. </heading>The author, a researcher at the American Museum of Natural History, introduce (1983) the species concept: Phylogenetic Species Concept (PSC), and elaborate on it (1997) e.g. on its role for conservation biology and in taxonomy. These are both seminal papers that introduce a new, and now, widely accepted species concept by means of theory, structure and use. PSC has been described as a pattern-based concept (in contrast to the Biological Species Concept and its alike in being process-based) and has been described by Groves (2004) "as nearly objective as we are likely to get" when it comes to describing taxonomy of extant species. PSC is defined as "the smallest cluster of individual organisms within which there is a parental pattern of ancestry and descent and that is diagnosably distinct from other such clusters by unique combination of character states". <heading>Heller, E. (1912). New races of insectivores, bats, and lemurs from British East Africa. Smithsonian miscellaneous collections, 60, 1-13.</heading>The author, a naturalist at the U.S. National Museum, describes the findings from the Smithsonian African Expedition in British East African in the years 1910-1911. This is the first description of one of the target species for my final project, Galagoides cf. cocos, here named Galago moholi cocos. General information on capture location is given; character description regarding pelage colour, texture and length; body and skeletal measurements and habitat description. It is described as an intermediate race between gallarum and nyas æof Nyasaland (Malawi). The six specimens collected during the expedition and used for this sub-species description was housed in the U.S. National Museum (The Smithsonian Institute). If these species are available still, they would be of most interest for my study. <heading>Paterson, H. E. H. (1985). The recognition concept of species. In Species and speciation , Transvaal Museum monograph ; no. 4 (Ed, Vrba, E. S.) Transvaal Museum, Pretoria, pp. 21-29. </heading>The author, researcher at the University of the Witwatersrand, provides his view of theoretical species concepts. The Biological Species Concept (= Isolation Concept) is criticized for its inconsistency in function and logic in contrast to the Recognition Concept of Species (= Specific-Mate Recognition System or SMRS). SMRS is the prevalent species concept that is used by researchers of galagos and indirect responsible for the recent upsurge in new found species. This seminal paper is a good source for the theoretical framework encompassing SMRS and contains vital information for any biologist and especially taxonomist. <heading>2.2 Material and Methods (2)</heading><heading>Graham, C. H., Ferrier, S., Huettman, F., Moritz, C. and Peterson, A. T. (2004). New developments in museum-based informatics and applications in biodiversity analysis. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 19, 497-503.</heading>The authors, researchers from different museums and universities in USA and Australia, seek to review the current state of availability and areas of use for natural history museum collections (NHCs). They describe the ever increasing availability of catalogues over NHCs on the web (Internet) and emphasise the vast amount of information that NHCs provide, to be utilised for such various purposes as to maximise outcomes of conservation and agriculture strategies. The information could also come in use in conjunction with other research areas such as ecology, physiology, and genetics. One particularly interesting suggestion for the use of NHCs is the analytical technique called generalised dissimilarity modelling (GDM). In short, this modelling tool can act to maximise the possibility of discovering new species within a region of interest. <heading>Maclarnon, A. (1999). The comparative method: principles and illustrations from primate socioecology. In Comparative primate socioecology (Ed, Lee, P. C.) Cambridge University Press, New York, pp. 5-22.</heading>The author, researcher at Roehampton University, presents an historic and theoretical background to scientific comparative methodology. The chapter provides useful understanding of the inherent power and importance of comparative methods in biological studies. <heading>2.3 New species (9)</heading><heading>Baker, R. J. (1984). A sympatric cryptic species of mammal - a new species of Rhogeessa (Chiroptera, Vespertilionidae). Systematic Zoology, 33, 178-183.</heading>The author, researcher at the Museum and Department of Biological Sciences, Texas, was conducting a genetic study on bats and came across differences in chromosomal make up revealing unknown taxa. It is stated that this new taxa, cryptic by nature, would not have been discovered had it not been for the conducted chromosomal analysis. This is a clear case study that shows on the difficulties in species description and what extra measures that is needed when one is dealing with a cryptic species. <heading>Dung, V. V., Giao, P. M., Chinh, N. N., Tuoc, D., Arctander, P. and Mackinnon, J. (1993). A new species of living bovid from Vietnam. Nature, 363, 443-445.</heading>The authors, researchers at the Ministry of Forestry and World Wildlife Fund, surveyed areas of rural Vietnam and came across remains of an unknown bovid species in hunters' houses. After additional skulls and skins were examined the researchers came to the conclusion that the remains belonged to, for science, a previously unknown species and possible new genus. They endorse it with the name Pseudoryx nghetinhensis. Further field studies are planned to observe a living specimen. This study provides a good example of how the use of morphology and genetics can suffice for extant species description when actual observations are limited (or absent, as in this case). Raising awareness about its presence is bound to have a positive effect on conservation efforts in the area. <heading>Grubb, P. and Powell, C. B. (1999). Discovery of red colobus monkeys (Procolobus badius ) in the Niger Delta with the description of a new and geographically isolated subspecies. Journal of Zoology, 248, 67-73.</heading>The authors, one taxonomist affiliated with Natural History Museum, London, and one researcher from the Rivers State University of Science and Technology, Nigeria, suggest the finding of a new subspecies of Procolobus badius on the basis of obtained skins and observational reports from areas not previously known to inhabit primate species of this kind. They present an exhaustive comparative intra-and interspecific description of the subspecies P. b. epieni with several P. b. ssp. based on data derived from skins and field observations. A careful description of P. b. epieni's distribution and habitat is also provided. This paper is as close to a template as I have come across for formal species (subspecies) description. <heading>Jones, T., Ehardt, C. L., Butynski, T. M., Davenport, T. R. B., Mpunga, N. E., Machaga, S. J. and De Luca, D. W. (2005). The highland mangabey Lophocebus kipunji : A new species of African monkey. Science, 308, 1161-1164.</heading>The authors, field researchers working in Tanzania, were conducting two independent surveys in remote mountain areas of Tanzania. Both research teams came across a new species of mangabey each that subsequently turned out to be two populations of the same new species, Lophocebus kipunji. The characters setting the new species aside from its (assumed) closest relatives L. albigena and L. atterimus are a few pelage features and two-three types of calls. The lack of data does not seem to affect these authors from denominate their findings of a new species, indicating on the importance of the character differences found. This further emphasise the gradual acceptance of vocal repertoire as an important species specific character. <heading>Niemitz, C., Nietsch, A., Warter, S. and Rumpler, Y. (1991). Tarsius dianae - a new primate species from Central Sulawesi (Indonesia). Folia Primatologica, 56, 105-116.</heading>The authors, researchers at Freie Universität Berlin and Université Louis-Pasteur, Strasbourg, analyse their field work to ascertain their suspicion of an encounter with a novel species. Character comparisons of the suggested new taxa are made with Tarsius spectrum, T. syrichta and T. bancanus (occasionally and inconsequently also T. pumilus). The results emphasise their suspicion and the new species, T. diane, is described. Niemitz et al., show of small, if any, pelage, soft anatomy and skeletal differences, however, not considered sufficient for species demarcation. Worth noting, about these comparisons, are that no statistical methods seem to have been applied to confirm their findings. Instead, the basis of their species description goes down to differences found in comparisons of karyotype and significant differences in vocal repertoire. A very interesting and novel (to me) suggestion of diagnostic tool for species description was put forward in the use intestinal parasites. I have not encountered that method in any species description made after this study was conducted, so its usefulness in this context is unknown. However, it is definitely an alley worth looking down into. <heading>Perkin, A., Bearder, S. K., Butynski, T. M., Agwanda, B. and Bytebier, B. (2002). The Taita mountain dwarf galago Galagoides sp: a new primate for Kenya. Journal of East African Natural History, 91, 1-13.</heading>The authors, researchers at Oxford Brookes University and National Museums of Kenya, conducted a survey in the Taita Hills in order to assess the taxonomic, biogeographical and conservation status of galagos. Species encountered was Otolemur garnetti lasiotis and a new Galagoides sp. It was established from observations of pelage colour and vocal recordings that the encountered Galagoides sp. indeed was a previously un-described species. The researcher's certainty on that point was mostly based on interspecific vocal repertoire comparisons. Suggestions are given to further studies on the species molecular data, morphology, vocalizations, behaviour and ecology to establish its taxonomic rank - a potential candidate for my study. <heading>Sinha, A., Datta, A., Madhusudan, M. D. and Mishra, C. (2005). Macaca munzala : A new species from western Arunachal Pradesh, northeastern India. International Journal of Primatology, 26, 977-989.</heading>The authors, researchers at Nature Conservation Foundation, Indian Institute of Science Campus and Wildlife Conservation Society, India, conducted two expeditions in the high altitude regions of Arunachal Pradesh, India, to survey the relatively unknown fauna of the area. The outcome of the faunal studies led to the discovery of a new species of primate: Macaca munzala. The basis for the author's taxonomic decision refers to differences in tail length, external morphology such as facial features and pelage colour. All feature characteristics are based on observational estimations which would make any interspecific comparisons (the basis for the establishment of new taxa) quite subjective. Further studies are, however, suggested to establish more knowledge of the species behavioural ecology, population genetics and conservation status. Strangely, it is implied that the authors consider capturing specimens to serve as paratypes (a photograph of a male is designated as holotype) before their conservation status is established. This study serves as an example of how different levels (amount of data) of evidence can serve as basis for species denomination (comparative, in some perspectives, with Jones et al., 2005). <heading>Thalmann, U. and Geissmann, T. (2000). Distribution and geographic variation in the western woolly lemur (Avahi occidentalis ) with description of a new species (A. unicolor ). International Journal of Primatology, 21, 915-941.</heading>The authors, researchers at Zurich University and Tierärzliche Hochschule Hannover, suggest taxonomic revision of the taxa Avahi from 2 to ≥3 taxon on the basis of data from their field research. One new species is described, Avahi unicolor. It differs quite distinctively in pelage pattern and coloration and inhabits a different geographic area than the other two species of Avahi. The holotype is set to a misnamed museum specimen of A. laniger. <heading>Zimmermann, E., Cepok, S., Rakotoarison, N., Zietemann, V. and Radespiel, U. (1998). Sympatric mouse lemurs in north-west Madagascar: A new rufous mouse lemur species (Microcebus ravelobensis). Folia Primatologica, 69, 106-114.</heading>The authors, researchers at Tierärzliche Hochschule Hannover, University of Munich and Parc botanique et zoologique de Tsimbazaza, describe a new species of mouse lemur Microcebus ravelobensis, discovered during field research in north-west Madagascar. The new species differ in several morphological characters from earlier described Microcebus taxon. This is an example of a new nocturnal primate species described solely on the basis of morphological characters, even though differences also were found in certain behavioural characters from its sympatric form. The study employs and describes statistical analyses of special interest for my study. <heading>2.4 Taxonomy (6)</heading><heading>Harcourt, C. S. and Bearder, S. K. (1989). A comparison of Galago moholi in South-Africa with Galago zanzibaricus in Kenya. International Journal of Primatology, 10, 35-45.</heading>The authors, researchers at University of Cambridge and Oxford Polytechnic, set out to clarify taxonomic discrepancies between Galago moholi and G. zanzibaricus on the basis of morphology, locomotion, calls, reproduction, diet, social organization and karyotypes. Though interspecific differences are established on all accounts the authors consider the use of calls as the most important feature. The pertinence of this feature as species denominator stems partly from the species concept promoted by the authors, The Recognition Species Concept, and partly because of its usefulness for cryptic species discrepancy in the field. <heading>Groves, C. P. (2001) Primate taxonomy, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington [D.C.].</heading>The author, researcher at the Australian National University, describes the theory of taxonomic procedures and then put it all into action by presenting a complete taxonomy over all extant primates. The book contains information on what taxonomy is; describes taxonomic ranking and nomenclature; present theoretical species concept and describe their implications for taxonomy; provides an introduction to the history of primate taxonomy and gives an explanation to the higher levels of primate taxonomic division. It contains the most current view of primate taxonomy and serves as a reliable starting point for any taxonomic work. <heading>Groves, C. (2004). The what, why and how of primate taxonomy. International Journal of Primatology, 25, 1105-1126.</heading>The author, researcher at the Australian National University, review the theoretical species concepts and phylogenetic mechanisms used in taxonomy in general and in primatology. This article brings up to speed the latest trends in taxonomy and is a very useful source for someone who wants a quick guide into species concepts and phylogenetic methodology. <heading>Grubb, P., Butynski, T. M., Oates, J. F., Bearder, S. K., Disotell, T. R., Groves, C. P. and Struhsaker, T. T. (2003). Assessment of the diversity of African primates. International Journal of Primatology, 24, 1301-1357.</heading>The authors, all leading researchers within primatology, produced this consensus primate taxonomy of species and subspecies at the Workshop of the IUCN/SSC Primate Specialist Group held at Orlando, Florida, in February 2000. This is the most recent (albeit not complete) primate taxonomy and it will serve as an encyclopaedic source of information. <heading>Masters, J. C. and Brothers, D. J. (2002). Lack of congruence between morphological and molecular data in reconstructing the phylogeny of the Galagonidae. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 117, 79-93.</heading>The authors, researchers at Natal Museum and University of Natal, South Africa, aimed to sort out the Galagidae current phylogenetical incongruence. Cladistic analyses based on morphological and molecular characters had been shown to differ quite markedly. By deriving new data on skull characters and combine those data with morphological and behavioural data from previous studies the authors hoped to the breach the two methods. The result was partially successful. If the out-group was Arctocebus and certain characters was weighted a congruence between the two cladograms was reached. <heading>Winston, J. E. (1999) Describing species: practical taxonomic procedure for biologists, Columbia University Press, New York.</heading>The author, director of research at Virginia Museum of Natural History, goes through all stages of species description in this very pertinent book. It is an invaluable source (and source provider) of information for taxonomic procedure. <heading>3. Behavioural ecology</heading><heading>3.1 Vision and Vocalization (6)</heading><heading>Ambrose, L. (2003). Three acoustic forms of Allen's galagos (Primates; Galagonidae) in the Central African region. Primates, 44, 25-39.</heading>The author, researcher at Oxford Brookes University, has collected field data on vocalization, morphology and biogeography from 10 sites in Central Africa in an attempt to sort out the taxonomic ambiguities of the species Galago alleni. Vocal data show three different acoustic forms and therefore indicates on three different species according to the Specific-Mate Recognition System (Paterson, 1985). The author emphasise galagos reliance on vocal and olfactory signals for kin recognition. Since the sample size is relatively small, the conclusions drawn from the morphological differences are set in correlation with local ecological differences. The study provides predicaments for the use of vocalization as species denominator. It is, however, unfortunate that other morphological characters, such as face masks (the paper contains excellent illustrations), are not given more space and weight in the study's final results and outcome. <heading>Bearder, S. K., Honess, P. E. and Ambrose, L. (1995). Species diversity among galagos with special reference to mate recognition. In Creatures of the dark: the nocturnal prosimians (Eds, Alterman, L., Doyle, G. A. and Izard, M. K.) Plenum Press, New York, pp. 331-352. </heading>The authors, researchers at Oxford Brookes University, has collected vocal recordings of 16 species of galago for which intra-and intercomparisons are made to demonstrate its usefulness and reliability as a tool for species recognition in the field. The results of its usefulness are quite convincing. On the basis of vocal analysis Bearder et al., discovered 5-6 potentially new species. No further action in regards of these new species taxonomy is made though further research of their genetics, anatomy and reproductive biology are considered necessary. This book chapter serves as strong advocate for certain types of vocalisation in its usefulness as species specific characterizer and as a powerful diagnostic tool in galago taxonomy. <heading>Bearder, S. K., Nekaris, K. A. I. and Curtis, D. J. (2005). A re-evaluation of the role of vision in the activity and communication of nocturnal primates. Unpublished manuscript, pp. 1-38.</heading>The authors, researchers at Oxford Brookes and Roehampton University, describe the role and evolutionary significance of vision for nocturnal primates. Deductions made from studies on wild populations of Galago moholi and Loris lydekkerianus stresses that vision can play a bigger role for nocturnal primates than previously thought. Suggestions is put forward that visual cues for inter- and intraspecific recognition from facial masks are used by these species. It is also suggested that some degree of colour vision is possessed. The study enters a new field of research for nocturnal primates and reviews vision's potential importance for these species. Of special interest for my study is the suggestion of individual recognition from facial masks. The indices that 'cryptic' species might use visual cues for intra-and inter individual recognition add another dimension to species description and potential differences that can be extracted and used as taxonomic characters from these features. <heading>Courtenay, D. O. and Bearder, S. K. (1989). The taxonomic status and distribution of bushbabies in Malawi with emphasis on the significance of vocalizations. International Journal of Primatology, 10, 17-34.</heading>The authors, researchers at Oxford Polytechninc, use data from a short term field study in combination with museum data to clear out taxonomic ambiguities of a galago species. Facts' relating to pelage colour, locomotor behaviour but foremost vocalization provides most vital character data for species recognition. The authors provide thorough descriptions on species morphology, geographic distribution and vocalization. Since the species described, Galago zanzibaricus, inhabits the region of at least one species under investigation for this project, Galagoides cf. cocos, information presented are of special interest. <heading>Zimmermann, E., Bearder, S. K., Doyle, G. A. and Andersson, A. B. (1988). Variations in vocal patterns of Senegal and South-African lesser bushbabies and their implications for taxonomic relationships. Folia Primatologica, 51, 87-105.</heading>The authors, researchers from Universities of Stuttgart-Hoheneim (Germany), Oxford, U.K.), and Witwatersrand (South Africa), have collected vocalisation data from Galago senegalensis sengalensis and G. s. moholi in order establish if, in fact, the suspicion of their status as separate species can be confirmed. The outcome of the study speaks in favour for an elevation of taxonomic rank to species and hence, is suggested by the authors. Interesting generalising findings from vocalisation analyses were: Vocalisations made in context with agonistic and alarm behaviour (described as noisy) are very similar between species. References are made to the generality of these calls in a cross-species context. Vocalisations made in association with contact or contact-seeking, defensive or alarm behaviour (described as tonal and harmonic) were very distinct species specific. <heading>Zimmermann, E., Vorobieva, E., Wrogemann, D. and Hafen, T. (2000). Use of vocal fingerprinting for specific discrimination of gray (Microcebus murinus) and rufous mouse lemurs (Microcebus rufus). International Journal of Primatology, 21, 837-852.</heading>The authors, researchers at Tierärztliche Hochschule Hannover, collected calls given in predator- and mating contexts from captive populations of two Microcebus species. According to Zimmermann et al.,'s interpretation of the Recognition Concept of Species (Paterson, 1985) they set out the hypothesis that calls made in mating context would be of more diagnostic value in specific identification than calls made in other social situations. The results confirmed the hypothesis. Beside the theoretical value to my study, this study also provided valuable suggestions to methodology and statistics to be used in analyses of vocalisations. <heading>3.2 Biogeography and Conservation (3)</heading><heading>Butynski, T. M. (2004). Primates on Mt. Kasigau, Kaya Rabai, and along the Tana River, Kenya: preparing for Red List Assessments and conservation action. Report. Conservation International, Nairobi, pp. 1-24.</heading>The author, researcher for Conservation International, aims to assess the primate diversity in the East Arc Mountains and Coastal Forsests of Tanzania and Kenya Biodiversity Hotspots. The final draft manuscript at hand concerns one of three questions related to this topic: "Confirmation of 'Galagoides cf. cocos' (Heller 1912) as the name for the 'Kenya Coast Galago'". G. cf. cocos type locality is in the Mazeras area, Kenya. Vocal recordings made at Diani, Kenya, 40 km from Mazeras, were indicating on G. cf. cocos presence in this area too. No vocal recordings ahd been made in the Mazeras, so in order to establish if the Diani galago was the same species, the author, accompanied by another researcher, set out on a short survey in the Mazeras region to record its vocalisation. Positive identification was made confirming the Mazeras galago to be the same species as the Diani galago, i.e. G. cf. cocos. With this fact in hand, the author further suggests that comparative studies on G. cf. cocos with its closest living taxa G. zanzibaricus are made, to formally assert the G. cf. cocos to species status. <heading>Nekaris, K. A. I. and Bearder, S. K. (2005). The Lorisiform primates of Asia and mainland Africa: diversity shrouded in darkness. Unpublished manuscript, pp. 1-42.</heading>The authors, researchers at Oxford Brookes University, aspire to show that the nocturnal Loriformes in Asia and Africa are a diverse group of primates with much more going for them than previously considered. The paper contains a very thorough review of what is known about taxonomy, distribution, phylogeny, ecology and behaviour, fully reaching up to the author's aspirations. It will be an important source of information for my study in all aspects mentioned above. If the information sought for is not detailed enough, the authors provide a very extensive reference list for more in depth research. <heading>Perkin, A. (2001). The taxonomic status and distribution of bushbabies (Primates, Galagidae) in the Uluguru Mountains. Report. Wildlife Conservation Society of Tanzania. Department of Anthropology, Oxford, pp. 1-20.</heading>The author, a researcher at Oxford Brookes University, was assessed as a consultant to collect information about three species of galago (Galagoides orinus, G. udzungwensis and Otolemur garnetti) in the Uluguru Mountain Forest, Tanzania. The findings confirmed a stable population of each species in the area and the author provided recommendations for future conservation efforts. The study confirmed to the validity of G. orinus as a species. This was made from direct morphological comparisons with G. udzungwensis, from characters such as face masks, pelage colour, and body size. But data on habitat preference, and especially vocal repertoire, played a major part in the confirmation. Even though the study was relatively short, lot of valuable information has emerged from it. Beside important data in forms of vocal recordings, biogeography and morphology, the author also managed to collect tissue samples for genetic analysis. <heading>3.3 Social and Feeding behaviour (5)</heading><heading>Bearder, S. K. (1999). Physical and social diversity among nocturnal primates: A new view based on long term research. Primates, 40, 267-282.</heading>The author, researcher at Oxford Brookes University, reviews the current knowledge of nocturnal primates, with special emphasis on Galagidae, taxonomy, social behaviour and social systems. Each topic is elaborated on in great detail summarising research efforts and put them in an evolutionary perspective. This paper really reaches its goal of "...leading to new perspectives on their [nocturnal primates] speciation, social behaviour, and conservation status". <heading>Bearder, S. K., Ambrose, L., Harcourt, C., Honess, P., Perkin, A., Pimley, E., Pullen, S. and Svoboda, N. (2003). Species-typical patterns of infant contact, sleeping site use and social cohesion among nocturnal primates in Africa. Folia Primatologica, 74, 337-354.</heading>The authors, researchers at Oxford Brookes University, review the current knowledge of the behavioural ecology of African Loriformes. Compilation and summaries of published and unpublished field research serve as the basis for this study. Beside the excellent summary of behavioural ecology data, it is recognised that Loriformes taxonomy is facing serious revision at generic and specific level as more and more knowledge about the species involved are retrieved. This is especially true for the sympatric species of Otolemur and Galagoides. <heading>Bearder, S. K. and Doyle, G. A. (1974). Ecology of bushbabies Galago sengalensis and Galago crassicaudatus , with some notes on their behaviour in the field. In Prosimian biology : proceedings of a meeting of the Research Seminar in Archaeology and Related Subjects held at the Institute of Archaeology, London University (Eds, Martin, R. D., Doyle, G. A. and Walker, A. C.) Duckworth, London, pp. 109-130.</heading>The authors, prominent field researchers, present their findings on Galago senegalensis and G. crassicaudatus ecology and behaviour from their long term field study in South Africa and Rhodesia. Results from the study provide a thorough description of these species social organisation, biogeography, locomotion and reproductive behaviours - important information for anyone interested in further studies on the species. <heading>Charles-Dominique, P. (1974). Ecology and feeding behaviour of five sympatric lorisids in Gabon. In Prosimian biology : proceedings of a meeting of the Research Seminar in Archaeology and Related Subjects held at the Institute of Archaeology, London University (Eds, Martin, R. D., Doyle, G. A. and Walker, A. C.) Duckworth, London, pp. 131-150.</heading>The author, a galago-pioneer field researcher, presents the results from almost 3 years of field studies from Gabon on lorisid ecology and feeding behaviour. The results presented are a compilation of field observations and experimental studies. Charles-Dominique kept individuals from five different species in a captive setting at his field site. Data are available for body measurements, ranging patterns, spatial positioning and especially diet composition (analysed from stomach content). <heading>Clark, A. B. (1978). Olfactory communication, Galago crassicaudatus , and the social life of prosimians. In Recent advances in primatology , Vol. 3: Evolution (Eds, Chivers, D. J. and Joysey, K. A.) Academic Press, London, pp. 109-117.</heading>The author, researcher at the University of the Witwatersrand, explores olfactory communication in relation with social behaviour of Galago crassicaudatus by setting up a series of experiments. On the basis of her results and by setting them in context of similar studies on other species, Clark concludes that olfactory communication is and has been an integral part of prosimian social behaviour. This study is quite rare in its kind since olfactory communication studies are hard to conduct. However, it would be interesting if studies on chemical composition of olfactory cues were made though they are likely to be species specific. It could prove to be an important diagnostic tool for cryptic species. <heading>3.4 Morphology (6)</heading><heading>Anderson, M. J. (1999). The use of hand morphology in the taxonomy of galagos. Primates, 40, 469-478.</heading>The author, a researcher at the University of Cambridge, assessed the use of volar (hand) pad morphology for taxonomic purposes by analysing 244 specimens of 12 species and 4 genera of galagos. Findings from the study indicated on low levels of intraspecific and high levels of interspecific variability in volar pad morphology. The fact that the results also support current taxonomy makes it a very useful diagnostic tool for defining galago taxonomy. Volar pads are often preserved in museum specimens making it a very useful tool as a species indicator if suspicions of misclassification are raised (as they often are for this type of cryptic primate). <heading>Anderson, M. J. (2000). Penile morphology and classification of bush babies (subfamily Galagoninae). International Journal of Primatology, 21, 815-836.</heading>The author, researcher at University of Cambridge, had recognised the morphological complexity and variation in penile morphology of nocturnal prosimians, especially members of the family Galagonidae, and searched to investigate its taxonomic usefulness especially for assessing the status of newly discovered species. Via intra-and interspecific comparisons of penile morphology the author came to the conclusion that examination of penile morphology, more than often, can be used as a reliable species identifier. Included in the paper is even a key for such use. <heading>Anderson, M. J., Ambrose, L., Bearder, S. K., Dixson, A. F. and Pullen, S. (2000). Intraspecific variation in the vocalizations and hand pad morphology of southern lesser bush babies (Galago moholi ): A comparison with G. senegalensis . International Journal of Primatology, 21, 537-555.</heading>The authors, researchers at Universities of Cambridge and Oxford Brookes and at Center for Reproduction of Endangered Species, California, searched to establish the use of calls and hand pad morphology as species denominators. The species under investigation, Galago moholi, indicated low, insignificant intraspecific variation while interspecific comparisons with G. senegalensis showed on significant differences in the chosen characteristics. The study thereby confirms the practical use of these comparative methods for distinguishing between cryptic species of galagos. The study contains useful methodology for volar pad comparisons. <heading>Dixson, A. F. (1987). Observations on the evolution of the genitalia and copulatory-behavior in male primates. Journal of Zoology, 213, 423-443.</heading>The author, researcher at the Centre for Reproductive Biology, Edinburgh, reviews data on primate penile morphology in correlation with different mating systems. This is an attempt to assess the evolutionary effect of sexual selection to the great variation in genital morphology. The results show that for species displaying polyandry, the penile morphology tends to be more complex and specialized. The study further broadens the conception and understanding of possible evolutionary explanations to extreme morphological characters. <heading>Dixson, A. F. and Vanhorn, R. N. (1977). Comparative studies of morphology and reproduction in 2 subspecies of greater bushbaby, Galago crassicaudatus crassicaudatus and G. c. argentatus . Journal of Zoology, 183, 517-526.</heading>The authors, researchers at Wellcome Institute of Comparative Physiology, London, collected morphological and reproduction data from the two taxon Galago crasicaudatus crassicaudatus and G. c. argentatus in an attempt to straighten out the current taxonomic ambiguities. Morphological differences were found but were considered too weak for elevation of taxonomic status. This in spite of the negative results from the cross-subspecies mating experiment, that, more or less, proved on the fundament for the predominant contemporary Biological Species Concept. <heading>Masters, J. (1986). Geographic distributions of karyotypes and morphotypes within the greater Galagines. Folia Primatologica, 46, 127-141.</heading>The author, researcher at the Univeristy of Witwatersrand, aims to contribute to the taxonomic clarification of specific differences between Galago crassicaudatus and G. garnettii through morphological and karyotypic analyses. The resulting discontinuities are set in correlation to their geographic distribution. The analyses indicate on a possible third species existence, a larger type of G. garnettii, but further investigation is required to establish its specific affinity. The study contains a valuable example set of skull measurements useful for morphometric comparisons. <heading>3.5 Genetics (9)</heading><heading>Chu, E. H. and Bender, M. A. (1961). Chromosome cytology and evolution in primates. Science, 133, 1399-405.</heading>The authors, researchers at the Biology Division of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S.A., analysed karyotypes of 38 taxon of primates as a contribution to the scientific and taxonomic knowledge of the order. This is one of the first chromosomal studies made on primates and its importance for the field can not be understated. Noteworthy from the study are the including of tree shrews amongst prosimians and the statement that "many primate species are diminishing in number and are in danger of becoming extinct". This was 44 years ago! Information of more hands-on value are for example the finding that many primate species either showed correlation between low chromosome number and a low number of acrocentric chromosomes, and , conversely, the same relation for high numbers. These correlations suggests on a certain type of chromosome evolution called Robertsonian translocation, which indicates on a high prevalence of centric fusions. <heading>De Boer, L. E. M. (1973). Cytotaxonomy of Lorisoidea (Primates-Prosimii) .1. Chromosome studies and karyological relationships in Galagidae. Genetica, 44, 155-193.</heading>The author, researcher at University of Utrecht, describe the karyotype of seven taxon: Galago alleni, G. crassicaudatus crassicaudatus, G. crassicaudatus kikuyuensis, G. crassicaudatus monteiri, G. demidovii, G. senegalensis senegalenis, G. senegalensis braccatus derived from 33 specimens. The chromosomal material was extracted from blood samples taken from captive individuals. The results show of interspecific differences between species and also between subspecies in karyotype. De Boer also encounters intraspecific differences within G. crassicaudatus, G. senegalensis and G. demidovii leading to suggestions of taxonomic revision. <heading>DelPero, M., Masters, J. C., Zuccon, D., Cervella, P., Crovella, S. and Ardito, G. (2000). Mitochondrial sequences as indicators of generic classification in bush babies. International Journal of Primatology, 21, 889-904.</heading>The authors, researchers at Università di Torino and Firenze, Italy, and at the Natal Museum, South Africa, sequenced certain genetic segments of African bush baby mitochondrial DNA with the aspiration to unravel some of the systematic ambiguities present. Some suggestions as to phylogenetic reconstruction of the family Galagidae based on their findings are made. <heading>Masters, J. C., Stanyon, R. and Romagno, D. (1987). Standardized karyotypes for the greater galagos, Galago crassicaudatus E Geoffroy, 1812 and Galago garnettii (Ogilby, 1838) (Primates, Prosimii). Genetica, 75, 123-129.</heading>The authors, researchers at Universities of the Witwatersrand and Studi di Firenze, analysed 21 greater galago karyotypes in an attempt to sort out ambiguities regarding interspecific identification of homologous elements previously encountered by other researchers in both idiograms and karyotypes. Different banding techniques and greater sample size helped the authors in this task. With the results in hand, further questions were raised asking for more research and new and improved cytogenetic techniques. The use of karyotype to entangle the taxonomy of cryptic species is emphasised and its use will be more and more important as banding techniques and analysing methods are improved. <heading>Nash, L. T., Bearder, S. K. and Olson, T. R. (1989). Synopsis of galago species characteristics. International Journal of Primatology, 10, 57-80.</heading>The authors, researchers at Arizona State University, Oxford Polytechnic and Albert Einstein College of Medicine, summarised the consensus made in the symposium "Variability within the galagos" held at the IPS Congress 1986. The outcome was a new classification of galago species diversity based on earlier taxonomic work (Olson, 1979 - see Appendix) including descriptions of 11 species. Over the recognized 11 species, no more than 28 subspecies are identified, including five as yet undescribed taxa. The study provide valuable summary of the current knowledge of galago distribution, biology, genetics and morphology. In order to characterise and distinguish species further, data from the following areas are emphasised for further investigations: chromosomes, visual and vocal repertoires, locomotor styles and penile morphology. <heading>Pardo-Manuel de Villena, F. and Sapienza, C. (2001). Female meiosis drives karyotypic evolution in mammals. Genetics, 159, 1179-89.</heading>The authors, researchers at University of North Carolina and Temple University School of Medicine, conducted an investigation on the driving mechanisms for chromosome evolution. The conclusions made in the study were based on analyses of 1170 mammalian karyotypes. They reached the conclusion that non-random segregation is the most important driving force in mammalian chromosome evolution. The authors describe their findings as follows: "Non-random segregation results from functional differences between the meiotic spindle poles in their ability to capture centromeres and the fact that different numbers of centromeres are found on paired chromosomes whenever Robertsonian translocations (bi-armed chromosomes with a single active centromere) are paired with acrocentric homologues (two uni-armed chromosomes with a total of two centromeres)." This can have implications for karyotypes as indicators of phylogeny. Non-random segregations can create major karyotype differences under a short period of time between closely related species. The authors describe these relatively complex chains of events with such prominence that even I, with very limited genetic education, understand most of it (or think I understand it). <heading>Pasztor, L. M. and Vanhorn, R. N. (1977). Intraspecific chromosomal variation within Galago crassicaudatus (Galaginae). Journal of Human Evolution, 6, 569-573.</heading>The authors, researchers at Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, were investigating the chromosomal make-up of two subspecies, Galago crassicaudatus crassicaudatus and G. c. argentatus, by extraction of genetic material from leucocytes. The two subspecies have the same diploid number of chromosomes (2N = 62) but differ in karyotype by number of subacro- and acrocentric chromosomes, i.e. different fundamental number. No claim to evidence from the authors that these subspecies should be elevated to species status, however, suggestions are made that such change in taxonomic level might be prevalent for sympatric species of G. crassicaudatus in the future. Beside the access to karyotype data, this study also explains the methods for extraction of chromosome material. <heading>Rumpler, Y., Couturier, J., Warter, S. and Dutrillaux, B. (1983). The karyotype of Galago crassicaudatus is ancestral for Lorisiforms. Folia Primatologica, 40, 227-231.</heading>The authors, researcher at the Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, and Université René Descartes, Paris, conduct a comparative chromosome banding study of Galago crassicaudatus, G. senegalensis and an ancestral reconstruction in a study aimed at confirming the latter species validity as holder of the ancestral Galagidae karyotype. Striking similarities are found between G. crassicaudatus and the reconstructed karyotype underpinning the validity of the reconstruction. Beside the interesting evolutionary deductions made from this study, it also contains karyotype data useful for my study as well as useful references to karyotype research. <heading>Stanyon, R., Wienberg, J., Simons, E. L. and Izard, M. K. (1992). A 3rd karyotype for Galago demidovii suggests the existence of multiple species. Folia Primatologica, 59, 33-38.</heading>The authors, researchers at Universities of Duke, Genoa and Munich (U.S.A., Italy and Germany) and Research Triangle Institute, U.S.A., describe their findings from a study on Galago demidovii's karyotype. Previous studies have shown two different karyotypes for the species and this study add on a further third type. Stanyon et al., draws the conclusion that the amount of karyotype differentiation between the three populations of G. demidovii probably is evidence of three different species. Further investigation on the correlation between geographic distribution or vocalization and the karyotypes are sought for to confirm their conclusion. 