<heading>Introduction</heading>Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus, also known as Non Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (NIDDM) or Juvenile-Onset Diabetes Mellitus, is an autoimmune disease, distinct from Type 2 and gestational forms of diabetes. For Alice, a 17-year-old girl living and coping with this chronic disease, its physiological symptoms may be mild or negligible, its major impact on her life being the daily blood glucose tests, dietary restrictions and insulin injections which can appear to be inconvenient, burdensome, even debilitating tasks to some young sufferers. As this essay will endeavour to show however, the hyperglycaemia which might seem unimportant to Alice now will almost certainly be affecting her future health by greatly increasing her (and her unborn foetus') susceptibility to a number of devastating complications. <heading>Possible genetic and environmental causes of Type 1 Diabetes</heading>NIDDM currently affects around 0.02% of children in the UK, and is on the increase (Devendra et al, 2005). Various environmental theories have been ventured for its proliferation. The 'hygiene' hypothesis groups Type 1 Diabetes together with asthma and eczema and suggests that an increasingly sterile environment, where children's immune systems remain underdeveloped through a lack of exposure to a range of bacteria, is to blame. Other theories attempt to show correlation with diet, or certain viruses, although these have yet to be supported by convincing evidence. Whatever environmental reasons may be contributing to the increase of Type 1 Diabetes, it is generally acknowledged to be a combination of external factors such as these and genetic predisposition that gives rise to the disease in a particular individual (Devendra et al, 2005). It is worth noting that, whether for environmental, dietary, or genetic reasons, the prevalence of Type 1 Diabetes varies significantly between ethnic groups. <heading>Physiological effects of Type 1 Diabetes</heading>In order to describe the physiological effects of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus it is necessary to explain briefly the endocrinal methods of glucose transport, usage and control in a healthy, non-diabetic person. In the Islets of Langerhans, located in the pancreas, humans have two types of cells that are instrumental in the delivery of the energy needed to the body's cells in the form of glucose: alpha and beta cells. Alpha cells secrete glucagons to stimulate the breakdown of glycogen and the manufacture of glucose. Beta cells produce insulin, the hormone that causes glucose to be absorbed into the cells to be received and converted to energy by the mitochondria - it is the vehicle, or medium, for this process. In this way Alpha and Beta cells work together to control levels of glucose in the blood - glucagons from the alpha cells pumping glucose into the blood when it is needed, and insulin from the Beta cells activating transport proteins to carry it out of the blood and across cell membranes into the cells where it is used as fuel (Kapit and Elson, 2002). This whole process is regulated by a feedback system: glucose in the blood stimulates the production of insulin, lack of glucose inhibits its production, and somatotatin, a hormone produced by the delta cells in the pancreas, helps to further normalize levels of both insulin and glucagons. Type 1 Diabetes has a sudden onset, but is caused by the gradual depletion over a period of time of the Beta cells in the pancreas (Burden, 2003; Sumner and Dyson, 2004). This is the result of an inappropriate immune reaction; for some reason the immune system of a type 1 diabetic person such as Alice has systematically attacked and destroyed the Beta cells. Without the Beta cells insulin is no longer produced, and glucose cannot enter the cells. So, it remains in the blood, while the cells literally starve for want of it. The body's response is to produce more and the useless glucose simply builds up in the blood (hyperglycaemia). <heading>Signs and symptoms of hyperglycaemia</heading>The signs and symptoms of Type 1 Diabetes can be explained by this hyperglycaemia and its physiological repercussions. The massive amount of glucose accumulating in blood has nowhere to go and so the body must eventually excrete it, which it does with difficulty, pumping it through the kidneys to the renal system where there is too much of it to be absorbed. The surplus glucose has the osmotic effect of drawing in water, and with it essential salts and minerals, before eventually leaving the body with the urine (Bewley, 2002; Burden 2003). Thus, four of the primary signs of the disease are displayed: muscle cramps caused by mineral loss, glucose in the urine (glycosuria), the passing of urine in the middle of the night (nocturia), and the passing of excessive amounts of urine (polyuria). This, latter symptom naturally causes dehydration and thirst in the patient, two further warning signs that might alert a physician to the onset of diabetes (Avery, 1998). Meanwhile, the body is wasting away without the energy it needs - its cells literally beginning to shut down and die. Stimulated by the need for fuel the patient's appetite may be increased (polyphagia), and yet without the energy getting to the cells where it is required they lose weight and feel tired. The body is unable to store glucose and so turns to its emergency resources - fat and protein are broken down, a process resulting in ketones in the urine (ketonuria) and eventually acid in the blood (acidosis). If it remains untreated, hyperglycaemia is self-perpetuating - the body will continue to produce more glucose, energy reserves will be exhausted, the chemical balance of the blood will be disrupted, the patient will become comatose, and the disease will finally prove fatal (Bewley, 2002). <heading>Alice's unstable blood glucose levels</heading>Hyperglycaemia and these symptoms arising from it are something Alice will have experienced at the onset of her diabetes aged 7. With her glucose now under poor control however she will still be experiencing periods of hyperglycaemia, and possibly swings down to hypoglycaemia, on a fairly regular basis. These variations in blood sugar levels could be attributable to a number of factors in 17-year-old Alice. Patients require particularly regular checks and close monitoring of their glucose levels throughout childhood and adolescence, with treatment being adjusted to meet the demands of increased height and weight and changes in lifestyle and habits - all pronounced and unavoidable features of "growing up". Puberty and adolescence can be particularly difficult times, with certain of the hormones being released by the body inhibiting insulin in its efficacy, and also of course resulting in difficult physical, social and emotional changes that have a tendency to produce tumultuous and rebellious feelings in any normal teenager. In the diabetic adolescent these are often, and understandably, characterised by a rebellion against the restrictive lifestyle regimes that close management of Type 1 Diabetes can entail. Bewley (2002) collates studies that would appear to show that girls of Alice's age with IDDM are vulnerable to a number of psychosocial factors that might prevent them from managing their glucose levels to the best of their ability. With the increased social need for acceptance by their peers and independence from their authority figures that adolescents experience, diabetes can be seen as a burden and something that sets the affected teenager apart. Experimenting with alcohol and/or recreational drugs, a growing up phase experienced by many adolescents, will complicate the matter of maintaining a tight control over blood sugar. As we have seen, maintaining a hyperglycaemic state also leads to weight loss; the patient can eat without the nutrients being properly absorbed by the body. Body image is a delicate issue for most seventeen year olds - and the portrayal of celebrity role models in the media encourages girls to aspire to ever more waif-like figures. It has been suggested that a shocking one in three diabetic adolescent girls also suffers with an eating disorder of some kind (Bewley, 2002), and so it is possible that Alice might be using hyperglycaemia as a means to control her weight. Alice's pregnancy is of course a further complicating factor, adding a host of extra hormones into the mix such as prolactin, growth hormone, cortisol and progesterone. These are secreted by the placenta during pregnancy and may also cause increased resistance to insulin and so possible hyperglycaemia (Harris and White, 2005). <heading>Potential long-term implications for Alice:</heading>The long-term repercussions of oscillating blood sugars or sustained hyperglycaemia are very serious. A number of recent studies have demonstrated a clear link between the many complications of Diabetes Mellitus and a history of poorly controlled blood glucose (Hill, 2004; Sumner and Dyson, 2004). Life for a 17-year-old girl however is very immediate, and it can be difficult to make a teenager understand the impact her disease might have for her decades in the future when the illness of her initial diabetes onset has subsided and her current symptoms are within tolerable limits. <heading>Neuropathy</heading>Worryingly, Alice already shows signs of nerve damage (neuropathy) in her lower limbs in the form of an infected foot blister which she had failed to notice, a long-term complication which is generally not expected until much later in life for diabetes sufferers. This complication is linked to vascular damage (see below), resulting as it does from impaired circulatory supply to the nerves (Hill, 2004). Feet are particularly vulnerable in diabetic patients, and the most common location for sensory neuropathy, demonstrated by Alice in her lack of pain or discomfort that would normally have alerted her to the presence of a blister on her foot. As well as masking tissue damage, sensory neuropathy can also be causative of foot ulceration, increasing the likelihood of trauma to the foot from pressure or heat (Springett, 2000; Foster and Edmonds, 2001). Autonomic neuropathy may also occur, affecting the patient's motor function (Hill 2004). The development of a foot ulcer (or blister) in a diabetic patient is described by Foster and Edmonds (2001:48) as "...a pivotal event in the development of severe complications." What probably seems to Alice to be a mild inconvenience is the beginning of serious problems for her; her foot symptoms already rank at a stage 4 in Foster and Edmonds' six-stage classification system, in which stage 6 is an "unsalvageable foot (amputation is inevitable)" (Foster and Edmonds 2000, cited in Foster and Edmonds 2001:48). Even if her infected blister is successfully treated her neuropathy cannot be reversed and she can expect to encounter similar (and escalating) problems with her feet in the future. <heading>Infection</heading>Infection is also a much greater likelihood for diabetic patients, so it is unsurprising that Alice's blister has acquired this further complication. High levels of glucose in the blood can cause bacterial infection, and impairment to the normal wound-healing processes of leucocyte infiltration, chemotaxis and phagocytosis can cause debris to be left in the wound site which will further increase the risk (King 2001). <heading>Cardiovascular problems</heading>Recent studies show a clear correlation between glycaemic control and the development of cardiovascular problems leading to cerebrovascular accidents, myocardial infarction and peripheral vascular disease. These are likely to be caused by the altered blood clotting and platelet activity seen in diabetic patients, and possibly also by increased amounts of fibrinogen produced in hyperglycaemia (Burden 2001). Peripheral vascular disease has the potential to cause further foot problems for Alice, such as ischaemia, which can lead to ulceration and necrosis and severely impairs wound healing and normal inflammatory responses to infection. Together with Alice's existing neuropathy, peripheral vascular impairment will greatly increase the risk of limb amputation for Alice in later life (Foster and Edmonds, 2001). <heading>Retinopathy</heading>As well as the temporary blurred vision that often accompanies hyperglycaemia, and an increased susceptibility to cataracts, diabetes carries a high risk of serious permanent damage to Alice's eyesight in the form of retinopathy. This too is a vascular complication of sorts - affecting the tiny blood vessels at the back of the eye. Poor diabetic circulation causes these vessels to become blocked. In the early stages this can cause tiny aneurysms and haemorrhaging, and longer term the formation of new, compensatory blood vessels that can grow into the vitreous gel and cause further problems. Sight loss caused by diabetes can be gradual and progressive or sudden and complete. In both cases it is irreversible (RNIB and RCOphth, 2004). <heading>Nephropathy</heading>Yet another major system of Alice's sustaining damage from her poor glycaemic control is her renal system and kidneys (Hill 2004). These are under the constant strain of hyperglycaemic polyuria and the absorption excess glucose. Kidney failure is incredibly debilitating, the only treatments being transplant or daily dialysis treatment, without which the patient will die. <heading>Effects on Alice's developing embryo and foetus during the first trimester</heading>Having briefly outlined the some of the many implications, both short and long term, that diabetes has had and will have on Alice's health, it is important to consider the other life that has entered the picture and will be directly affected by the functioning of Alice's physiological systems: her unborn baby. Complications, foetal abnormalities and spontaneous abortions are all greatly increased risks where diabetes is present, particularly when blood glucose is erratic at conception and during early development (Harris and White, 2005; Farrell et al, 2001). The effect of hyperglycaemia on the foetus is non-specific; most of the foetus' systems are vulnerable to malformation, particularly up to week 7 of the pregnancy (Farrell et al, 2001). During this time the foetal organs are still being formed - it is the most vulnerable time for complications in any pregnancy. In a diabetic pregnancy it leaves the foetus ill equipped to deal with excess glucose levels which will cross the placenta. The foetus' glucose levels will correspond to those of its mother (Bewley 2002), and so hyperglycaemia will give rise to certain analogous symptoms in the foetus, such as polyuria. This in turn can cause an excess of amniotic fluid surrounding the baby, and so contribute to formative defects. <heading>Conclusion</heading>It is clear that the effects of poor insulin control for Alice are severe and far-reaching. Even at such a young age she is beginning to show signs of nerve damage, and this is probably an indicator of damage already sustained to many of the body's systems. Her foetus is vulnerable to more immediate risks, and this should be a further incentive to tighten glycaemic control. The development of Type 1 Diabetes has been described by Devendra et al. as "...a life sentence to a difficult therapeutic regimen that is only partially effective in preventing acute and chronic complications" (2004:750). Recent evidence offers a more hopeful picture for diabetes sufferers however by demonstrating that maintaining blood glucose levels within a tighter range - one more similar to that of a non-diabetic person - from as early in life as possible, can prevent or arrest the progression of hyperglycaemic damage. This essay has hopefully demonstrated that this glycaemic control must therefore be a priority for Alice - damage already done to her nerves, blood vessels, eyes and kidneys cannot be reversed, and so must be arrested in order to minimise further problems. The alternative is a dramatic impairment to her quality, and quantity, of life. 