<heading>Section A - 1. Men's magazines</heading>Some of the oldest existing men's magazines are Esquire, Arena, Playboy, and  FHM. Chris Astridge launched 'For Him Magazine' - formerly For Him - in 1985. FHM is the most popular men's magazine in terms of current sales; from July to December 2005 it sold 500 865 copies (ABC). Although this is 13.6% less than the same period in 2004, FHM's sales are more than 20% of the total sales for the men's magazine market. The latest circulation figures for other monthly men's publications are less than half that of FHM - 232 001 for Loaded and 233 445 for Men's Health (ABC Jul-Dec 05). The rise in popularity of men's magazines relates to men's lifestyle changes in the mid 1980s. In general men began to stay single for longer and had more disposable income. Publishers recognised a demand for men's lifestyle magazines, and many existing men's titles broadened their content. Initially For Him focused on fashion, but it introduced a sports supplement in the early 1990s. It is interesting that the 'male script' portrayed in men's magazines can be so different from one to another. This is largely related to the age of the target reader. At one end of the market is Men's Health, designed to fill a niche for men in their thirties. The mean age of its readers is 31, compared to 27 for Loaded and 24 for Nuts. The idea of the magazine is to encourage men to reach their full potential in all areas of life. Its unexpected popularity reflects the recent change in the definition of masculinity. For example it is more common and acceptable for men to take responsibility for their health and appearance than thirty or forty years ago. But this might in fact be a consequence of the media rather than the media being a reflection of society. There is a similar problem regarding Loaded and the rise of 'blokeish' or 'laddish' culture. IPC Media launched Loaded in 1994. It is often referred to as the first 'lad mag', because it marked a break from the earlier men's lifestyle magazines that focused on sophistication and style. In the first issue, the magazine's philosophy stated; "Loaded is a magazine dedicated to life, liberty and the pursuit of sex, drink, football and less serious matters". The nature and content of such magazines reflected the emerging 'laddish culture' of the 1990s that could also be seen in television programmes like 'Men Behaving Badly' and 'They Think It's All Over'. The typical Loaded reader is "younger, louder, and more hedonistic" than readers of men's magazines like Arena or Esquire. Recently, the success of men's monthlies like Loaded has prompted publishers to release more frequent publications. Nuts and Zoo both started in 2004. They are similar in content, attitude and layout, although Nuts is slightly ahead of Zoo in terms of sales. In the last 6 months Nuts sold 306 802 copies and Zoo sold 260 470 (ABC Jul-Dec 05). Ultimately, men's magazines reflect conceptions of masculinity at the time, particularly those that are successful. Both Nuts and Zoo place emphasis on news, sport and girls in a "fast and funny style", to reflect the interests and lifestyles of men in their late teens and early 20s.  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL <heading>Section B - 2. Food and Drink</heading>Consumer magazines consist of both 'general' and 'specialist' titles. Food and drink magazines fall into the 'specialist' category; they are "for people with sharply defined hobbies and pursuits" (John Morrish, p13). Perhaps inevitably then, there is competition from general interest titles that include their own food and drink sections, such as Good Housekeeping and Prima. In addition most supermarkets publish a magazine, although these also contain other areas of interest besides food and drink. For example, Sainsbury's: The Magazine classifies 50% of its content as 'lifestyle and features' and 50% as 'food and drink'. Supermarket magazines are rarely actively bought; Tesco Magazine, Asda Magazine and The Somerfield Magazine are all free to their customers. This analysis will focus on magazines that are primarily about food and drink, and are paid for by the consumer. The most popular title in this category is BBC Good Food, published monthly by BBC Magazines. From July to December 2005, Good Food sold a total of 329 233 copies in the UK and Ireland (ABC). In comparison, Delicious - released in November 2003 - sold 94 870 copies in the same period. Good Food and Delicious are similar in that they aim to celebrate good quality food. Their emphasis on quality can be seen from the glossy, high quality paper used. Another similarity is in the design and layout; Delicious describes this as "clean and uncluttered". In addition, Good Food and Delicious are directed at more or less the same target group; people who are passionate about food and cooking. The majority of this target audience is female - 85% of Delicious readers are women, and most are aged 25 - 54 (ABC1 profile). From their market research Delicious concludes that most of their readers are "married...high earning females in full or part-time work". Consequently they are able to spend a reasonable amount of money on food and cooking utensils. On the other hand, Decanter ("Britain's leading wine magazine" published by IPC Media) is read by a predominantly male audience; 82% of its readers are men. Decanter is somewhat unique in its orientation, because there are few (if any) other magazines dedicated solely to wine in the UK. Again the emphasis is on quality. This is reflected in the print techniques and paper used, together with the magazine's price of £3.40. The fact that the economic status of readers of Good Food, Delicious and Decanter are so similar suggests a niche in the food and drink magazine market. In 2004 BBC Magazines attempted to reach a broader audience by publishing Easy Cook quarterly, a food magazine that "focuses on real food for real people". Its lower price of £1.99, compared to £2.90 for Good Food, suggests a more inclusive target audience. Easy Cook focuses on "simple, useful recipes" designed to save time and money. In conclusion, the food and drink magazine market is more competitive than it initially may seem. Although food and drink is a long-term specialist interest, magazine titles in this area still fluctuate in terms of popularity and sales. Many publications compensate by including other areas of interest - one example is supermarket magazines as discussed earlier.  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL <heading>Section C - 1. Teens</heading>The teenage magazine market is dominated by girl's titles, as teenage boys tend to read magazines on their hobbies and interests. These fall into other magazine markets such as sport, motoring or music. For this reason, this analysis focuses on three significant teenage girls magazines - Bliss, Sugar and CosmoGIRL! . Since its launch ten years ago, Sugar has been the best-selling teenage title in the UK. This has not been the case for the last six months though, as Bliss outsold Sugar by 17 010 copies from July to December 2005. This may only be temporary, as Sugar recently changed to a compact format in January this year. The latest circulation figures published by ABC are; 267 109 for Bliss, 250 099 for Sugar and 152 094 for CosmoGIRL! . The circulation figures for teenage magazines are not as high as adult publications; one reason is that the majority of teenagers under 16 are not yet earning. Another reason is that it is common for girls to read their magazines together rather than separately. Consequently, teenage girls magazines are passed around groups of friends, more so than adult magazines are. Bliss, Sugar and CosmoGIRL! are fairly similar in their content and style, including articles on relationships, fashion and celebrity gossip. Each magazine also has an internet site that features quizzes, competitions and horoscopes. Their core buyers are teenage girls aged 12 - 17. There are also other titles in this market aimed at the slightly younger age group of 10 - 14 year old girls. The problem is that these age ranges can be ambiguous. Teenage girls mature rapidly during this period and often choose products that are intended for older age groups. A highly debated issue regarding teenage magazines is that of appropriate content and language. It has been suggested that age restrictions should be printed clearly on the front of magazines, to protect younger girls from inappropriate sexual content. The circulations of all magazines in the teenage market are in decline. This may be because teenagers are choosing to spend their money in other areas, such as mobile phones and text messaging. This might explain that fact that in the last five years the teenage magazine market has significantly decreased in its total size. Former publications J17, 19 and ElleGirl all folded in this period. Some publishers including Hachette Filipacchi, the publishers of Sugar, attribute this to the changing lifestyles, attitudes and experiences of teenage girls. Not only are they maturing faster, but teenagers are becoming increasingly fragmented into many sharply defined groups. Therefore it is hard to find common attitudes and interests among teenagers simply by grouping them in terms of age or gender.  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL  URL <heading>Section D - 7. Music</heading>The music magazine market has been challenged recently by changes in technology. From the late 20 th Century music fans started to use the internet and digital music channels as sources of information instead of music magazines. IPC Media decided to merge NME with its long-standing rival Melody Maker in December 2000, due to "increasing competition from music sites on the internet". At the same time Emap Consumer Media closed Select, a monthly music magazine, also holding market conditions responsible. Only a month earlier in October 2000 Kerrang! magazine reformed its logo and layout, presumably in response to the decline in the music magazine industry around this time. Some of the key publications in the current music magazine market are Q magazine, NME and Kerrang! There are also more specific titles for niche areas of the market, for example Guitar and Rhythm (for musicians), DJ Magazine (underground dance music) and Computer Music (for creating music on a PC). Out of these, Q magazine is the biggest selling music magazine in the UK. Published monthly by Emap, Q sold 168 547 copies from July to December 2005 (ABC). Q aims to be a "serious music publication" and is recognised for being the ultimate unbiased music guide. Most music magazines are monthly publications, except for NME published by IPC and Kerrang! published by Emap. NME uses this as a unique selling point, as the magazine is strong on reporting the latest music gossip and up-to-date gig guides. It started in 1952, making it the oldest existing music magazine. Kerrang! is dedicated to "rock in all its forms" and has been since the first issue came out in June 1981. According to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulation (ABC) figures published in February 2006, Kerrang! is only 600 copies behind NME in global sales (76 792 for NME and 76 165 for Kerrang! ). The core target audience for Kerrang! is 15-24 year olds, and there is a 60:40 male:female ratio (NRS). In comparison the mean age of NME readers is 24, out of these 68% are male. The median age of Q magazine readers is 25. This is reflected by the language used in the magazines; Kerrang! uses more colloquial language to appeal to a younger audience. On the other hand, Q uses more formal language and has a "clear and literate" style. Yet despite sales being in decline, music magazines still hold their influence in the music scene. Many upcoming artists and bands rely on music magazines as a medium to reach potential fans and increase their recognition. For example 'The Strokes', 'Kaiser Chiefs' and 'Arctic Monkeys' all shot to fame after appearing on the front of titles such as Kerrang! and NME. Many titles have attempted to turn modern technology from a threat into an opportunity. Magazines such as Kerrang! and Q use their titles as brand names that are linked to other areas of the music industry. For example Q has a music channel - 'QTV' started up in 2000 - and almost all music magazines have internet sites. Kerrang! is also a digital radio station playing many sub-genres of rock. 