In Oct 2004 Google launched Google Print, currently Google Book Search (GBS), which aims at service of book searching and its excerpts displaying. Google first works with 5 main USA and UK libraries, e.g. University of Michigan, Oxford University etc, to digitize books in their collections and make them accessible via GBS. Google plans to digitize and make available through GBS service approximately 15 million volumes within a decade. Up to now this ambitious plan and its actual action have brought about a 6-month long controversial dispute, even lawsuit, involving authors, publishers, librarian, internet users and politicians all over the world. Copyright and relocation of its related profit, publication security as well as culture identity are the core issues concerned by various interest groups. GBS is a 10-year plan at its first stage. It is too early and too hard to predict what will happen to it in the late of its first 10-year. But, GBS and its related debate are displaying a phenomenon, i.e. Non-publishing companies are expecting to make profit through publication-related business. They may be the new entities and will change the business model of publishing. Its uncertainty leads that different interest groups have different attitude to it. Moreover, in the same interest group, they may have contradictory opinions, while others hold an ambiguous attitude. Publishers: After the lawsuit of the Association of American Publishers (AAP) on behalf of five major publisher members, there is a continuation of accusing GBS of copyright violation. Some publishers, e.g. Bloomsbury, strongly disagree what GBS has been doing. They are calling on internet users to boycott Google. (The Guardian, Mar 4, 06) However, other publishers, e.g. Blackwell and HarperCollins, have put 5-6000 titles into GBS (Bookseller, LBF Daily, Mar 7, 06). Authors: Authors Guild, representing 8,000 writers, at first joined individual authors in a class-action lawsuit alleging the GBS Library Project violated their copyright. However some authors, e.g. Cory Doctorow, expressed their firm support to this project. Government: GBS has hit a particular nerve in France. The French response from leading politicians, technology companies and the book world has as much as do with culture. They suspect whether GBS, a USA-based company's project, can well manage European culture. As a result, a move of European Digital Library (EDL) was put forwarded and supported by people, including Mr. Jacques Chirac, French president, who is already backing another Google rival in the form of Quaero - a multimedia search engine. EDL is planning to make 2m books, films and other files digitising and accessible through the portal by 2008. "It is clear that the Frenchman's tract, which paints the digitisation debate in terms of Europe fighting American hegemony"(Financial Times, Mar 7 2006 ) GBS is a new thing facing international publishing. It is not because of digitisation of publications itself (there are some similar projects, e.g. Gutenbery Book Project, OCLC Bibliography service etc) but the feature of the "practitioner", Google is an internet searching service company whose business is based on money earning through advertisement matched with the relevant searching results. Its operational idea and business model is totally different from what publishing industry is like. Moreover, its ambitious plan is so big to not only involve all publishing-related people, but also include some in-copyright books. So it is difficult to be accepted. However, it contains possibilities to be: a channel for book publicity and promotion and sales a channel for online publication service for publications in public domain a way publishers benefit from the book promotion through GBS. What the publishers gain is not only the increase of sales but also a portion of revenue from advertisement. Normally, publishing is a business of money-spending on Ad or promotion. But GBS is a new business model which is based on splitting advertising revenue with publishers. Possibly, this will be a force pushing publishers to involve in GBS more than before. In digital age, the way of information dissemination is changing the business model of publishing, which avoidably lead to reconsider the following issues: <list>Copyright and security of publication in digital ageThe permission and the technical standard of digitising of publicationsWho should be the owner and practitioner of digitised publicationsNew business model, e.g. the cooperation of publishers and non-publishing partners; selling advertisements next to classic works is good or not etc.</list>Google was found in Sept 1998 and headquartered in USA. Now it has grown up as one of global leading internet searching service companies with over 5000 employees working in about 20 overseas offices in the world. As a multinational enterprise, Google is featured as: Mission Statement: Organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful. Expansion of business is based on persistently pursuing innovation of technology and bettering the organisational structure and intercultural. It's business philosophy contains 10 aspects. "Focus on the user and all else will follow" comes at the first. Possibly, this is why it can make a quick response to issues aroused GBS and took a effective solution to the relevant issues, e.g. starting to use the name of GBS with more precise business orientation; extending GBS from Book Library Project (BLP) only to including BLP and "Google Books Partner Programme - for publishers' service" "Don't be evil" is Google's business ethics. Basing on this motto, Google respects the local culture and ethics, e.g. Google enters into some countries (including France, Germany, China) with contents not conflicting the local cultural and governance. This is why Google can win bigger markets than its competitors. GBS, as a new business model of Internet searching engine, as a new channel of international publications, as a new service for Internet users, is worth of further attentions. 