<heading>1. Introduction</heading>The report aims to identify through research whether Canada is a suitable market for a British hospitality company to enter and expand its business. UK based boutique hotel in the countryside was established in 1989, and is planning an expansion to Canada. After a successful operation in the UK the hotel was rolled out across other countries during the next 16 years. Currently is operating in five European countries and the United States. One unit runs in each European country and three units in the US; all are discretely sized properties. The same brand name is utilized across all countries: Finesse Boutique Hotels (FBH). All the properties have a special identity adapted to the culture of each country while offering a unique atmosphere, charm, authenticity and calm everywhere in a beautiful scenic mountainside or countryside setting. As being such a huge success in the United States the company decided to expand and make presence in Canada, where nature is outstanding with its huge mountains and lakes. It is an interesting place for the company to explore because environmental scanning of Canada suggested that it could be an easy environment to get in, in the view of more similarities with the UK than differences. Canada is the world's second largest country, rich in natural resources. The country profile compiled by Datamonitor (2003) states: "Canadians are rightly proud of their tradition of tolerance, openness and stability", which suggests that they are a welcoming nation. It can be considered as an attractive market, because it is politically stable, economically very well developed, accounting for the seventh largest economy in the world (see Appendix 2 for details). International marketing intends to offer a product tailored to the needs of the local customers within a global framework (Usunier and Lee, 2005). Therefore it is necessary to recognise the needs and interest of the customers one aims to offer their product to. The main characteristics of FBH are personalised, high quality service, relaxing ambience, pampering spa treatments, fine wines and fine dining, all of which created and delivered with attention to detail. Therefore the targeted segment is a specialised niche, luxury market with high education and high disposable income, health awareness and aged between 25-55. <heading>2.1 Evaluation of the Business Environment</heading>A successful company always needs to be adaptive to the changes happening in the environment it operates in (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). Both macro- and micro-environments need to be taken into consideration when evaluating business environment. The macro- environment has been analysed through Political, Economical, Social, Technological and Environmental (PESTE) scanning in order to identify key similarities and differences between external environments of UK and Canada (see Appendix 2 for more details). The micro- environment has been investigated through analysing potential employees and customers as internal factors affecting marketing and direct competitors as external factors. For a British company the Canadian environment can be considered as easy to enter for the following reasons: both are open economies encouraging tourism, there is high business- and consumer confidence (Datamonitor Canada and UK, 2003). Joining the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994 enabled Canada to specialise in some profitable industries (Nations of the World, 2004) such as aeronautics or network technologies. Canada's independent foreign policy helped some firms especially in tourism sector to work on some lucrative joint venture projects in connection with the Caribbean Island (Datamonitor Canada, 2003). The macro- economic framework created in 1990s supported well Canada's economy to produce at its prospective (OECD, 2004), there were no major imbalances. The only exception was 2003 when two outbreaks of Severe Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in Toronto, the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) in western Canada and forest fires and electricity blackout in Ontario affected some sectors and regions; but in general did not have a big affect on annual GDP growth according to Bank of Canada, 2003 (ibid). These disasters negatively influenced the tourism industry in Canada, while the UK was not that much affected by these happenings. There are more natural resources such as oil, natural gas and timber (Datamonitor Canada, 2003) in Canada than in the UK, which in terms of exports accounts for a great deal. Also the close trading relationship between Canada and the US cannot be ignored as it is unique. 85% of total exports exit Canada for the US market (Datamonitor Canada, 2003) while US being the biggest trading partner for the UK it accounts for only 15% of total exports (Datamonitor UK, 2003). From political point of view there is one major difference that needs attention, the issue of the French-speaking province of Québec in Canada who rejected "a referendum on secession from the Federation in 1995" (Euromonitor International, 2005). There is a big divide between the Francophone province and the rest of the country. Many feel their ethnicity is at risk from the huge Anglophone culture of North America. Also the east-west split influences the political culture in Canada. Economically both countries are very well developed, Canada counting for seventh, the UK for the fourth largest economy in the world and future predictions are promising, too. (Appendix 2, Economical factors) From socio-cultural point of view the main difference is again the French- English internal tension in Canada. There is bilingualism in Canada (English, French) and one official language in the UK. There will be no language barriers when conducting a business in Canada which is a great advantage (Appendix 2, Social influences). Technologically both countries are very advanced there is a lot of investment in new technologies in both countries (Appendix 2, Technological influences). When conducting business in a foreign country this fact is essential in terms of marketing communication possibilities. The spread use of the internet is just one possible feature to be used for successful marketing. From environmental point of view there are a lot more opportunities in Canada than in the UK. Canada's natural environment is outstanding with its mountains, lakes, national parks, wildlife suggesting a lot of opportunities for tourism (Appendix 2, Environmental influences). As sport and health tourism are among the most popular ones nowadays these are supportive factors however the increasing popularity of 'new' destinations such as South- America, Central America and the Caribbean cannot be ignored. There is a future forecast by World Tourism Organization (1999) that there will be the lowest growth in tourism arrivals in the North- American part, while the highest growth is expected in Southern America until the year of 2020. While Canada is an attractive environment there is a big marketing challenge for Canadian hospitality industries to remain at the top. <heading>2.2 Demand</heading>There is a need for analysing the demand for travel and tourism in the destination country before deciding whether to enter the foreign market. Drivers of each type of hospitality demand apply to all countries for travel and tourism according to Middleton and Clarke (2001) which need to be constantly monitored by marketing managers in order to gain competitiveness. The same external factors of market demand influence all hospitality industries, the difference in success lies in the way they respond to these determinants. Looking at international arrivals, American visitors are far the biggest sector for Canada (Loverseed, 2005). There is an interesting growth from year 2001 to 2002 which might be surprising after the 11 September terrorist attack, however it can be explained that many US tourists cancelled their overseas holiday plans choosing Canada instead as 'safe' place and alike to their home. There is a decrease (Appendix 3) in US travellers according to the previous year, which might be associated with Canada's choice not to participate in the Iraqi conflict, SARS outbreak (ibid). Nevertheless the table below shows that US is still the largest inbound market to Canada. <table/>After the US international demand comes from the UK and France. For Europeans Canada is an attractive destination as the prices related to tourism such as food and lodgings are comparatively lower than in their home countries, thus Canada is a 'good value for money' (Loverseed, 2005). Travel and Tourism Intelligence research also suggests that domestic and international business demand comes from Vancouver where a large convention and meetings clientele exists. Advantages of business customers are that bookings are arranged very much in advance and cancellations are rare, whereas domestic leisure consumers are more likely to change their minds. Economic factors influence the volume of demand (Middleton and Clarke, 2001). Looking at annual disposable income in Canada and tourist expenditures in 2003, both show growth comparing with the previous year which suggest 'income elasticity' (Appendix 4 and 5). There was a slight fall back in expenditure in 2001 and 2002 but the following year it has risen again. International tourism receipts decreased in 2003 (Appendix 4), mainly due to SARS outbreak however this affected domestic tourism in a positive way. Inflation in Canada is very low and has remained between the range of 1 to 3 per cent since 1991, which was established by the Bank of Canada and the Government as a target and is predicted till the end of 2006 when it will be reviewed again (OECD, 2004). Exchange rates are very in favour of Canada, there was a currency appreciation in 2002-2003. "Sharp and rapid appreciation of Canadian dollar weighed on demand." (Euromonitor International, 2005). Low interest rates sustained domestic demand and personal consumption rose by 4.3% in 2003, while there were not very large wage increases. Future outlook is very positive, though there is a risk to be considered which the rise in oil prices is. Although Canada would benefit from higher export income it would bring down the demand from the US and would put downward pressure on Canadian exports, but this is impossible to predict with accuracy. Demographic data suggest the average household in Canada consists of 2 persons which is typical of developed economies (Middleton, 2001). In the last decade more detailed segmentation and niche marketing have been introduced in order to get a better picture about consumer needs. Especially in the luxury market sector, there are people with high income but probably with different interest coming from different business backgrounds. Geographic factors are becoming more and more influencing on travelling decisions. As WTO suggests that tourist are becoming more interested in activity inclusive vacations rather than classical sightseeing (World Tourism Organization, 1999). The climate, diverse nature and scenic appeal of Canada are definitely attractive for future visitors. From socio-cultural point of view holidays are believed to be a necessity rather than a luxury and this applies to Canada. Growth in earlier discussed disposable income, short working hours a week (average working week in Canada in 2003 was 32,5 hours according to International Labour Organisation), personal mobility enables people to travel more and more often (Euromonitor International, 2005). Tourist arrivals by road are the highest in terms of method of transport (Appendix 6). National Parks though in Canada have their regulations for entrance by private car. Sustainability is a concern taken care of in Canada. Influence of the media and the information technology are another factors influencing demand. In Canada 33.6% of households make travel arrangements through the World Wide Web (Appendix 7), which is going to increase in the future. Governmental regulations on eco-tourism are very effective in Canada in order to protect the nature and the wildlife. People in luxury segment are looking for something inspirational, satisfying their special interest. <heading>2.3 Supply Factors in Canada</heading>When entering a foreign market there will be presence of existing hospitality companies and the competition needs to be examined. Porter (1980) recognised that understanding and analysing competitors helps to convey the best from a company. He identified 'five competitive forces' that drive industry competition: 'bargaining power of buyers, bargaining power of suppliers, threat of new entrants, threat of substitute products or services, intensity of rivalry among existing firms. A combined strength of these forces establishes probable revenue for the industry. Suppliers and rivalry among existing competitors is being looked at in more detail. Main issues in bargaining power of suppliers from hospitality prospective are the workforce and labour relations from marketing manager point of view. Ronen and Shenkar's figure (1985 cited in Bowie, 2005) of country clusters shows that Canada belonging to the "Anglo" Country Cluster as well as the UK and US will make it easier to work there. Canada having one of the official languages English there are no language barriers. On the other hand there might be issues with the question of skilled staff, as to be able to deliver high-standard service. In the luxury market sector skilled, dedicated personnel is essential to perform at their best ensuring customer satisfaction. While unemployment remains relatively high: in 2002 "more than 500,000 new jobs were created", principally in the services segment. The 99% literacy in Canada (Datamonitor Canada, 2003) shows sophistication. A large number of highly skilled employees at FBH will probably take away a great part of the company's profit. According to Porter's (1980) five forces model 'intensity of competitive rivalry' needs to be analysed, in case of FBH number and type of competitors. As targeting a niche market segment both domestic and international competition need to be looked at. Thorough research of the author indicated that there are a large number of boutique hotels in Canada. Due to space limitation the ones big large number of rooms is being ignored, only the 'smaller' ones are being looked at. However research suggests that in North America there is a different understanding of 'small' than in Europe. Key competitor hotel brands identified are the 13 Relais & Chateaux hotels and restaurants across Canada, from which the Post Hotel and Spa in Lake Louise, Alberta have been chosen to be analysed; and other small boutique hotels in the area such as: Whistler Pinnacle, Sundial Boutique Hotel and Pan Pacific Whistler Village Centre. There is the Lumière Restaurant which however is not a hotel but cannot be ignored because of its Relais Gourmand title, a top restaurant in town of Vancouver being unique in the area (Appendix 10). These hotels all target a niche market sector. <heading>2.4 Market Attractiveness</heading>Canada attracts both small and large companies from any part of the world (Osland et al. , 2001) and has one of the world's most open economies for foreign investment. Dynamically encourages non-Canadians to commence a new business activity or expand their existing one by setting up small number of restrictions and regulations (Government, 2005). Federal requirement is to file a notification within 30 days of the implementation with Investment Canada. Selecting an entry mode is one of the most central strategic decisions an intercultural company has to make (Root, 1994 cited in Osland et al. , 2001). Implementing the appropriate mode of entry may help to achieve competitive advantage. Firm specific internal and location specific external factors need to be considered (Hollensen, 2004) when looking for the right method of entry strategy. Internal factors in case of FBH are as follows: a relatively small hotel with small number of bedrooms, with international experience in five countries in Europe and the United States, high economies of scale, using global reservation system, need for investment in training. External factors suggest a politically stable country with business confidence, high level of economic development, not much cultural distance from the home country. However climate change cannot be ignored when evaluating market attractiveness. The outstanding natural environment in Canada with its scenic mountains and lakes, national parks are all determining attractiveness for tourism and are a critical factor when defining a quality tourism product according to HLA Consultants & ARA Consulting Group in 1995 (Hall and Higham, 2005). The loss of these natural settings out coming from climate change could have a great deal of negative implications on Canadian tourism in the Rocky Mountain and the Great Lakes area as well. The tourism industry must be adaptive to climate change and should work together with scientists in order to develop a sustainable tourism program. Hollensen (2004) ranks the entry modes in export-, intermediate- and hierarchical groups. Export modes are indirect or direct exporting, or export marketing groups; which are typical choices when entering a foreign market for the first time and supplying from the domestic set. Secondly, types of intermediate entry strategies are franchising, joint venture and management contracting, where there is a shared ownership between the parent company and the local firm. Finally hierarchical modes are where the company has an entire ownership and control. There are advantages and disadvantages in all categories depending on several factors. Research showed that for FBH most suitable forms of entry would be franchising or whole ownership. Franchising is easier in developed countries suggests Contractor and Kundu (1998). Wholly owned subsidiaries require the greatest resource commitment, though it enables highest control and lowest technology risk (Osland et al., 2001). There is a need for high personal control at FBH to ensure consistency. While in case of franchising the franchisee has the power of operational control and the franchiser has not a great deal of direct control. Root (1994, cited in Hollensen, 2004) states that there are three different rules companies follow when entering foreign market. If decision is to enter all foreign markets in the same way it is 'naive', when the most effective mode is chosen he calls it 'pragmatic' and when all the possible entry modes are investigated and then the choice is made taking in account maximum profit that is carried out following the 'strategy rules'. FBH being present in several countries already suggests experience and capital to be able to invest. Some of the existing properties have been franchised, but for the new Canadian subsidiary an ownership might be more suitable to begin with. Also the employees need to represent the company itself rather than the country they work in. There is a plan to relocate some professionals from the UK based hotel to Canada in order to train the new, locally hired staff and transfer the knowledge and policy of the hotel which is necessary in case of transnational organization according to Hollensen (2004). Subsequently there is the question of whether to acquire an existing building or to proceed with foreign direct investment. Acquisition might cause some difficulty as FBH is a standardised hard brand in terms of quality which will be explained later. However it might be a possibility to buy an establishment where a different industry operates that would be a 'conglomerate' form of acquisition (Root, 1987 cited in Hollensen, 2004) in order to be able to establish own brand. Nevertheless it is time consuming and there is a need for high investment FBH should consider building a hotel with the opportunity to design according to the latest fashion and create its own image, and the possibility to implement 'state of the art technology.' Market entry strategy suggested is a wholly owned subsidiary, a greenfield investment. <heading>2.5 Key Target Markets for FBH</heading>Demand determines potential clientele. From geographic prospective target markets are visitors from the UK as home country market, Canadians as host country market, regional US, global Western European countries and Japan (Table 1 p. 7). Regional demand comes from the United States which according to the statistics is the highest. International demand comes from home country-UK at the first place, followed by France and Germany. There is a mix of geographic target markets for FBH. However the standards of FBH target consumers are elegant ambience, relaxation, pampering, fine dining, and sophisticated staff. The similar values and lifestyles form their behaviour. Therefore the market segment is based on 'affinity classes' (Usunier and Lee, 2005) rather than 'affinity zones'. It is a narrow niche market looking for perfection. Niche markets such as spa are emerging in Canada (Loverseed, 2005) and they are targeted by smaller competitors, who are proposing original and appealing packages to attract specific interest travellers. Golf and cruises are behind the spa tourism. The spa usage is more likely to be linked with holiday taking as it is supposed be a stress relieving, fitness and health activity for both genders rather than beauty treatments or weight loss for only women as it used to be in the past (Travel and Tourism Analyst, 1998). Health consciousness of highly educated consumers creates a demand for health tourism in a relaxing and beautiful area offering nutritious and gourmet meal at the same time. Targeting a niche market who is not interested in mass destinations where 'sun-sea-sand' desires are fulfilled but looking for something more personalised and meaningful in order to learn about themselves and their lives. Enjoying a relaxing holiday treat while remaining healthy, keeping fit and young-looking in a beautiful scenic setting of mountains. Sports tourism is another niche market in Canada (Travel and Tourism Analyst, 2001). According to Sports Canada statistics mainly consumers at the higher end of the income scale take part in sporting activities due to the high costs of sporting outfits for skiing or golfing. Canada offering sporting facilities by its nature invites the Canadians to enjoy the outdoor activities, as well as the couple of Olympic Games hosted in Canada made sporting activities popular. FBH is located in the mountain close to ski resorts and offering spa facilities. Prioritised target market is a low volume, high value global market for both business and leisure in a luxury price band. <heading>2.6 Strategic Orientation for FBH</heading>There are four types of centricity identified (Hollensen, 2004) from an international hotel marketing perspective: ethno-centric, poly-centric, region-centric and geo-centric. "Centricity" is a tool to analyse companies, it is ideal, cannot be perfectly implemented but helps to recognize an approach FBH should take when considering international expansion to Canada. Following Hollensen's structure the following ideas have been formed: The ethno-centric orientation targets the consumers of home market, providing domestic offer, applying domestic marketing in any part of the world. This is a perfectly acceptable route when looking after people from UK in Canada, which could be a possible approach adopted by FBH as it has been seen from statistics earlier that UK visitors are the second largest inbound market in Canada. The poly-centric orientation focuses on the host market, tailoring their marketing to the needs of local customers. There is a great domestic demand in Canada but considering that there are no fundamental differences between the UK and Canada as seen from the PESTE analysis of the Canadian environment perhaps this approach would not be the best to follow. The regio-centric direction concentrates on the regional demand, consumers from the US in this case. FBH could possibly follow this approach as US demand is the greatest in the host country. Finally the geo-centric orientation addresses the global market, having an affirmative mind-set towards any culture in the world and implementing the best management techniques from many different countries. Though there is a great regional, host- and home market demand in Canada FBH targets a narrow, niche Anglo- American market. The similar values are recognised rather than the country of origin. After investigating all the possible "centricities" it is recommended that FBH should adopt geo-centric orientation concentrating on global elite. <heading>2.7 Brand Image and Positioning</heading>The brand in the hospitality industry is a 'source of competitive advantage' (Bailey and Ball, 2005 p. 40) as they support differentiation based upon characteristics of the actual brand. It encloses several advantages for the consumer, both 'functional and emotional'. It is predicted that the number of the existing branded 15 million bedrooms will reach 30 million by the year of 2030 (Slattery, 2003 cited in Bailey and Ball, 2005). Usunier (2005) states that a brand name should not be more than three syllables and be easily understood everywhere to ease communication between supplier and consumer. The brand name 'finesse' was originally designed to be easily recognised and pronounced worldwide in several languages. As Usunier (2005) suggests an "ex nihilo" formation of an international brand name, when it is understood in a similar way across different languages and cultures. These hotels distinguish themselves through the excellence of their warm welcome, individually designed and decorated rooms and suites, truly outstanding quality gourmet restaurant, the greatest vintages of fine wine and high-standard service and personal care. If needs of a specific target market are not met customers will not be loyal to the brand (Connell, 1992). It is a challenge to achieve brand consistency. A brand name with the same name across different countries has to deliver the same standards everywhere in order to be identified by customers constantly and on repeating visits. <quote>"Branding can facilitate differentiation and positioning in a competitive marketplace" (ibid p.30).</quote>As prioritised market segment has been identified as luxury, following STP figure adapted from Lovelock (Bowie and Buttle, 2004) helps to get to positioning strategy on the following route: segmenting, targeting, positioning. There are 13 Relais et Chateaux in Canada and some boutique hotels with small number of rooms. Consumer benefits are high standards, exceptional personalised service and stylish, individually designed rooms what the competitors do not offer. Product differentiation as in order to attract consumers, product and service should be different or better. Logo present on all products throughout the hotel (Appendix 11). There is high brand awareness because of the presence for 16 years and also the high brand image fulfil quest for perfection. Enthusiastic staff is attentive to the smallest detail doing everything possible in their power to satisfy customer needs and furthermore make their stay a special and memorable one. Courtesy, comfort, cuisine, tranquillity, passion are all fundamental values. Gastronomy is created with special signature dishes from the famous head chef who works together with his team of dedicated professionals using their talent, creativity and local, organic produce to deliver outstanding culinary delights to the customers. Caters for all special dietary requirements, and provides special menu for blind people. Slattery (1991 cited in Connell, 1992) has identified terms "soft" and "hard" in order to differentiate stages of consistency. Following this defined features the FBH brand has been analysed. FBH uses the same brand name across all the countries it operates in, targets a specific segment, customers expect a consistent offer in terms of product, service, location. However there is no totally "soft" or "hard" brand all these characteristics mentioned above suggest that FBH should be a hard brand. Key loyalty emotions such as being pampered, relaxed and sophisticated are rated highest by luxury market consumers (Barsky and Nash, 2002). Getting feedback on customers' emotions which appear through the experience with the product itself and the services offered in the hotel it is essential aspect for a successful brand and for gaining regular clientele. FBH is putting a lot of effort into investigating these characteristics moreover for the reason that according to research carried out by Barsky and Nash (2002, p.39.) there is no evidence that any hotel "have ever measured or used consumer emotions as a management tool". There are other things that FBH differentiate itself from its competitors. While positioning the FBH brand number and types of services and their special characteristics have been analysed which are offered by each hotel. Main features included: designer suites, ski-in ski-out and heli-skiing possibility, spa and fitness facilities, gourmet restaurant preferably with a celebrity chef, individually named rather than numbered rooms. While all the hotels being looked at are close to the skiing gondolas with minor differences this positioning suggested more anticipation. However it has been found that for example Pinnacle Boutique Hotel does not offer individually designed suites however it is an elegant stylish boutique hotel in the heart of Whistler village within steps away from the mountains. There are no spa and fitness facilities on-site however it offers a fine dining restaurant. Pinnacle is in the lowest position. Highest competitor was identified as Sundial Boutique Hotel. However the gourmet meals they offer are prepared in the guest suites by a personal chef in front of the fire place, which might be rather a big advantage for some of the targeted customers. None of the hotels offer rooms with creative names as it is at FBH, where the individually addressed decoration, fragrance and matching toiletries are all aiming to present unique qualities. All the rooms give a different experience, which might create a regular clientele returning with the wish to stay in another room with a diverse atmosphere or on a different occasion. FBH believes this is a good pulling power among all the others that offering quality, nutritionally supervised gourmet dining and refreshing spa facilities and outdoor activities in all seasons. Brand positioning map describes all these differences between the competitors (Appendix 13). <heading>2.8 International Marketing mix- Standardisation and Adaptation Decisions</heading>The marketing mix explains the tools that are used to control demand (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). Five elements of the hospitality marketing mix are being discussed in details: location, product, distribution, pricing and marketing communications. First of all location decisions are crucial when entering a foreign market. Canada being an attractive market to enter and targeting upscale market interested in sports, health, fine dining. Ideal location is in the mountains but in short driving distance from large and gateway cities such as Vancouver and Calgary- both have international airport- to offer a leisure escape or even a different business venue close to the city. Suitable sites are premium where the most beautiful ski resorts are and the hot springs offering spa facilities. Close to competitors and to Whistle where the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Games will take place. Close the US border as they are the major inbound market. Closeness to the Pacific Ocean is another aspect in terms of high quality, freshly caught seafood offered in the gourmet restaurant, which will need a daily delivery. Considering all the above explained factors exact location chosen for the first unit is in British Columbia, on Whistler mountainside in village of Whistler. Future plans include the roll out of the brand into the Rocky Mountain's area and to Eastern part of Canada, between Toronto and Ottawa. Secondly the 'product' element of the marketing mix is being discussed. According to Usunier and Lee (2005) it is an essential matter to decide whether to standardise or adapt products when planning international marketing strategy. A large number of firms offer a standardised "core" product and adapt if necessary. Within the product there is a range of characteristics that might need different level of standardisation or adaptation according to different customer routine in various cultures. However there is a very strong argument against this from Levitt (1983) who believes that there is no need to differentiate in little details that might come out from various cultures. The company should concentrate on global- rather than personal needs. He states that the development of technology converts all consumers into a global customer who desires the latest product with lowest price. He holds the idea that the world demand has been irreversibly homogenized and 'this makes the multinational corporation obsolete and the global corporation absolute' (ibid, p. 93.). Nevertheless Usunier and Lee (2005) strongly emphasise that cultural differences need to be recognised. They suggest that the offered hospitality and tourism product may be analysed with three groups of product attributes, in order to meet customer expectations. These are physical, service and symbolic attributes. FBH offers an international luxury hotel product and customers are expecting a consistent offer, hence there is a need for standardisation in terms of high quality. Physical attributes such as size and facilities need to be standardised, on the other hand design should be adapted to the host country as the 30 individually decorated rooms are created by two famous Canadian designers. Each room will have its own name and fragrance according to the style and atmosphere it will offer. At the same time this will apply to the lounge areas and the Champagne Bar, the two main dining rooms and one private dining room. Leisure facilities offering spa treatments shall be standardised in terms of quality but adapted to local needs and potentials. The restaurant is planned to accept up to 100 guests. Wedding receptions, business meetings, corporate days will be accommodated in the private dining room up to 50 customers. Other physical attributes such as safety and hygiene regulations, climate and environment generated issues will be necessary to adapt. Service attributes are not easy to standardize (ibid), they are more reliant on culture. However, consistent service standards are expected at FBH. Courtesy, welcoming smile and open attitude, telephone answered in two rings, skilled multilingual staff are all standards of performance in all FBH around the world. Some adaptation might be needed in terms of training unskilled staff or customers arriving from fundamentally different cultures. Symbolic attributes are normally explaining physical attributes. The size of the hotel, the colours used in décor, the name of the brand and logo all represent a meaning. Though this can be understood in different ways by various cultures in case of FBH this would not apply. Symbolic attributes should be standardised. Thirdly distribution channels are being looked at. As FBH targets a narrow niche market direct marketing will be used to deliver the customers, avoiding intermediaries or using some specialist ones if needed such as it used in the UK. The fourth element is the pricing. Kotler and Armstrong (2003) state that there are internal and external factors which influence pricing decisions of a company. They also advise that after the target market and positioning has been chosen pricing should be easy to complete. In case of FBH high-income segment suggests high prices also for the reason that there is a price quality relationship. Ransley and Ingram (2001) believe that a valuable design can catch the attention of the targeted market segment and makes it possible for the hotel to set the prices consequently. This theory applies to FBH as all the suites, restaurants and lounges are individually designed by professionals creating a special value and lifestyle is one of the main characteristics of the brand. However this will draw a danger as well in terms of product life cycle, as refurbishment and maintenance will require high investment. But design is only one element among all the others. Competitors' prices are similar to FBH prices, that is a competition-based pricing (Kotler and Armstrong, 2003). In order to attract new customers and also to keep the existing clientele there is a definite need for powerful marketing communication. Creating a relationship between the seller and the buyer through advertising, sales promotion, personal selling and public relations (Usunier and Lee, 2005) are the four possible routes of marketing communication. The cultural differences would apply again if thinking of a foreign market, but not in the case of Canada and the UK. Anecdotal evidence shows that in the UK there is a big popularity of direct mail, in the host country direct mail will be the primary tool of marketing communication. Media in Canada is among the top 10 countries in terms of advertisement expenditure (Usunier and Lee, 2005). A very good customer database shall be developed in order to understand habits and needs of customers the most and according to that information satisfy their needs. <heading>3. Conclusion</heading>The research suggests that the negative affects on Canada's hospitality industry are demolishing and tourism is taking a positive turn in 2005 which is fully expected to flourish and develop, future outlook is promising. Niche markets are small at current but showing increase as specific interest is more and more the leading driver for demand. The extensive spread of the World Wide Web creates a great opportunity for customers to browse for the best deals when looking for a holiday destination which is undoubtedly a marketing challenge. The 2010 Winter Olympic Games will draw the world's attention to British Columbia and especially Whistler and Blackcomb area where it will take place. There will be a great presence of media from around the world, which is a big opportunity for tourism and hospitality industries and for FBH to benefit from such a global event. FBH will make an arrangement to be a sponsor of the Games and will work out professional marketing plans in order to create special offers, packages and be prepared to accommodate sport stars taking part in the event. Canada is continuing to be among the top ten destinations in the world (Loverseed, 2005), the challenge for the hotel and tourism industry and within it the FBH is to create a bright image of the country, a new 'Canada brand' that will make it successful with its admirable nature and differentiate itself from the competitors. Overall Canada can be considered as a suitable market for UK-based Finesse Boutique Hotels to enter. 