<heading>Introduction</heading>The current era is ruled by technology (Peacock, 1995), technological innovations appear in one's life on a daily basis; this includes information technology and the Internet. The world has moved from pre-Internet age to the Internet age, where the World Wide Web has a major importance in all areas of one's life. The theoretical concept and principles of the Internet were created essentially by three individuals and a research conference in 1956 (Internet History, 2005). Through technological development, research and implementing the visions of scientists there was a use of networking protocols in the 1980s. There were networks (ARPANET, National Science Foundation Network, and Computer Science Network) which connected the Universities in North America and then EUnet (European Network) connected Europe's research centres and Universities in 1990. ARPANET is the first internet that evolved to the one which is in use today. The use of the Internet increased quickly after 1990 and the US Government appointed independent internet management organizations starting in 1995 to work together in managing, researching and developing the Internet. Electronic commerce through the World Wide Web is gaining importance whether buying or selling products and services. The travel and tourism industry is not an exception. In the coursework three different electronic tourism distribution channels are being evaluated and discussed both from consumer and supplier perspective. The same travel package is analysed from three different providers which are the aggregator (tour operator) and integrator (travel agent) and the principals (airlines, hotels and car hire company) themselves. There is a need for clarifying special terms and explain definitions from different authors in the literature. The Internet is defined by Peter Drucker (2002 cited in Turban et al. , 2004 p. 3) as 'the major, worldwide distribution channel for goods, for services, and for managerial and professional jobs', which has a major changing affect on the organization of the industry, market segmentation, consumer behaviour and the continuous supply of products and services. The Internet thus enables people to buy and sell through a world wide network. This action can be considered as conducting business on electronic grounds- electronic commerce (EC). The method of buying, selling, and exchanging goods, services and information via computer networks is called EC (Turban et al., 2004). This retail is supported by supply channels. A distribution channel for travel and tourism whether it is related to traditional travel agents or Web sites is defined by Middleton (2001, p. 292.) as 'any organized and serviced system, paid out of marketing budgets and created or utilized to provide convenient points of sale and/ or access to consumers, away from the location of production and consumption'. However other authors argue that this definition ignores some activities undertaken by distribution channels. These are 'promotion and market research' (Buhalis and Laws, 2001, p. 332) and also the information supplying role of distribution channels. These aspects are vital in the tourism industry as customers need information for motivation to travel and for making a decision for the purchase of the tourism produce. O'Connor and Frew (2002), Buhalis and Laws (2001) stress the importance of it by stating that information is the 'lifeblood' of tourism; especially because of the intangible and perishable character of its products. Consumers need the information to fill the gap between their expectation and experience. Hotels need to use various distribution channels (O'Connor and Frew, 2002) including the emerging electronic ones. The role of information technology in tourism is of a high importance as it enables customers to find the information and to purchase the product at the same place. This facility saves costs, time and is very convenient for the customers and suppliers at the same time. As mentioned earlier distribution costs are covered from the marketing budget in any travel and tourism organization and it is the largest cost element of this budget thus there is a great interest and investment in the Internet (Middleton and Clarke, 2001). The importance of Global Distribution Systems (GDS) must not be ignored even in the internet era as O'Connor and Frew (2002, p. 41) state after their analysis of individual channels that 'the continuing importance of the GDS from the industry perspective is clearly evident'. Examples for GDSs are: Amadeus, Galileo, Sabre, Worldspan. Computerized Reservation Systems (CRS) are in use in all large business for customer database, enquiries and bookings (Middleton and Clarke, 2001). CRS is the main player in the distribution process. The Switch used to create the electronic connection between the GDSs and CRSs. The role of search engines is another aspect that needs to be looked at. Over 80% of web users find information on the World Wide Web with the help of search engines (Chaffey et al., 2003). This data suggests that they have a great importance from consumer point of view. From supplier perspective this fact means that companies who wish to be the ones that are visited most frequently with large number of customers they need to position themselves high on the search engine list, preferably within the first page. Danny Sullivan, editor of Search Engine Watch suggests for companies to create a 'short, attractive, enticing title tag' which will benefit buyers and sellers at the same time. Search engine (SE) 'provides an index of content on registered sites that can be searched by keyword' (ibid, p. 345-346.). Examples of SE on the Internet are: Google, Ask Jeeves, AltaVista, Lycos, Mamma, Profusion etc. Electronic distribution is facilitated through intermediaries such as tour operators and travel agents on one hand and through principals on the other. Intermediary is any third party that enables purchases (Middleton and Clarke, 2001), acting as a middleman between the producer and consumer. Destination Management Organizations (DMO) are considered as intermediaries. Disintermediation is the act of taking the middleman out of the distribution chain; the producers are dealing directly with the final consumers. There is a need to mention the role of infomediaries at this stage. Infomediaries are new forms of intermediaries (Middleton and Clarke, 2001) that provide the information but transfer customers to intermediaries or principals when they wish to book a holiday or purchase a product. Examples are: Kelkoo, Travelzoo and Traveljungle. Intermediaries can act both as aggregators or integrators. Aggregators are satisfying average consumers within the targeted segment. Tour operators can be considered as aggregators as they offer packages that are built in advance and the deal is to take the package as it is, however it may not satisfy individual aspects and personal demand. For example: Voyages Jules Verne, Globus, Cosmos etc. are aggregators. Integrators are aiming to meet individual needs. In tourism industry these are the travel agents who are able to provide tailor-made packages designed to special requirements and individual interests. Examples for electronic integrators are: Expedia, Travelocity, and Ebookers. However they can act as aggregators as well at the same time depending on the offer they propose. Principals- are the companies themselves who offer the product directly to the customer. There is no middleman between the supplier and consumer. These are hotels, airlines, different visitor attractions that are emerging with their own Web sites. Nevertheless the boundaries between all these suppliers- aggregators, integrators and principals- are starting to blur. In order to stay competitive they might have to be very versatile and try to satisfy different needs in the near future rather than concentrate on average demand. This concludes a channel conflict about 'who owns the customer'. The distribution channels used to depend on each other and thus work in cooperation with each other; however nowadays they are competing with each other. As the traditional bookings were made through two channels, one was providing the necessary information and the other used to carry out the transaction (O'Connor and Frew, 2002). Electronic-based systems play both roles, making it more convenient and less expensive to put together a booking and purchase for a holiday in a shorter time as well. Online buyer behaviour needs to be taken into account when creating internet marketing strategy. In order to satisfy specific needs and to design appealing products, marketers need to gain as much information about their target markets as possible. There are different models of online consumer behaviour created by various authors. Lewis and Lewis (1997 cited in Chaffey et al. , 2003) identified five categories of people using the Internet: undirected information seekers, who are only surfing on the internet  directed information seekers, who know exactly what they are looking for  directed buyers visit the site with an intention to buy specific product or service bargain hunters look for the best deals entertainment seekers use the Internet for joy and games. Another approach was developed by Styler (2001 cited in Chaffey et al. , 2003) who believes there are four types of customers: <list>-brand focused,price-sensitive,feature-savvy, advice-led. </list>In the same year Kothari et al. (cited in Chaffey et al. , 2003) proposed a segmentation based on the level of brand knowledge and on the fact whether one is searching specific information or only 'surfing' on the World Wide Web. They identified: <list>the expert,the wanderer,the adventurer, the investigator. </list>From supplier point of view these authors suggest that one must consider these different behaviours and decide on a target market in order to design a Web site and provide appealing information and navigation assistance according to the level of specific audience (Chaffey et al., 2003). For example business-to-business sites should consider that most of their consumers will be information seekers and buyers mainly. Many chief executives of leading e-commerce companies agree that loyalty is an economically and competitively essential attribute (Reichheld and Schefter, 2000) as attaining new customers is extremely costly and long-term profits highly depend on customer loyalty. Trust is stressed mostly when talking about electronic commerce. As customers cannot see and touch the products they buy therefore they need trust in the Web site in order to share their personal details with the suppliers. Many people believe that price is the only reason that drives customers to buy products and services online; indeed on the contrary research indicates the opposite. Reichheld and Schefter carried out a survey in their companies and the results confirmed the earlier statement that people will only buy from a Web site they 'know and trust' (2000, p. 106) and 'price does not rule the Web, trust does'. When customers trust a site there is a bigger chance that they will give their personal details. The authors carry on saying that another great advantage of online purchases is that shopping patterns of customers are transparent, and can be tracked by each click they make while in traditional retailing this is not really possible (unless tracking their credit card payments, which except for credit card issuers is not a possibility for companies). This feature makes it extremely easy for marketers to get to know their consumers and offer them products and services according to their preferences and shopping habits. However Reichheld and Schefter (2000) found that less than 20% of the online companies take advantage of this opportunity thus neglecting chances of up selling. Finally the design of a Web site should be customer-oriented. Chaffey et al. (2003, p. 288) suggest that information should be: personalised, easy to find, timely, up to date, accurate, clear, detailed and relevant. These are the aspects that consumers appreciate and make them 'stick' to a Web site. If they find easily what they are looking for and the content is recent and clear with offered explanations when necessary, they will be satisfied and visit again. The WAI Web Content Accessibility Guidelines consist of fourteen general principles of accessible design (W3, 2005). There are three identified priority levels, divided into checkpoints: <list>Priority 1: 17 high-priority checkpointsPriority 2: 33 medium-priority checkpointsPriority 3: 16 lower-priority checkpoints</list>The priority one checkpoints are expected to be all met by the online companies in order to make their Web site accessible to a wide range of people, including those with certain levels of disability, who are potential customers. This leads to identifying the customers of the coursework by describing the customer profile. The travel package is chosen for a young couple aged 27 (lady) and 32 (gentleman), empty nesters, who are belonging to group 'A' in socio-economic aspect. They are highly educated and health conscious, with a great deal of disposable income deriving from their high positions in their jobs. The purpose of their travel is a birthday treat for the gentlemen as a surprise from his fiancée. It is a leisure holiday however not once in a lifetime trip, moreover as the gentleman is motivated for Thailand, mainly because of its culture and gastronomy this is planned to be the first of the many trips in the future. Activities at the destination are planned to be mainly dining out in fine restaurants in Phuket and Bangkok, exploring the fresh fruit and fish markets and relaxing at the beach in Phuket enjoying local speciality cocktails. These activities are not included in the package, as it is supposed be a surprise organized by the fiancée, she intends to leave some power in the decision-making for the gentleman, and thus they will decide on activities together at the two destinations. It is a two centre holiday, and their budget is £ 1.800 for the travel itself including accommodation and an extra £ 700 for activities at the destination, total of £ 2.500. Explanation of travel package characteristics <heading>Aggregator:</heading><heading> URL  </heading>The aggregator is THG Holidays is specialist tour operator, created in 2002. The company is a division of Thomson Travel Group which is part of the World of TUI (THG, 2005). Travel package offered by aggregator, THG Holidays is an 'Early Bird Thailand Offer', two-centre holiday in Bangkok and Phuket, which includes the following: Return scheduled flights on Etihad Airways from London Heathrow to Bangkok International Internal flights from Bangkok International to Phuket on Thai Airways All pre-payable airport taxes 10 nights accommodation in Phuket at fours star Amari Coral Beach Resort, inclusive of breakfast 2 nights accommodation in Bangkok at three star plus Tawana Ramada Hotel inclusive of breakfast Return airport/hotel transports throughout, organised by Destination-Asia. Note: Offer valid between 01/05/2006 and 15/10/2005.at £699.00 per adult <heading>Travel package offered by integrator:</heading><heading> URL  </heading>The package as described by aggregator can be found at travelocity.com with the exception for the transfers. For the transfers in this case, Budget car hire company has been used and included in the price comparison. Whilst it was quite easy to book a transfer in Bangkok, however there were some difficulties doing it for Phuket. For this reason, the same price was used for Phuket as it was shown for Bangkok. Due to this fact the figures are not entirely precise, yet there should be only a minor difference that would not affect the final price of the package. Along with the failure to be able to book a transfer in Phuket there appeared another difficulty when looking for the hotel in Bangkok, Tawana Ramada. Despite the fact that there are great search facilities offered on the Web site, in fact they might disappoint the customer. When entering the name Tawana Ramada to advanced hotel search offered, the hotel was not found due to a misspelling. Tawana Ramada is spelled as Tawanda Ramada (see Web site 13 in appendices). Finally the hotel was found with the aid of A-Z listing. There was a problem with the phone number when completing the booking. (See Web site 10 in appendix) <heading>Travel package offered by principals:</heading><heading> URL </heading>Etihad Airways- return international flights This site is very pleasant, customer friendly, and easy to navigate. This Web site confirms the theory that design should be clear, accurate, detailed and relevant. From customer point of view most of the aspects are met. <heading> URL  </heading>Thai Airways- return internal flights Similarly to the previously discussed site is very customer friendly and experience can be described as enjoyable. Rich and relevant information, quick registration process and easy navigation are all good features for a customer. <heading> URL  </heading>Amari Coral Beach Resort- ten nights accommodation There was a slight confusion experienced when searching for the Web site of the Amari Coral Beach Resort hotel as there were two different Web sites found, none of them seems to be the hotel's own site as it is connected from a 'phuket' or a 'amari site'. The first one (above) has been evaluated; however there is acknowledgement of the  URL  Web site as well. The prices offered on the two sites match; however the layout and design is completely different. The question was raised whether it is the phenomenon of 'cyber-squatting', nonetheless there was no mistyping or misspelling and research confirmed that both sites are valid. The first Web site is more appealing in terms of design and the logo in the background gives a safer feeling to the customer while the amari.com/coral Web site appears less professional and would not be associated with a hotel at the first sight. <heading> URL  </heading>Tawana Ramada Hotel- two nights accommodation The site is very customer friendly and easy to use. There is a lot of white space in the background making it easy to read the displayed information. However it is easy to switch to another hotel from this site. Customer reviews have a positive impact on decision-making. <heading> URL  </heading>Destination Asia- return airport/hotel transfers The Web site is very rich in terms of information; one could consider even that whether it is not immensely large amount of reading, more than necessary. There is no possibility to book online however using the e-mail for queries is very effective. There is a personal not automated reply within the next day, or otherwise there is an apology in the a-mail explaining that due to holidays in Thailand there was no answer earlier. Evaluation of the seven different Web sites has been carried out using the AID-10 Web site Evaluation Framework (Paraskevas et al. , 2005). There is a summary of the scores below in two tables, and the most outstanding scores both positive and negative ways are explained; more details about the rest of the scores can be found in the appendices. <table/>As seen from the tables above the ranking of the Web sites is as follows. The best results were rewarded to Amari Coral Beach Hotel, followed by Tawana Ramada and Etihad Airways with the same result, then Thai Airways, Travelocity, Destination Asia and then and finally THG Holidays. <heading>THG Holidays</heading>Poor layout is due to the fact of 'rectanglitis'; however the layout looks organized. There is not enough white space in between the lines. Positive thing is though that there is no need for excessive scrolling. Value Adding Features are poor because THG uses limited number of value adding features. Informs about insurance and airport parking, but do not provide hyperlink for them. Personalization/Interactivity has been ranked as Poor as there is no interactivity of any kind; personalization appears through possibility offered for tailor-made holidays by completing a form with personal details and requesting a quotation via e-mail. Online transactions are poor because it is not possible to book holidays on-line, however the e-mail response is quick and personal with a helpful answer. For Travelocity the search capability is the only excellent feature. The website is very searchable, search possibilities are offered in each sector of the page. Etihad Airways' online transactions are not satisfying at all, as the booking for June was note possible online. The latest bookable date is 25 March. In the price comparison the price was confirmed by telephone from a London office. Thai Airways is a great website except for ease of access and accessibility. These features were analysed with technical aid of WebXACT and Net mechanic. The problem of accessibility applies to Amari Resort as well; the other attributes work quite well. Tawana Ramada's graphics and images are not satisfying. There are not enough pictures on the Web pages, neither attention-calling animation. Finally Destination Asia has excellent layout and extremely rich content quality; yet the personalization and interactivity is very poor. They do not offer any kind of personalization, the only possibility to get information is by e-mailing a member of the team. However the e-mail reply is very quick, personal and helpful. <heading>Price comparison</heading><table/>(See appendix for more details and for examples of calculations.) The young couple described earlier would probably buy the package from the aggregator as that is the easiest and quickest way to do it. However the THG Web site is not the most brilliant and it is not possible to book it online, yet it is convenient to get this package easily and for a good value for money. If looking for special offers, this package can be found very easily and is explained clearly in detail what is included. The departures of the flights are convenient (Heathrow- easily accessible airport) and the hotels included are upscale market; just enough for a birthday treat. Along with the fact that they offer the lowest price for the Thailand package, they respond very quickly to queries and seem very helpful. However it would fit in their budget, the young lady would not appreciate the time spent with the travel agent neither with the principals to book the same holiday with much more effort and difficulties that came up. Moreover the prices are higher with the other two channels which make the choice even easier. They would find at the Web site of the aggregator easily what they seek for. However it should be considered that in other cases, when looking for a more specific holiday with different requirements they might opt for a travel agent and a more customised offer. From Travel and Tourism Organisations perspective there are some implications that were experienced during planning the package and booking online that need to be addressed. Security issues are of high importance. As the literature points out customers will use the Web sites they 'know and trust'. To gain trust from potential consumers it is essential to ensure them about the security concerns they might have. Inform them that their data is handled with security and once the transaction is made their credit card numbers are destroyed. The analysed Web sites do not seem to have security problems. Except for THG Holidays and Destination Asia, they all obtain security certificates where there is a possibility to book online. The literature stresses the importance of loyalty. The different marketing techniques used by the Web site to keep the existing customers and attract new ones are vital. Such as use of cookies to get personal details and preferences in order to know the customers needs and habits as much as possible; update them with latest news and offers via e-mail or newsletter. Accessibility is a concerning issue for all of the analysed Web sites. None of the Web sites comply with all the automatic and manual checkpoints of W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines. All companies should preferably meet at least all high-priority checkpoints as for tourism organizations, airlines and hotels it is of major importance to make their Web site accessible to people with disabilities. Groups of people with different impairments are possible costumers. Companies should consider prospective customers who have hearing problems, not good eye-sight and display information in a way that is not tiring to read or describe sounds with text at the same time. As it can be seen from the evaluation Web sites do not meet even priority 1 checkpoints. It is becoming an issue. One could assume that this aspect of the Internet design is still in its infancy as even big companies- such as Travelocity- miss on these features; however in the future there will be a need for urgent improvement. Recommendations for each Web site are described below. <heading> URL  </heading>THG needs to make possible online bookings, make the site more attractive and appealing. Future online behaviour will not fit into these limited opportunities. People will appreciate the convenience of booking on the site. There is a need for improvement in terms of layout as well in order to solve the problem of 'rectanglitis'. <heading> URL  </heading>There are several good and bad points at the site of Travelocity. Explanation and guidance throughout the booking process (see Web site 8 in appendices) and their own hotel-rating system (Web site 9) is helpful. On the other hand there were a number of difficulties on the site when trying to book the travel package; one of them was a problem with entering the telephone number (Web site 10). Any format of the number was not accepted. Wrong spelling of a hotel name (Web site 13 and 14) is a huge mistake in such a large and well known company. This problem might disappoint customers and thus they might have a negative impression of the site; this mistake should be corrected. The calendar that is provided is rather annoying than helpful (Web site 11 and 12) <heading> URL  </heading>Etihad Airways- return international flights The national airline of United Arab Emirates, Etihad Airways should make it available to book more in advance. At the moment they offer 3 months in advance only. They promote themselves as the 'Worlds' leading new airline', and order to make this statement valid they are advised to invest in some improvement in the future. <heading> URL  </heading>Thai Airways- return internal flights National carrier of the Kingdom of Thailand, Thai airways Web sites got a very good overall score due to the fact that the site is very versatile. The aspects that need improvement are the ease of access and accessibility. There seem to be no security problems; it is easy to identify the safe URL with 'https'. <heading> URL  </heading>Amari Coral Beach Resort- ten nights accommodation The Amari Coral Beach Resort should create a more clear and focused Web site in order to avoid any possible confusion. These two sites in question offer the same price for the bedrooms; however give a different picture of the resort with variously designed Web sites. The <heading> URL  </heading>Tawana Ramada Hotel- two nights accommodation There is a large number of good features on the Web site. Firstly the 'live chat assistance' is offered throughout the booking process, where the customers can get help with a click and entering their name and phone number. This provides 24/7 customer service. Secondly past customer reviews appear straight on the homepage, which gives a good impression as there is a description of a person's positive experience with the Web site. As well as the hotel overview on the homepage which gives a good idea about the hotel and facilities offered. Furthermore there is a currency converter when the price of the room is displayed although it does not work. 'Page cannot be found' message appears, which is advised to be investigated. Despite of the fact that with the aid of Net Mechanic there were no dead links found there are definitely some that need correction. From security point of view there seem to be no problem. The padlock is present in the right corner of the Web site and clicking on it one can realise that there is an SSL protection and up to date security certificates. The fact that other hotels appear on the Web site should not be ignored. From marketer point of view it is very easy to loose the customer in a way that by clicking on 'popular Bangkok Hotels' they might decide to book another hotel instead of the Tawana Ramada. <heading> URL  </heading>Destination Asia- return airport/hotel transfers Destination-Asia is a destination management company specialized in Indochina. It was created in 1996, and it is the first Asian-based travel company owned by its employees. However they are not a principal in the aspect the coursework is looking at companies acting as principals, yet they have been treated as a principal for the following reasons: they are providing transfers in the package offered by the tour operator and they do own some cars that are used for transfers (Somchit, personal communication, December 9, 2005). While they offer online internet reservation facilities for tour operators nevertheless it should be considered to offer these facilities to individuals at the same time. As a result they could gain more customers. Despite the fact that they have a very attractive, well designed Web site, as well as rich information; however the main point is being missed out. The online booking facility for individuals is a huge gap which needs to be filled in the near future. As well as personality and interactivity aspects of the Web site need definitely more attention. It is recommended to open the Web site to individual customers and offer them the possibility to register online. As a result it will be possible to find out what individuals look for and what their interests are; hence they can offer more suitable products and respond to special needs. It would be however advisable to consider the background and foreground contrast and the red letters on a dark grey background might cause some difficulties in reading. 'The Internet per se will rarely be a competitive advantage' (Porter, 2001, p. 64). This statement suggests that the internet is a tool which if used wisely can improve the traditional ways of distribution and sale. Both on the demand and supply side the success will be achieved with the combination of 'old' and 'new' selling and competing techniques. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The use of the Internet in terms of distribution is emerging; however customers will still need personal assistance and will appreciate physical points of sale at the same time as on-line sales. They can then decide on the most suitable option for themselves and the method they wish to deal with a company. On the company side the combination of all features mentioned earlier will add value to their services. Yet there is a definite need for improvement in terms of Web site design. As the boundaries between all the different distribution channels are starting to blur, in the future all companies will be 'multigrators' (Bowie et al. , 2005) with diverse functionality in order to be able to please all segments and offer customised products with great deal of flexibility. As consumers are getting knowledgeable and experienced they will have the power to opt for the companies that best suit them. Thus to gain loyalty of customers will be very challenging from marketing point of view and will be vital for long-term benefits. Online distribution will rise in popularity; however the Internet will be a tool to complement the traditional elements of it. 