<heading>Dear Mr. Beswick, </heading>I am a first time author, and hope you will consider my novel for publication. 'Straight to the Heart' is a 60,000 word crime thriller set in the heart of Birmingham, based on PC Jack Cooper caught up in a investigation a bit too close to home. The title is meant to reflect the well used phrase "straight from the heart" which reflects the content of the novel, showing that the crime was one of emotion. Also, it relates to wedding ring fingers, which are cut off the victims in the novel, as a vein flows from this finger straight to the heart. 'Straight to the Heart' is a crime thriller with an edge of humour, focussing as much on the characters and their development as crime aspect itself. This is synonymous to Christopher Brookmyre's debut novel 'Quite Ugly One Morning". My writing style is also similar to Brookmyre's work, with the humour I employed being more subtly incorporated into the text. 'Straight to the Heart' should also appeal to readers of other authors on your list, such as Iain Banks. I am 19, and grew up on the outskirts of Birmingham, which enabled me to experience Birmingham first hand. Since moving to Oxford to study for a BA in Publishing, I have encountered many people with preconceived ideas of Birmingham, all very stereotypical. I aim to address this in my work, creating a more realistic view of Birmingham. Please find enclosed a synopsis and sample chapter of 'Straight to the heart'. I hope to hear from you soon, Yours sincerely,  <heading>Synopsis of 'Straight to the Heart'</heading>Jack Cooper is a constable in the West Midlands Police Force, suffering with interminable shifts, patrolling the streets of Birmingham, which is not as dangerous or interesting as people first think. Aside from his work related problems, he is also struggling with the broken relationship with his ex-long-term girlfriend, Sarah Evans, who is desperate to make their relationship work, despite having cheated on him, due to Jack's lack of commitment. Amidst Jack's 30th birthday celebrations comes the unpleasant gift of a severed ring finger, mystifying the police, turning Jack's home into a scene of investigation. Despite the arrival of the digit somewhat putting a dampener on celebrations, it gives Jack a more interesting role in the force, as it seems the finger was sent to him specifically, as a less than savoury birthday present. He is therefore more involved in the investigation, reading evidence reports, and delving into some long forgotten memories to identify someone with a grudge. The discovery of the body, to which the finger belonged, was supposed to be the main lead. However, when identified as Simon Wood, married accountant with two children, and with no link to Jack, it becomes apparent that things are not going to be cleared up in a hurry. Then another ring finger arrives, this time belonging to a Natalie Spencer, at face value, with no connection to either Jack or Simon Wood. With work, although more interesting, but becoming more stressful, and the ongoing struggle to form a relationship with new love interest, Emma Pendlington, with the ever-present Sarah, determined to patch things up, Jack feels that maybe life was easier patrolling the streets. However, when it is discovered that Natalie Spencer was formerly Natalie Millward, and attended Summerbridge School, Jack realises that she is not quite so unconnected to him as he first thought, remembering that she was his first ever girlfriend, despite the insignificance of the relationship they had. The arrival of yet another ring finger, once again female, and Jack interviewing potential suspect after potential suspect, initiating more school reunions than Jack could have imagined, it becomes more essential to wrap up this case as quickly as possible, as there is a general feeling that Birmingham has a serial killer on its hands, one with an unhealthy preoccupation with marriage. When the finger's owner is found Jack feels frustrated that once again he doesn't recognise the face or name, this time Ruth Hayden. But whilst Jack is in the morgue he recognises the feather tattoo on her hip. She was his birthday stripper, the lack of stage make-up and stage name making her temporarily unrecognisable. The thought that the link between the victim and Jack is possibly still coincidental is proven wrong, when Jack and Emma find the dead body of Jack's ex-fiancée on the front lawn. Despite the fact that the murderer must have walked up the drive with a dead body, there are no witnesses, which leads the police to rely on forensics, and other evidence gathered. While working on the evidence determined to catch the bastard who did this to Jen, Jack receives a 'phone call. The patrol car taking Emma home had been crashed into by a black VW Beetle, leaving one policeman seriously injured, and Emma nowhere to be seen. Scarcely believing it, Jack comes to the conclusion that Sarah must be involved, the black Beetle, Sarah's car, being too much of a coincidence. Arriving at Sarah's apartment, he lets himself in with his key, but finds nothing but a few of his old photos, some of Jen, and his School Year Book. Jack tries to figure out why she's doing this, not believing her to be just a jealous ex. Having a drink to steady his nerves, he tries to think what to do next. In anger, he throws the empty glass at the wall, knocking a picture off the mantelpiece. Picking the picture of an old village church, he realises where Sarah must be. Jack leaves, and rushes off to the church where Sarah's parents were married, and where she always wished she and Jack would be married. Arriving at the small, abandoned church in the small village of Kingswinford, Jack sees Sarah's car, and his worst fears are confirmed. Walking in slowly, he sees Sarah, sitting in the pew at the front of the church. Hearing him approach, she stands slowly, and points a gun at him. Desperate to find Emma, but scared to provoke Sarah, he listens to her, about how he could have prevented these murders, by taking her back after her affair, and by committing to her, by proposing to her. She explains that they all had to die, Jen, because she so nearly had what Sarah desperately wanted, Natalie, because she was his first girlfriend, and Simon, Sarah's lover, because she blamed him for Jack and Sarah's break and finally, Ruth Hayden, or Eva Angelina for dancing like a slut for his pleasure, not considering that it might hurt Sarah. When Jack explains that things will never work between them, Sarah demonstrates her psychopathic self, forgetting the gun, and throwing herself at him, not considering that she is smaller and weaker than Jack. Losing control, Jack knocks Sarah unconscious, handcuffs her, and calls for help. Frantically, he searches the tiny church, and finds Emma, slumped in a chair in the Vestry, with a gunshot wound to her head, and her wedding ring finger missing. <heading>Sample Chapter of 'Straight to the Heart'</heading>God, how he hated Birmingham, with it's £500m Bullring shopping centre, the Symphony Hall, the NEC, Jasper Carrott and HP sauce that everyone else seemed to love. However, whether you hated it or not, it was the sort of place that would defend until your death when in another part of the country, when people took the piss out of your accent. Jack hated his accent. When in Birmingham, he was regarded as well spoken. He avoided slang, and spoke correct English. When in the South he was common and stupid, which restricted his promotion prospects. It was this that had convinced him to move back to Birmingham almost 5 years ago, still PC Jack Cooper. He often regretted this decision, usually when on the train in the morning. Commuting to London was a private affair, everyone keeping themselves to themselves, the only sounds that of shuffled sheets of the Financial Times, and the mechanics of the underground. In Birmingham, it was a very different matter. Everyone seemed to know someone, loud chatter boring into Jack's head like a drill, the caffeine of his morning tea competing with the hypnotic effect of the train's motion and the dull conversation, luring him back to sleep. Stepping off the train onto Snow Hill station platform, the cold November air hit him, reviving him instantly. It took a moment for his eyes to adjust to the gloom; the covered station lit only by the dim lights several metres above, and the entrance at the top of the escalators. He was shunted by the crowd towards the stairs, the echoing of heels on the hard floor mingling with the sound of the trains pulling in and out of the station bringing with them the smell of burning oil. Stepping out onto Colmore Row, he began his fifteen minute walk to Starbucks for his coffee before work. He walked through the crowd, desperately trying to get there before the suffocating clouds above decided to drop its burden, but even as he thought this, he felt a drop of rain on his face. He attempted to pick up the pace, hoping his luck would ensure he got there before it really started to rain. Slowly but surely, heavy raindrops hit him more and more frequently. He started to run, his futile attempt to avoid getting soaked before he arrived, but when he pushed the steamy glass door open and stepped inside, he dripped over the polished tiles, leaving a pool where he stood. The smell of rich coffee greeted him instantly, immediately intensifying his craving for caffeine. He stood in the queue, inching slowly towards the counter. He reached the Mexican girl at the counter, and was about to order when someone interrupted. "Grande Caramel Macchiato please. And a tall decaff latte for me please." "Hello Sarah, I didn't see you. How are you?" Jack said. Despite Jack and Sarah having broke up two months ago, the old familiarity was there between them. It was difficult for them not to remain friends after a three year relationship. Although she had cheated on him, Jack found it very difficult not to trust her. He believed that three years couldn't be erased in a night. Sarah's brief affair had just highlighted some underlying problems with their relationship. That's what caused their break-up, but Sarah never saw it that way. After receiving their coffees at the end of the bar, they went to find a seat, choosing a worn purple sofa towards the back of the room. "So, why are you here?" Jack asked, confused. "I thought you were based in Walsall now." "I changed back to Birmingham. I found it too quiet. Never thought I'd miss the city. Decided to pop here before I started work... like we used to." Sarah looked down at her coffee, her long hair falling across her face. Although Jack couldn't see her face, he knew what she was thinking, and what was coming next. He winced inwardly, "Do you think..." she started. "No, Sarah, not again. It didn't work. Please, let's just stay friends, ok?" Jack attempted to keep his tone light, knowing that Sarah was just taking this harder than he was. She was never one to be alone. She needed the company. He attempted to change the subject. "What are you up to tonight? Anything interesting?" When she looked up, her eyes were still bright with tears, but her voice was steady. "I think I'm going out with the girls. Not too sure yet." Jack finally stepped onto the train again at ten past five. He managed to find one of the last available seats, and sat down heavily. The aches and pains that seemed to accumulate whilst at work relieved by the surprisingly comfortable seat. He hated patrol, distracting youths from their usual pursuits, and chasing off kerb-crawlers. He hated it even more so when he was forced to do this tedious job with PC Tremble, the most insanely paranoid person he was ever unfortunate enough to meet. There was one piece of good news in his day, brought by Tremble. He had informed Jack that he would not be able to attend his birthday celebrations that night. Jack was still thinking of this stroke of good luck whilst travelling to the Spearmint Rhino that night. Tremble was not the best of company. On the force, very few people got on with him, and his presence would only have made the celebrations slightly awkward. His colleagues had picked the location, and Jack was fine with it. The Spearmint Rhino was an upper class strip club, or "Gentlemen's Club". This was reflected by the inconspicuous brick building with plain gold lettering mounted on the front. Only the suited bouncers and the blacked out windows would be an indication of the business conducted inside. He didn't feel seedy or perverted in the Spearmint Rhino, unlike Birmingham's other strip clubs. Jack walked inside, and was greeted by a topless escort. She led him through the main hall, full with runways with poles in the centre, chairs surrounding them. The décor was as beautiful as the dancers. Candlelight was casting an appealing glow round the room, highlighting the assets of the performers. His escort continued to the back of the room, up a spiral staircase and into a private parlour, Jack following. He was surprised when he entered that everyone was already there. The only seat remaining was the one at the head of the table, just two metres away from the pole. Amidst the cheers of the other ten people there, Jack sat down and took his vodka from Michael and downed it in one. Jack was surprised that he felt relaxed, even excited. He had always wanted to go to a strip club when in a relationship, but when single he regarded it as beneath him, but sitting here with Eva Angelina dancing for his pleasure, the small feather tattoo on her hip drifting from side to side in front of his eyes as though caught in a breeze, he felt that this was the best way possible to spend his birthday. Jack stumbled through the front door at around 3am, tripping over the door mat and hitting his head off the corner of the banister railing. He managed to get through to the kitchen, the thought of sobering bread and water reminding him to not pass out. He took the slice of bread and the water to the stairs, sipping the water and nibbling the bread alternately. He put his head between his legs, a wave of nausea passing over him. He must not be sick. It would be a nightmare to clean up sick out of the cream carpet. He looked up and took another sip of water, staring at the front door. At its base, on the mat Jack had tripped over, was a small box wrapped in brown paper and tied with string. Jack crawled towards the door, and leant against it. He picked up the box too carefully, and tried to untie it, the knot in the string too difficult for his drunken fingers. Eventually the string came loose. Jack ripped the paper, and opened the box. There was a severed finger inside. Jack was sick on the carpet. <heading>Draft Chapter</heading>God, how he hated Birmingham, and the people who deluded themselves, thinking that it was "the second city" with only London better. Only people who lived in Birmingham referred to it as the second city, reeling off a list of benefits of the place. The £500m Bullring shopping centre, the Symphony Hall, the NEC, Jasper Carrott, Kojak and HP sauce. However, it was the sort of place that you hated if you lived there, but would defend until your death when in another part of the country, when people took the piss out of your accent. Jack hated his accent. When in Birmingham, he was regarded as well spoken. He avoided slang, and spoke correct English. When in the South however, he was common and stupid. It was this that had convinced him to move back to Birmingham, almost 5 years ago. He often regretted this, usually when on the train in the morning. Commuting to London was a quiet affair, the only sounds that of shuffled sheets of the Financial Times, and the mechanics of the underground. In Birmingham, it was a very different matter. Everyone seemed to know someone, loud chatter boring into Jack's head like a drill, the caffeine of his morning tea competing with the hypnotic effect of the train's motion and the dull conversation, luring him back to sleep. Stepping off the train onto Snow Hill station platform, the cold November air hit him, reviving him instantly. It took a moment for his eyes to adjust to the gloom; the covered station lit only by the dim lights several metres above, and the entrance at the top of the escalators. He was shunted by the crowd towards the stairs, the echoing of heels on the hard floor mingling with the sound of the trains pulling in and out of the station bringing with them the smell of burning oil. Stepping out onto Colmore Row, he began his fifteen minute walk to Starbucks. He walked through the crowd, desperately trying to get there before the voluminous clouds above decided to drop its burden, but even as he thought this, he felt a drop of rain on his face. He attempted to pick up the pace, hoping his luck would ensure he got to work before it really started to rain. Slowly but surely, heavy raindrops hit him more and more frequently. He started to run, his futile attempt to avoid getting soaked before he arrived, but when he pushed the steamy glass door open and stepped inside, he dripped over the polished tiles, leaving a pool where he stood. The smell of rich coffee greeted him instantly, immediately intensifying his craving for caffeine. He stood in the queue, inching slowly towards the counter. He reached the Mexican girl at the counter, and was about to order when someone interrupted. "Grande Caramel Macchiato please. And a tall decaff latte for me please." "Hello Sarah, I didn't see you. How are you?" Jack said. Despite Jack and Sarah having broke up two months ago, the old familiarity was there between them. It was difficult for them not to remain friends after a three year relationship. Although she had cheated on him, Jack found it very difficult not to trust her. He believed that three years couldn't be erased in a night. Sarah's brief affair had just highlighted some underlying problems with their relationship. That's what caused their break-up, but Sarah never saw it that way. After receiving their coffees at the end of the bar, they went to find a seat, choosing a worn purple sofa towards the back of the room. "So, why are you here?" Jack asked, confused. "I thought you were based in Walsall now." "I changed back to Birmingham. I found it too quiet. Never thought I'd miss the city. Decided to pop here before I started, like we used to." Sarah looked down at her coffee, her long hair falling across her face. Although Jack couldn't see her face, he knew what she was thinking, and what was coming next. He winced inwardly, "Do you think..." she started. "No, Sarah, not again. It didn't work. Please, let's just stay friends, ok?" Jack attempted to keep his tone light, knowing that Sarah was just taking this harder than he was. She was never one to be alone. She needed the company. He attempted to change the subject. "What are you up to tonight? Anything interesting?" When she looked up, her eyes were still bright with tears, but her voice was steady. "I think I'm going out with the girls. Not too sure yet." Jack finally stepped onto the train again at ten past five. He managed to find one of the last available seats, and sat down heavily. He hated patrol, distracting youths from their usual pursuits, and chasing off kerb-crawlers. He hated it even more so when he was forced to do this tedious job with the most insanely paranoid person he was ever unfortunate to meet. It was without regret that Jack was told that PC Tremble would not be able to attend his birthday celebrations that night. Jack was still thinking of this stroke of good luck whilst travelling to the Spearmint Rhino. His colleagues had picked the location, and Jack was fine with it. The Spearmint Rhino was an upper class strip club, or "Gentlemen's Club". This was reflected by the inconspicuous brick building with plain gold lettering mounted on the front. Only the suited bouncers and the blacked out windows would be an indication of the type of goings on inside. He didn't feel seedy or perverted in the Spearmint Rhino, unlike Birmingham's other strip clubs. Jack walked inside, and was led through the main hall, full with runways with poles in the centre, chairs surrounding them. The waitress continued to the back of the room, up a spiral staircase and into a private parlour, Jack following. He was surprised when he entered that everyone was already there. The only seat remaining was the one at the head of the table, just two metres away from the pole. Amidst the cheers of the other ten people there, Jack sat down and took his vodka from Michael and downed it in one. Jack was surprised that he felt relaxed, even excited. He had always wanted to go to a strip club when in a relationship, but when single he regarded it as beneath him, but sitting here with Eva Angelina dancing for his pleasure, the small feather tattoo on her hip drifting from side to side in front of his eyes, as though caught in a breeze, he felt that this was the best way possible to spend his birthday. Jack stumbled through the front door at around 3am, tripping over the door mat and hitting his head off the corner of the banister railing. He managed to get through to the kitchen, the thought of sobering bread and water reminding him to not pass out. He took the slice of bread and the water to the stairs, sipping the water and nibbling the bread alternately. He put his head between his legs, a wave of nausea passing over him. He must not be sick. It would be a nightmare to clean up sick out of the cream carpet. He looked up and took another sip of water, staring at the front door. At its base, on the mat Jack had tripped over, was a small box wrapped in brown paper and tied with string. Jack crawled towards the door, and leant against it. He picked up the box too carefully, and tried to untie it, the knot in the string too difficult for his drunken fingers. Eventually the string came loose. Jack ripped the paper, and opened the box. There was a severed finger inside. Jack was voluminously sick on the carpet. 