Different societies have different ways of seeing the world. People, places, objects and situations are placed in categories related to appropriate behaviour, and how they are categorised is unique to each individual culture. WHR Rivers provided an excellent example of the importance of understanding the classification systems of these cultures, and how failing to do so can lead to confusion. The Primitive Conception of Death shows how the Melanesian words for "dead" and "alive", mate and toa, cannot be translated into Western thinking literally. The fact that some Melanesian people carry out live burials is incomprehensible unless we understand that mate is a term applied to someone in the transitional state of dying. They are not yet dead as we conceive the term, but if they are very ill or very old they cease to be toa. Classification is the process by which people interpret what is happening around them, and it is essential to set all observations of a certain culture within this context. The concepts of purity, pollution and taboo can be very useful for understanding a system of classification. Besides the fact that these ideas produce observable behaviour in the form of rituals, they can give us a good idea about the boundaries of certain categories. The word taboo comes from the Polynesian tabu, which Franz Steiner took to be comprised of two parts, ta, "to mark off" and bu, meaning "thoroughly". Many anthropologists have suggested that taboo concepts are those which fall outside normal categories. Therefore, many taboos are associated with people in liminal states, such as initiates to manhood, or menstruating women. According to Lynn Bennett, in the Brahman-Chetri culture of Narikot, Nepal, women are forbidden to touch adult males, for fear of the contaminating properties of menstrual blood. While in this liminal state, women are removed from society and have to observe certain purification rules. During this time they are even more downgraded in status than normal, and there is a sense of sin attached to them. Taboos can also be interpreted as holding up precarious political systems. Supernatural power inhabits those of high social status, thus making them dangerous to lower ranks and vice versa. The strict Hindu caste system is enforced by notions about the polluting nature of lower castes. The highest group, the Brahman are held to be the purest and the pani na caln, the untouchables, are defiling for any high caste who come into contact with them. A symbolic expression of this is the giving of dal-bhat, a ritually significant staple food made from lentils and rice. Dal-Bhat would never be accepted by a Brahman from a lower class unless it is fried in butter in order to purify it. A Brahman who accidentally comes into contact with an untouchable, whether directly or indirectly must be cleaned with pure water. The idea of purification is central to the Hindu world view. To understand this we must understand a little about the context in which ideas of pollution are held. To Hindus, the world is full of mutually opposing concepts. Highly important are the religious notions of samsara and mukti. Samsara refers to all earthly human affairs, a condition held to be highly unstable and effectively a delusion of subjective consciousness. As the Nepalese villagers explained to Bennett it is "an unending and trustworthy fluctuation between different physical, emotional, ritual, social, and economic states." Therefore the concept of samsara invades all parts of Hindu society, as does its opposite mukti, the reward of the enlightened individual who passes to a transcendental state through correct living (dharma). Samsara is the state in which the individual constantly swings between the opposing ideas of jutho ("impurity") and cokho ("purity"). Because of this the Hindu is engaged in a constant battle to purify his or herself, especially in conjunction with eating and copulation, the most tempting pleasures of the flesh. However, almost all everyday essential functions of being human are potentially polluting. In relation to eating, one necessary purification ritual involves cleaning up scraps and leftover rice with a ball of cow dung. The dung of the cow is defiling in relation to a god, but in relation to a human being it is relatively safe, and even a Brahman can wash his body with it for ritual cleansing. We see the relation of the castes expressed through food, as no one of a lower caste than any member of a particular household may enter the kitchen area for fear of defiling it. This pollution rules could be interpreted as an attempted to bring some unity to the chaotic world in which we all live. As Mary Douglas wrote in Purity and Danger, "ideas about separating, purifying, demarcating and punishing transgressions have as their main function to impose system on an inherently untidy system." The Hindu can protect his or her cokho, hopefully enough to obtain mukti. There is an interesting insight to be had into the kinship system of this Nepalese Hindu community through the idea of purity. One way of determining the lineage of those of Brahman or Chetri caste is by reference to the gotra he or she belongs to. The gotra is a Hindu agnatic unit, a group bound together by shared relation to a particular mythological patrilineal ancestor, known as a rishi. The rishis were exceptionally pure sages and to have one as one's ancestor suggests a certain "spiritual pedigree". As Bennett writes, the rishi "provide conceptual basis for the cherished ideas of patrilineal continuity and purity of descent." There is a taboo resembling incest rules against anyone marrying into his or her own gotra. According to Bennett's own translation of the Gorkha Thar Gotra, any offspring born to an endogamous marriage "will most certainly be one who is accursed."This is an example of a pollution/purity idea defining and highlighting important classificatory boundaries. The term taboo can be applied to a broad range of ideas in any society, and is difficult to grasp precisely. What is clear however is that perceived dangers, whether real or imaginary play a highly important role in bracketing off sacred or unclean objects. To return to the original source of the word, the Polynesian meaning is unique, but there are parallels with many cultures. In Polynesia there seems to be little differentiation between the concepts of sacredness and ritual impurity however, the "constellation of meaning" as Steiner puts it is similar to that of the Nepalese Hindus in the opposition between sacred and profane. Each category is polluting to the other, and so sacred objects (which are polluting in relation to profane ones) must be fenced off and have particular sanctions associated with contact. Thus we can see how sexual division, class division, moral ideals and other such societal structures can be maintained. This concept of opposing sections of human experience is expressed in a myriad of ways, and one of my favourites is Hertz's comparison of the right and left hand, in which he suggested that left-handedness is rare, not because of any organic bias, but because of a taboo against its use. The dualistic nature of man is symbolised by the fencing off of the left hand. "If organic asymmetry had not existed, it would have had to be invented." 