Is it necessary to postulate sense-data in order to account for illusion and hallucination? This text will argue in favour of sense-data theory as a necessity to account for illusion and hallucination. First of all, a brief introduction to the relevant theories of perception will be described, namely Realism and Anti-Realism and their divisions; Direct Realism, Indirect Realism, Idealism and Phenomenalism. Reasons as to why sense-data theory might be hard to accept and arguments for the proposal of sense-data theory will follow. These arguments supporting sense-data theory arise from hallucination and illusion. The example used in this text as reinforcement to back up arguments will relate to visual perceptual experience, as it is most easily understood and more readily applicable. It is important to realise though, that each argument counts equally as much for the other forms of sensory perception, such as aural and tactual perception, as it does for visual perception. Often when one looks at an object, say, a half emptied bottle of whiskey, one believes that they are perceiving an external object. They see a bottle infront of them and can (assuming they have not drank the first half) interact with it by means of their senses. The sensory experience is inside one's mind and the bottle is in being externally; independent of the mind, though causally related to the internal sensory experience. This view is referred to as Direct Realism. 'Realism' because the theory assumes an external, mind-independent world; a reality. 'Direct' because all of what is perceived, be it perceived visually, tactually, aurally, etc. is perceived directly. One sees the bottle of whiskey because it is there in the external world and not in their mind. One uses one's sensory receptors, in this case one's eyes, to have a visual sensory experience of a half empty bottle of whiskey and the bottle of whiskey is causing the subject in question to have this sensory experience; there is a causal connection between one's sensory perception and the perceptive mind-dependent object. This theory of perception seems very plausible and is often what is assumed. However, there is one problem with Direct Realism, in that it does not account for errors in sensory experience; hallucination and illusion. To experience an illusion is to perceive something in an alternative way than it should otherwise be perceived. When one sees the aforementioned bottle of whiskey, one sees that it is made of clear glass, but the bottom half of the bottle seems to be of a golden colour; the colour of whiskey. One sees the bottle in this way, but not as the bottle actually is. A stronger argument comes from hallucination, which is to perceive a seemingly external perceptive object that is not available for perception, thus, a non-veridical perceptual experience. An intuitive argument by Descartes was that illusion and hallucinations are characteristically indistinguishable from actual sensory perceptive experiences, and thus showing that in any experience the external object of perception could be completely negligible (Crane, 1992). To account for this discrepency an alternative Realist theory shows itself. Indirect Realism accounts for perceptual error by proposing that the direct object of perception is not the mind-independent external object but an internal projection of that object referred to as a sense-datum. While there is a causal connection between external perceptual objects and one's sensory experience, unlike what Direct Realism proposes, the external object is perceived indirectly rather than directly. What is perceived directly however, is the internal idea, the sense-datum of the external object. There is the bottle of whiskey in the external world and it causes a sense-datum through my visual consciousness. The sense-datum acts as a mediator between the object one perceives and the sensory perceptual experience one has. The external object is thus indirectly perceived, whereas the sense-datum of that object is what is directly perceived (Audi, 2003). As there now is a bridge between the external and internal, there is room for perceptual errors such as hallucination and illusion. Alternate views that use sense-data to a certain extent account for sensory experience are the Idealist view and the Phenomenalist view; both Anti-Realist. Idealism and Phenomenalism differ from both Realist views in that they do not consider an external world. All forms of sensory experience are internal and it is impossible for any object to exist if it is unperceived. Sense-data theory is largely in support of Indirect Realism, whereas Anti-Realism agrees with Direct Realism that objects are perceived directly but agrees with Indirect Realism that what is directly perceived is not of the physical realm. As the name Idealism suggests, it is ideas that are directly perceived; sense-data. Phenomenalism, similarly to Idealism, argues that objects can not exist unperceived. It is, however, impossible to say whether or not objects exist unperceived, because that requires observation, and once an object is being observed, it is being perceived. So, to say that objects do not exist when they are not being perceived is a rather believable theory if one considers a sensory object and that it is made up of sensory phenomena, as the theory's name suggests (Audi, 2003). Once they are removed, there can not possibly be any of its qualities remaining, suggesting that all perceptibles are mind-dependent. Phenomenalism has conditions though. If we take the example of the whiskey bottle, it exists if it is in sufficient proximity to be heard or touched, or it is in sufficiently lighting to be seen. If these criteria, and any other criteria corresponding to the relevant senses, is not fulfilled, then, phenomenologically, there is no whiskey bottle. There seems to be a paradox concerning both forms of Realism. On the one hand, one could have a sensory experience entirely devoid of an external perceptual object. A veridical experience would be to have the half bottle of whiskey cause a sensory perception of it, but it would also be possible for one to be an alcoholic deprived of alcohol longing so much for it that his or her desire for whiskey could cause them to have a sensory experience of a bottle of whiskey. Both experiences would be characteristically indistinguishable, and either way, an external object would not be necessary for one to have such an experience (Crane, 1992), so by it is hard to think of any alternative to a mediary such as sense-data. However, when one examines one's experience at face value it is next to impossible to believe that there can be anything but internal experiences given by sense-data. One does not commonly come by beliefs about the world around oneself by considering a sense-datum for each corresponding perceptible. There is no consideration about the internal sense-data experience, but where the consideration lies is with what the internal experience concerns; the external world. When properties of external objects are inconsistent; that their secondary qualities are different to how they normally would be (like the whiskey bottle appearing to be of golden glass when viewed through the whiskey), then to understand such an inconsistency would require an assumption that it is not necessary for there to be a match between indirect mind-independent objects and internal sense-data (Audi, 2003). A hybrid Realist view satisfies both qualms by proposing that every veridical sensory experience is directly perceived and that when there is a perceptual error, the sensory experience is indirectly perceived. This view is referred to as Disjunctive Realism. The perceptual theory of Direct Realism simply requires for a direct causal sensory experience between subject and object. There is no mediary between the direct object and the subject's sensory experience. While this is a plausible for veridical sensory experience it does not account for non-veridical experience such as hallucination for the very fact that everything is perceived as it is in the external world. Indirect Realism tends to make up for what Direct Realism lacks by inferring a mediary. The object causes a sense-data experience in the subject whose mind projects secondary qualities, such as quality, texture, taste, etc. onto the external object. The object is perceived indirectly through a sense-datum, and with that gap there is space for error to occur, thus accounting for hallucination and illusion. Phenomenalism does not even consider an external environment nor does it account for indirect sensory perception. It does, however, consider sense-data as the objects of direct perception. If these objects of perception are directly internally perceived, then just like the Direct Realist view, these objects must be exactly as they are perceived, and thus, any thing perceived out of the ordinary can not possibly be a hallucination or an illusion, because everything is as it seems. From Direct Realism there was a problem accounting for perceptual error, and from Indirect Realism there was a problem considering sensory experience as indirect though sense-datum theory did account for perceptual error. Disjunctive Realism cleaned up both problems by stating that when a perceptual error occurred, it was an indirect perception, but nonetheless a sense-data perception. This is why it is necessary to postulate sense-data to account for hallucination. 