The accommodation sector is the largest sector in the tourism industry (Cooper et al, 1998) and includes a wide variety of establishments, providing somewhere for people to rest and revive themselves whilst on their travels. 29% of tourists stay in hotels in the UK, and 41% of their spending goes on hotels ( URL , 2004). This goes to show how big the hotel sector is within the hospitality industry. Accommodation establishments vary from youth hostels, where several people share a room, to 5 star resort-style hotels with several hundred rooms, and countless facilities. Hotels vary greatly in size and the facilities they provide. A bed and breakfast with just 3 rooms is classed as a hotel (Mintel, 2004) along with the aforementioned resort style establishments. This essay will focus on the hotel area of the industry, particularly the operations of the Hilton International Hotel Group. Hilton is a large international hotel group, with at least seven brands (Hilton Hospitality Inc, 2004) and operates in seventy nine countries, with a total of three hundred and ninety two hotels included in all of their brands. In the UK, there are over 33,000 hotels ( URL , 2003), of which seventy seven belong to the Hilton Group PLC (Hilton Hospitality Inc, 2004). Hilton provide a mid to high class style of accommodation (Hilton Hospitality Inc, 2004), in a variety of markets. Such examples are beach resorts, golfing hotels, spa breaks, business hotels, airport hotels, as well as resort style hotels (Hilton Hospitality Inc, 2004). This means that Hilton have established a wide range of hotel styles to attract many different market segments. The variety of hotel styles also means that if there are problems in one sector of the hotel industry, then Hilton can play to their strengths in other parts of the industry. Hilton Group PLC has reported a 19% growth in profits in the 4 months up to October 2004 (Financial Times, 2004). It is suggested that this growth will continue for the next 3 years. At present, Hilton is in the process of selling 11 hotels in the UK, mainly in Scotland, though it is not clear why (Paton, 2004). This would suggest that Hilton are making plans for the future, and need money to fund the plans. The sales of the hotels should generate £80-£100 million for Hilton. However, there are threats within the hotel industry that are completely unpredictable. A major threat to the hotel industry over not only the last year, but two before, is that of terrorism around the world. Countless acts of terrorism have taken place, although none have yet to target Britain on a large scale. However, there have been several flawed attempts, one on Canary Wharf in November 2004, the main business area of London (BBC, 2004). This sort of news doesn't build the confidence of travellers, and can deter people from travelling to these areas. Another major threat is the war that is currently taking place in Iraq. Although this doesn't directly affect the hotel industry in the UK, Hilton stated in May 2003 that they believed it to be a reason for a slump in profits (BBC, 2003). The pre-tax profits of the firm had dropped by 25% in the four months to April 2003. Hilton's other reason for this drop in profits was the SARS outbreak in Asia. The operations that were hit particularly hard were in London, Continental Europe and Pacific Asia. This is because people were advised not to travel to Asia, and a large amount of people from Asia travel to Continental Europe and London, and were not doing so at the time. The affect of the war has also been that the economies in some countries have experienced a slow down, and so people are less able to afford to travel, and stay in hotels. This is particularly true in some of the key Eurozone countries (Visit Britain, 2004). The economic slow down itself isn't the only problem for the hotel industry. The economy still has to climb to a level where people feel confident enough to spend money on luxuries such as holidays, and other travel that could be avoided. Another factor that is making travel less affordable is the increase in flight prices (Visit Britain, 2004). This flight price rise is due to increased oil prices, which has again been attributed to the war in Iraq. This is a threat that has already affected the hotel industry, but is also a threat in the future, as oil prices don't seem to be going down. Obviously this will not affect domestic travel so heavily, as alternative forms of transport exist such as rail and coach travel. Within the UK, a further threat is that the south of Europe is becoming more attractive to tourists. There are several reasons for this, firstly, conflict has died down in this region over the last 5 years, but more recently, the Olympic Games were held in Athens, Greece. Due to this, the city has become popular with tourists, where they can visit the stadia, and also look at the other historic sites that have always attracted other visitors there (Visit Britain, 2004). A further, very recent challenge for the hotel industry in the UK has been the American elections taking place (Independent, 2004). In the run up to the elections, the American's prefer to stay within the USA when travelling, so as not to miss any developments in the campaigns. With many American tourists visiting Britain, they've reduced in numbers this year. This means many hotels, especially those with a good international reputation, such as Hilton, have reduced numbers of visitors. After the elections however, it's likely that occupancy figures will return to normal. However, the hotel industry is perishable (Harris, 1999), and so the room sales that were lost in the run up to, and during the USA elections can never be retrieved. Although this is some lost revenue for the likes of Hilton, and other international hotel brands, there is an increasing amount of business coming from continental Europe to the UK. This is mainly in the form of French, Italian and German businesses, who have their conferences in UK hotels. This has resulted in Britain having the strongest hotel economy in Europe, so despite some threats to the industry, the hotel chains are taking advantage off all opportunities presented to them. Other opportunities are also arising within the hotel industry that are set to improve sales for UK hotels. After several years of uncertainty in the travel and tourism industry, after September 11 th, and the ongoing war in Iraq, tourists are becoming more confident about travelling, and so demand is growing for hotels and other tourism products (Visit Britain, 2004). It appears that demand levels are returning to levels experienced pre-September 11 th (Mintel, 2004), with the recovery, and further growth expected to continue. Mintel suggests that the industry will grow by 14% between 2004 and 2009, and this will be a benefit to any hotel operator. Growth is particularly strong in the London market (Accommodation Management, 2004). Another opportunity for hotel operators to take into account in the UK, is the increased amount of domestic tourism. "The weakening Pound against the euro, as well as ongoing fears of global terrorism will help maintain the market while bouts of good weather, such as the heat waves of 2003 and 2004, will all add to heightened demand" (Mintel, 2004, pg 54). The domestic market is hard to measure, as the tourist don't travel through any borders, where they can be counted (Page et al, 2001), but the previously mentioned factors all bode well for hotel operators in the UK. The way the hotel industry works is controlled by the current trends of the market. There are three main trends in the industry at the moment, the rise of the budget hotel, the increasing popularity of upmarket, contemporary hotels (Mintel, 2004), and more environmental awareness (Pryce, 2001). Budget hotels developed in the late eighties, a development of original budget accommodation such as farmhouses, inns and guest houses (Jones, 1996). Projection 2000 (In Jones, 1996, pg 62) defines budget hotels. <quote>"Budget hotels offer 2/3 star accommodation at 1/2 star frills. Mainly located on major roads, they are designed with 'no frills' convenience as a priority... The budget hotel has two principal differences when compared with a standard hotel or guest house: price and location."</quote>In 1992, a survey found there were 193 budget hotels in the UK, with the market dominated by Travelodge, and Travel Inn (Mintel, 2003). Now, there are around 850 budget hotels in the UK, with the figure still rising, as it has the most growth in the UK accommodation sector (Mintel, 2003). Mintel has estimated that there will be 883 budget hotels by the end of 2003. This trend is very promising for companies running budget hotels, but for companies without a budget brand, such as Hilton, the rise of the budget hotel means that there is a greater degree of competition. Tourists find the budget accommodation, and almost expect to find something of a better level, but at a similar price. For Hilton to compete with budget hotels, they could branch into this sector of the industry and compete directly, or provide a more upmarket service for the people that would normally stay in budget hotels, at just a slightly higher price. Mintel (2004) found that the top response from a survey was that many tourists would be prepared to pay more for more facilities, and a higher quality of product and service. At the other end of the spectrum, there is an increased popularity of niche, boutique hotels (Mintel, 2004). This shows a continued demand for an upscale product and service. This is proven by the fact that Thistle Hotels have plans to re-brand their UK hotels from mid-scale, to 4/5 star establishments. With regards to Hilton, they already have several more upmarket establishments, for example, The Waldorf Hilton in London, the Hilton Arc de Triomphe, Paris, and the London Hilton on Park Lane, which is a flagship hotel (Hilton Hospitality Inc, 2004). This is an area Hilton could expand on, as they already operate several establishments in the upscale market. If this trend continues, Hilton will be able to take advantage of it. Environmental concerns are becoming more widespread in the hotel industry. As the industry is a fairly clean one, with many voluntary environmental policies, there is very little legislation governing the protection of the environment within the hotel industry (Pryce, 2001). The protection of the environment comes under the heading of sustainable tourism. The World Tourism Organisation (in Pryce, 2001, pg 97) defines sustainable tourism to: <quote>"meets the needs of... host regions while protecting and enhancing opportunity for the future. It is envisaged as leading to management of all resources in such a way that... needs can be fulfilled while maintaining cultural integrity, essential ecological processes and biological diversity."</quote>Many hotel companies have developed environmental policies (Page et al, 2001), with the intention of stating what they do for the environment, and how they help to protect it. The Travel and Tourism Analyst (2001) cites a survey that shows how many of the top 10 European hotel chains have implemented an environmental policy. Hilton Group PLC in the UK has the Hilton UK & Ireland Environmental Sustainability programme, which aims to train all of their employees in environmental sustainability by the end of July 2004 (Mintel, 2004). This will make Hilton the "industry leader in terms of caring for the environment" (Mintel, 2004, pg 38). The implementation of policies such as these is advantageous to both the environment around the hotels, and the hotels and their owners themselves. For the environment, it means that water use may be reduced, more recycling may take place, and energy consumption may be reduced (Cooper et al, 1998). For the hotel companies, implementing an environmental policy can improve company image, attract environmentally aware tourists, as well as reducing their costs with the likes of energy and water bills (Pryce, 2001). For the hotel industry, as long as world events remain stable, the trends should continue to develop. The hotel industry is still recovering from the world event of the last few years, but this recovery is set to continue. Hilton has announced 19% profit increases in the four months up to October 2004, and this is set to continue (Paton, 2004). The development of more budget hotels cannot continue forever, as eventually the market will become saturated. However, trends such as increased concern for the environment can always continue, and is likely to, whatever happens in the world. For Hilton, the main risk is further investment in the budget hotel sector, and if they wish to compete with these operators, they may wish to invest themselves, and reap the benefits. Other, less significant trends that are affecting the hotel industry include the consolidation of larger operators, which puts small, independent operators at risk, and more standardisation of the service and product within the industry (Sigma and Baum, 2003). For the hotel industry, times ahead are uncertain, with the continuation of the war in Iraq, and more threats of terrorism. However, there is also hope for the industry with in increased domestic tourism, and for Hilton, the increased popularity of the upmarket hotel sector, in which they are already well integrated. 