<heading>Outline and evaluate the financial control procedures adopted in one area of the business. Support your answer with relevant financial reports or documentation. </heading>Within all departments, some sort of cost and stock control needs to take place. The bar holds a wide variety of stocks, including spirits, soft drinks and beers. It is important to keep records of these stocks, their ordering and delivery. Another area to be controlled is the reconciliation of cash, room charges and credit card charges with the till printouts. This ensures that all drinks served have been charged for. <heading>Controls</heading>Controls are standards that must be adhered to within a process (Dittmer and Keefe, 2006). An example is the cocktails made at Cowley Manor. Almost all the ingredients of the cocktails are measured into the shaker or the glass in which they are to be served. As the drinks are measured, it ensures that the guest always experiences the same drink. More importantly, all of the costs of the ingredients are accounted for in the price of the cocktail. At Cowley Manor, mixers for spirits are often served from small bottles. This means that the same amount of mixer is used each time, and a uniform drink is produced. An advantage for Cowley Manor is that when charging for these drinks, the costing is simple as the unit price for each mixer is the amount that has to be covered in the price of the drink. The same is true for all beer, lager and cider. These are all served in bottles. <heading>Stocktaking</heading>A stock take is a physical count of all the stocks held by a business (Burgess, 2001). A theoretical count of the stock should also take place, where the amount of stock delivered is added to that which is already there, and all sales and wastages are subtracted, leaving the amount of stock that should be there. In theory, the physical and theoretical counts should have the same results (Burgess, 2001). At Cowley Manor the stock take is carried out by an external auditor. Cowley Manor uses an external stock taker as it is independent, and any missing stock is noticed (Jake Osborne, House Manager). In order that the stock take figures are correct, all drinks that are taken from the bar but charged through a different department have to be noted down in a transfer book. For example, if the chef needs 50ml of brandy for a dessert, the cost would be attributable to the kitchen. It has to be ensured that all stock taken from the bar is noted as a cost for the department it is going to, and not the bar. <heading>Cost calculation</heading>The pricing of products is worked out using one of the cost-plus pricing methods. Gross profit pricing, which is used at Cowley Manor, involves the cost of the raw materials being added to the gross profit required (Burgess, 2001). This is a simplistic, but the most commonly used method of pricing. The House Manager, who calculates selling prices needs to make a gross profit of 70% in the bar. Some products produce more gross profit than others. The more expensive items contribute less gross profit, but this is made up for by cheaper items. <heading>Reconciling cash with printouts</heading>At Cowley Manor, only very small amounts of cash are handled. Almost all charges are made to bedrooms or credit/debit cards. However, it is still the case that all room and card charges have to be reconciled with the print out that is produced when the till is cashed off at the end of the shift (Appendix 8). Any variances in the amounts charged and the sales made have to be fully explained on the cashing up slip. As drinks bill are often transferred to the restaurant, this happens on a regular basis. <heading>Purchasing and Security</heading>The process of purchasing, taking delivery of, and storing stock is one that should be tightly controlled (Dittmer and Keefe, 2006). The ordering can be done in one of two ways. The periodic order method may be used, when an order of variable quantities is placed on a set date. Alternatively, the perpetual order method may be used, when an order is placed when necessary for a set amount (Dittmer and Keefe, 2006). At Cowley Manor, periodic ordering takes place. An order is made on a weekly basis, for the amount needed. This method requires the purchaser to have a good knowledge of the products that sell, and for them to be able to anticipate demand (Dittmer and Keefe, 2006). A record of the order is always made at the time of ordering. This allows the person who takes in the delivery to check that the correct goods have been delivered. When orders are delivered, there is often not a member of bar staff at the hotel. This means that the order is not always correctly checked upon delivery. Checking the delivery involves counting the delivery and checking for breakages and broken seals. Brands should also be checked (Davis et al, 1998). Dittmer and Keefe (2006) believe that alcoholic beverages are prone to theft in the storage areas, and that security of stocks should be a high priority for any business. They suggest that the availability of keys to the storage areas is restricted to only two people. At Cowley Manor, all bar staff, as well as the restaurant supervisors and all managers have access to the drinks cellar. This could leave the hotel susceptible to unscrupulous members of staff taking advantage of a lack of security. However, stocks are kept low, and with so few bar staff, it would soon be noticed if liquor started to "walk." There are many financial control procedures in place at Cowley Manor to ensure that all stock sold in the bar is accounted for. This includes the standard measures used and the cost calculations. The purchasing and supply of stock is a less well controlled area of the bar. Often, stock is not checked thoroughly on delivery, and is stored in an area accessible to a large number of staff. This is an area for improvement within the bar. <heading>How effective is your organisation in training employees and managers? </heading>Every employee has to go through a certain amount of training, as every job differs slightly. According to Go et al (1996) "effective training is a basic ingredient of success in the hospitality and tourism industry." If staff aren't trained, then the business will be less successful, as the staff won't be as efficient. Training is the process whereby staff gain and develop knowledge through practical activities and instruction (Go et al, 1996). In an ever-changing industry, the training should be on-going to keep up with developments. Cowley Manor is a Small Medium Enterprise (SME) as defined by the EU. It has less than 500 members of staff and is legally independent ( URL  t.com, 2006). Training in SME's is notoriously different to the training that takes place in larger organisations. Often, the management in SME's play many roles within the organisation, and so don't have such a specific perception of training (Davies and Ryan, 2005). At Cowley Manor, there are only 7 managers, all of whom take responsibility for training in each of their departments, alongside the running of their department. <heading>On the job training</heading>Training in SME's is often on-the-job. This is no different at Cowley Manor. According to research by the Learning and Skills Development Agency, employees at SME's learn best through everyday experiences (Personnel Today, 2004). A lot of value is placed on this informal, on-the-job training. This type of training is often the most used, but also abused (Go et al, 1996). As each new employee learns skills from other members of staff, it's possible that bad habits are handed down to new staff. On-the-job training should be planned in the same way that structured training is planned. This way, new staff learn the way the job should be done, rather than the way other staff do it. At Cowley Manor, on-the-job training is used in all of the departments, while some departments combine it with other training methods. <heading>Training Manuals</heading>In the reception and c-side, the spa, there is a training manual that is available to new members of staff (Reception training manual can be seen in Appendix 5). At c-side, this is particularly important, as it gives the new therapists a means of learning the treatment sequences. In main reception, the manual details exactly how to use the Fidelio reservation system. There is also detailed information about how to run reception shifts (Appendix 6). Manuals such as these enable staff to take the information away with them, and remind themselves of details at leisure (La Greca, 1988), but they can also be used by staff while carrying out their tasks as a reference without disturbing other staff. <heading>Off the job training</heading>Off-the-job training is also used, but to a lesser extent. This can take place at the place of work, but away from the physical location where the work is carried out, or away from the place of work (Go et al, 1996). At Cowley Manor, the off-the-job training takes place at the hotel. This training is mainly carried out for the staff of the restaurant and the spa. The restaurant and bar teams recently took part in rum, wine and food tasting. This allowed the staff to learn about the products they sell on a daily basis in a pressure-free situation. They were also given the opportunity to take notes, so when guests ask for advice on choosing wine for example, the staff can share their knowledge (Appendix 7). The wine and food training was done by the House Manager, but the rum tasting and training was presented by an outside visitor. These examples both count as off-the-job training as they took place away from the work. At c-side, they often have training days with the aromatherapist who designed the treatments there. <heading>Management Training</heading>At Cowley Manor, there is little in the way of training for the managers. There is the option for them to attend training courses, but according to Deputy General Manager, Kevin Wilkie, the best way to learn is to use past experiences. Kevin and the General Manager, Stuart McPherson, both have twenty years of experience in the hospitality industry. The two House Managers have ten years of experience each. When Kevin came to Cowley Manor, he had managerial experience, but he had to be trained to use the Micros point of sale system, and the Fidelio booking system. The training for this is the same that a new member of staff would go through. Additional training that some managers go through is for First Aid and Health and Safety. Kevin is the nominated first-aider, and oversees health and safety. This means he has undergone extra external, off-the-job training. Although training at Cowley Manor is quite relaxed, it generally works. However, there are areas for improvement. In housekeeping, new employees are placed with another housekeeper and expected to learn from them. This means that bad habits are picked up. The Head Housekeeper doesn't train any of the new employees, so they don't learn how to clean a room to the required standard without cutting corners. Although cleaning guidance does exist for the housekeepers, it isn't used. Another area for improvement is the organisation of training. Except for c-side therapists, there are no training schedules for any new member of staff. This means that new employees have no set targets for completion of learning. From researching the training that takes place at Cowley Manor, one concludes that training is of a satisfactory level. In all departments, excluding housekeeping, staff know their roles, and are knowledgeable of the products they are selling. In housekeeping, there is a need for more formal guidance, although the lack of training doesn't show in the standards of cleanliness. Although the management don't take part in formal training, they have enough experience between them, and also have the option to take on training if they wish. The staff at Cowley Manor take part in on-the-job training in the majority of cases, and so benefit from being shown everything right from the start of their employment. Anyone who wished to take on further training to develop themselves in the job would be supported by management. <heading>Identify the target market(s) for one product within your business and for one target market carry out a competitive analysis to identify organisation strength and weaknesses. </heading>This report aims to make a competitive analysis of Cowley Manor against its main competitors. As the whole hotel is the product, the competitive analysis will be carried out across the whole hotel. The analysis will concentrate on the facilities provided for the leisure market, as this is the market that Cowley Manor originally intended to attract. For Cowley Manor, the target market is young professionals, between the ages of 25 and 35, with a high disposable income, mainly from London (Fiona Hamilton Andrews, Sales Dept). A competitive analysis is a means of assessing an organisation's capabilities against those of the competition (Boddy, 2002). As all strengths and weaknesses are relative, it is a very useful tool for an organisation. Strengths and weaknesses of a business are the key internal issues related to the running of a business (Boddy, 2002). A competitive analysis allows a business to compare themselves with the competition, and gives them a benchmark to aim for. There are several criteria that will be used to compare the hotels. Firstly, the location of the hotels, both in relation to London, and local towns. The hotel facilities, the spas and the grounds of the hotels are major factors when deciding upon a leisure break. <heading>The Main Competitors and their Locations</heading><table/>For guests with cars, all the hotels are relatively easy to get to. However, those who use public transport would struggle from London, as the train journeys often need a change of train. As most people who visit these hotels are coming from London, and often only for a night or two, the ease of the journey and the journey time are important. <heading>Hotel Facilities</heading>The quality of facilities and amenities in the hotels is important to guests. All the hotels have invested in state of the art technology in the rooms and within the public areas of the hotels. <table/>The facilities within the hotels are fairly similar. There are private rooms for hire, which are desirable for groups of people celebrating. For guests with children, Babington and Cowley are particularly appealing due to the crèches. Facilities that may also appeal to families are hotel cinemas. Babington House (Babington House Explore The House, 2005) and Whatley Manor (Whatley Manor Private Matters, 2005) both have cinemas showing recently released movies, as well as old classics. Both Cowley Manor and Babington House Hotel have bespoke furniture in all areas of the hotels, which adds to their exclusivity. <heading>The Spas</heading>For many people wanting a few days to relax, a spa is very appealing. This table shows the spa facilities available at the hotels. <table/>C-side spa, at Cowley Manor, has recently been voted the 5 th best hotel spa in the country (Condé Nast Traveller, Oct 2005). C-side was also voted the spa with the best facilities. <heading>Eating and Drinking</heading>Drinking and dining are a big part of a leisure break at a hotel. <table/>For great food lovers, either Whatley Manor or the Cotswold House would appeal the most as there is a choice of restaurant, but for those with a more simple palette, the familiar Italian/European food at Barnsley House, or the refreshing food of Cowley Manor may be more appealing. <heading>The Grounds</heading>The grounds of a hotel are very appealing to guests who are there to relax. It gives them somewhere to relax, and offers a very different view to that which they are used to living in a city. <table/>The grounds of all the hotels are beautiful, and any guest would be delighted to wander round them. However, for those particularly interested in the grounds, Cowley Manor and Barnsley House would be most appealing as they are famous, and listed in the case of Cowley Manor. From carrying out this competitive analysis, it has become clear that Cowley Manor has both strengths and weaknesses in comparison to the competition. The spa at Cowley is a big strength, with it being the only hotel of those analysed that was voted in the top 5 of the Condé Nast Traveller Readers Awards. With regards to general facilities, Babington House and Whatley Manor are both very well equipped. As eating is very important for leisure guests, I feel that Cowley Manor and Barnsley House are at a slight disadvantage as they only have one restaurant. In the recent Condé Nast Traveller Reader's Awards, Babington House was voted the 4 th best leisure hotel, Cowley Manor was placed 5 th, and Whatley Manor came 10 th. The other two hotels were not listed. In another poll by the same magazine of the world's top 100 destinations, Babington House came in at 77 th, while Cowley Manor was placed at 83 rd (Condé Nast Traveller, 2005). There isn't much to choose between the hotels, and it is interesting to note that many people that stay at Cowley Manor have stayed at the other hotels in this analysis. <heading>Within the department in which you work, examine how service quality is defined and managed</heading>Within any hotel, the standard of cleanliness should be so high that it's almost unnoticeable to the guests. This report aims to compare the quality of cleaning within the public areas and rooms at Cowley Manor, with the quality of cleaning in the spa. Lockwood et al (1996) state that guests have certain expectations of an experience, and if these expectations are met or exceeded, then the guest will have had a 'quality' experience. In relation to Cowley Manor, guests arrive expecting a certain level of cleanliness to be maintained in the public areas, the rooms, and at the spa. If the expected levels of cleanliness are not attained, then 'quality' will not have been provided to the guest. Quality can also be defined as "conformance to requirements' (Crosby 1984, cited in Lockwood 1996). In the hospitality industry, a key aspect of quality is reliability (Lockwood et al, 1996). A guest will expect the same level of cleanliness each time they visit Cowley Manor. For this reason, standardisation of cleaning processes is important. In theory, the guest should always receive the level of cleanliness that they are expecting as there is a set way of cleaning the various areas of the hotel (Understanding Hospitality Management Lecture 6, 2004). <heading>In The House</heading>The rooms and public areas in Cowley Manor are maintained by a group of housekeepers, working between 9am and 9pm. The housekeeping department has a checklist of jobs that is to be completed in each room (Appendix 1). However, this checklist is not given to housekeepers on a daily basis, as it is assumed that they know what they have to do. This means that the standardisation of cleaning methods are not followed, although there is a standard process. Kandampully et al (2001) believe that if frontline members of staff, such as housekeepers, are not given a high enough status, they may not be inclined to work to the full capabilities, due to job dissatisfaction. This could be a reason for the less than enthusiastic attitude of the housekeepers towards their job. Another guidance sheet is available for the turning down of beds in the evening (Appendix 2). Again, this sheet is not given out on a regular basis, or displayed anywhere within the housekeeping office. Although turndown is a less thorough clean of a room, there are still tasks to be performed, such as changing towels and emptying bins. When a housekeeper has been performing a job for a while, it's possible that they may become slightly complacent. The public areas of the hotel are cleaned on a daily basis, with vacuuming and dusting taking place. The toilets are also checked three times a day. However, there is no checklist or timetable of jobs that have to be done in the public areas on a daily, weekly or monthly basis (Neal Spencer, Head Housekeeper). Due to this, some important tasks, such as removing cobwebs from the ceiling aren't done regularly, and may be noticed by guests. <heading>At C-Side</heading>At C-side, the spa at Cowley Manor, the cleaning is carried out by the receptionists and the therapists when they have free time between treatments. There is a daily checklist of cleaning tasks that has to be completed (Appendix 3). This ensures that the spa is always immaculately tidy and clean. This checklist is a very useful tool for the staff at C-side (Gilly Willis, Spa Receptionist), as it means everyone knows what tasks need to be performed at certain times of day, and what has not yet been done. At the spa, there is also a chart of tasks that have to be performed on a weekly basis. These tasks ensure that all deep cleaning is done regularly. By doing the jobs more regularly, they are easier, and the fittings remain in better order. Cowley Manor closes for 5 days each winter, to allow for maintenance to be carried out that is impossible to carry out when guests are around. This period would also be an opportunity to do some deep cleaning in the hotel rooms and public areas, such as shower drains, and cleaning under large items of furniture, such as sofas. The cleaning of drains is an example where the hotel and the spa differ. In the spa, the shower drains are lifted and deep cleaned on a weekly basis, whereas in the rooms, this task is carried out once a year, during the winter shutdown period (Amy Terry, Housekeeper). This means that drains in the bedrooms can smell, and this is experienced when working in the housekeeping department. There is a formal list of tasks to be completed by the housekeepers during winter shutdown, which means that staff know what they are doing over the course of the week (Appendix 4). At the spa, this list is drawn up in the weeks before shutdown. From the research carried out, one is inclined to conclude that the cleanliness of the spa is managed more effectively than that of the main house. There is far more guidance at the spa as to what, and how, tasks are carried out. However, it is very rare that there are complaints about cleanliness in any areas of the hotel from guests (Alex Burgel, House Manager). This would suggest that the housekeepers do just enough surface cleaning to satisfy the guests expectations, and so quality in cleaning is provided by Cowley Manor as a whole. 