On a first observation of Song: On Her Loving Two Equally the reader is aware that the poem is set out visually and rhythmically in a song-like format further signified by the indication in the title; 'Song'. Each of the three stanzas is of equal length and metre, the first five lines of each stanza working in iambic tetrameter followed by the final line of iambic pentameter, reverting to the traditional metre in Shakespeare's love sonnets. Perhaps this steady lyrical rhythm represents the steady heartbeat of the speaker emphasised by the masculine single rhyme scheme, thus linking to the theme of love presented throughout the poem. Supporting this idea is that as the poem draws to a climax in the third stanza, the natural flow of the final lines are broken up by punctuation more often than elsewhere in the 'song' and an exclamation of 'But which, O Cupid, wilt thou take?' possibly conveying the increasing intensity of feelings of the speaker and confusion in her heart, showing how deeply the situation affects her. <fnote>M. Ferguson, M. J. Salter, J. Stallworthy, The Norton Anthology of Poetry, (Fifth edition, W. W. Norton & Company, London, 2005), p. 545, Song: On Her Loving Two Equally. </fnote>The rhyme scheme differs in the middle stanza from the first and final as the pattern changes from aabbcc to  ababcc. As the final syllable in each line is stressed it creates a greater impact and more resounding effect encouraging the awareness of the seriousness of the poem. Behn uses mainly imperfect rhyme; 'god', 'blood' and even eye pararhyme; 'prove' and 'love'. The poet could be using these fairly unsatisfying techniques to signify the complexity and irregularity of emotions and deep feelings, the chaos of love. The lack of perfect rhyme also maybe represents her indecisiveness about which lover to choose and the unorganised thoughts in her mind. Throughout this piece of literature can be seen a specific lexical cluster containing such words as 'heart', 'love', 'passion', 'flow', 'blood' and 'Cupid' working to conjure up a strong image in the reader's mind. This collection of words appear to link to the natural world; 'flow', evoking an image of a river and 'blood', a vital part of the human body reminding the reader of the naturalness of love and emotions. The particular image of 'Cupid' acts as a metaphor for the speaker's own decision on which lover to choose and relates to the traditional views on love as this Roman god is brought into the picture. Language is a key feature in the 'song' and many types are used for dramatic effect. The archaic language used; 'wilt thou', ''twixt', creates a sense of tradition and importance enhancing the significance of the poem's meaning and the gravity of 'love'. Behn also occasionally uses onomatopoeia in the poem such as the repeated word 'sigh' to enable the reader to obtain a clearer insight into the speakers mind and create a sharper picture through the detail of sound. The 'fever in' her 'blood' is personified and becomes 'restless'. This emphasises the torturous quality of her feelings and enhances the physical passion she feels in the situation. The idea of possessive love is conveyed powerfully it seems by the use of first person and the consistent use of 'my' especially whilst referring to 'Damon' and 'Alexis'. She loves both and cannot live with one without the other, therefore attaches herself to the 'two' and is afraid to let one go. There are many formal features in Song: On Her Loving Two Equally that emphasise the ideas and enhance the poem's quality to make the piece effective to the reader. 