The relationship between land prices and house prices is complex, involving the inter-relationship of several contributing factors: the land market; the planning system; new housing production and the housing market. When determining house prices a number of things have to be taken into consideration, such as supply and demand of many different factors, interest rates, population change and movement, construction and production: all of which vary in impact. The economic model of supply and demand, developed by Antoine Augustin Cournot, 1883, attempts to describe, explain and predict changes in the price and quantity of goods sold in competitive markets. It describes how prices vary as a result of a balance between a products availability at each price, the supply, and the desires of those with purchasing power at each price, the demand. This concept applied to house prices show that demand and supply have a huge impact. Land is finite resource as there is only a given amount of in each country. As a result supply is completely fixed and therefore it can be depicted as a perfectly inelastic supply curve: shown by the graph below. <figure/>'The supply of housing is inelastic, at least in the short run, because even if there were large increases in demand few new homes would be supplied on to the market. ' (Bachine) House construction is a lengthy process, which results in time lag between demand and supply: a change in price and an increase in properties becoming available through either the supply of new properties or existing homeowners deciding to put their properties onto the market. <fnote>Balchin P, Bull G and Kieve J (1995): Urban Land Economics and Public Policy, 5th edition. Macmillan Press Ltd: Hampshire. </fnote><quote>'When demand shifts outwards and supply is inelastic the result is a large rise in market price and a relatively small expansion of the quantity of houses traded. As supply becomes more elastic over time, assuming the conditions of demand remain unchanged, the expectation would be to see downward pressure on prices and a further increase in the equilibrium quantity of houses bought and sold. ' (Warren, 2000)</quote><fnote>Warren M (2000): Economic Analysis for Property and Business. Butterworth Heinemann: Oxford. </fnote>If the rate of change of land prices is compared to that of house prices, they have moved in a similar pattern, the movements have just been more volatile for land. Land supply can affect house prices much more in the medium and long terms than in the short term, so it would require not only substantial land release on a national scale but also a consistently sustained policy change to achieve a significant effect on house prices. Land is further reduced by landowners' own expectations. If they believe that in the future land prices are going to increase faster than other prices they will have an incentive to hold the land off the market: thus shifting the supply curve. From the point of view of builders' the incentive to expand housing construction following house price increases may be reduced, if not completely removed, by the resulting increase in land prices. Other factors affecting supply and demand are things such as household income, interest rates and the cost of land, as well as: income elasticity if demand, sensitivity to interest rates, cross price elasticity of demand with rental prices, price elasticity of demand/supply and sensitivity to cost of land. Interest rates are a prime factor with relation to house prices. They impact booms and recessions in the housing market. In the UK housing market a large proportion of demand for housing is as a result of borrowing. If interest rates are low the cost of borrowing decreases, which leads to an increase in the amount of disposable income of first time buyers and property investors. Due to the fact housing is seen as normal/luxury good, with increases in incomes the demand for housing will increase as more people attempt to buy houses, resulting in house prices increasing. This pattern will continue until the supply can match the level of demand, which is very unlikely to occur due to the lag time of production. This also works in reverse; if interest rates increase the cost of taking out a mortgage will be far higher. Therefore demand decreases and more people will look for an alternative, for example renting, and eventually the price of houses would decrease. Loans, in this case mortgages and the house are complementary goods: if the demand for mortgages increase then there will be a corresponding increase in the demand for housing and vice versa. Lower costs of land will also increase the market supply of housing. The lower cost represents lower costs of production; this will increase profitability and attract more producers into the market. Again, the outcome is that market supply curve shifts. A major detail that should be taken into consideration with regards to land is that the demand for building land is derived. Thus, it is lands potential utilisation that is important. 'The price of land is a product of bidding between competing users rather than the simple extraction by landowners of some national residual development value.' (Warren, 2000) Developers and others who demand land for housing, have the intention to sell the completed development at an acceptable profit. They will therefore be prepared to pay a residual price for the land, based on the difference between the prices they can achieve for the housing and their costs of production. The price they offer will normally depend upon the state of the market for completed buildings: the anticipated future value of the buildings would need to be forecast. <fnote>Warren M (2000): Economic Analysis for Property and Business. Butterworth Heinemann: Oxford. </fnote><quote>'The demand for property leads to distinct patterns of land-use as different occupiers compete for a limited supply of land. The patterns that emerge result from the differential ability of users to generate profit from particular sites and from the reaction of developers and landowners.' (Ball M et al, 1998)</quote><fnote>Ball M et al (1998): The Economics of Commercial Property Markets. Routledge: London. </fnote>This statement highlights that development has a major impact upon land. Land is a major determining factor but once the land is in possession of developers it is then up to them what happens to it. Consequently the influencing factor becomes the houses: it is the houses that now determine land prices. The intensity of utilisation in this particular topic would relate to the residential development; number of houses a developer is allowed to build on each hectare; a factor controlled by government planners and the local planning departments, will depend on the type of houses being built. High-density developments increase the value of land. For example, if a developer bought cheaper land and created a high-density development at a cheaper cost the housing could be sold for more. Thus, showing that land value could be low but with high market demand the price of housing can be high and therefore increasing the land value in the long run. In this case it is housing prices that are determining land prices. This view is also supported by local planning authorities that argue the demand for land and thus its price is derived from the demand for housing. House builders contradict this by believing that the supply of land and its cost is a determinant of house prices. Land potential may decline due to its situation where, for example, degradation and exhaustion could occur or if the land has been subject to damage or contamination and as a result it became apparent that the land was polluted or contaminated from previous industrial use or dumping of waste a sever drop in the price of the houses on that site would occur. In this circumstance it is others affecting the price of land. The importance of house prices in the economy as a whole means that, land and house prices are determined at the local level, where a large number of local and site-specific factors come into play. House prices reflect their location, as do land prices. If the land is situated in a particular part of the country: London, for example, its cost is going to be higher than in the majority of other areas in the UK. This is where bid rent functions come into play. These show the willingness of particular users to pay for property at specific locations in a defined spatial area. The graph below compares land prices all over the country. <figure/>Land price can also be affected by the area around it and the same applies with regards to house prices: what is built on surrounding land can have big consequences for the site in question. For example: <quote>'Imagine a housing estate that is presently situated next to the open countryside. Despite the picturesque value of open space, greenery and its possible amenity value, the price of the existing houses may rise if complementary development were to occur on this rural land.' (Warren, 2000)</quote><fnote>Warren M (2000): Economic Analysis for Property and Business. Butterworth Heinemann: Oxford. </fnote>Location does not have to be looked at on such a wide scale. Land on the outskirts, near motorways etc. often has a lower value than land closer to or in a city centre. The planning system has a big impact on both the land and house market as it is responsible for restricting the total quantity and location of housing land made available. Planning policies influence land supply through development plan allocation and the need to obtain planning permission, which in turn affects the demand for housing and its price. If permission could not be granted for the specific use required on the particular area of land, it is of little value to the developer. Planning reduces both market supply and makes it less responsive to change. <quote>'Using the example of a free market, without planning constraints, the quantity of land made available for new housing would be expected to increase as the price that people are prepared to pay for housing land increases. This is because there are differing opportunity costs to bringing land into housing use and in particular differently valued alternative uses for different parcels of land.' (Eve, 1992)</quote><fnote>Eve, G (1992): The Relationship between House Prices and Land Supply. HSMO: London. </fnote>In conclusion both land and house prices affect each other just in different stages of the house construction process. <quote>'If house prices increase, higher profits may be taken and indeed there may well be upwards pressure on building costs as more labour and building materials are demanded but the amount of money left over to bid for land is also likely to be greater. Conversely, if house prices were to fall less money would be left over for the payment of the required land. ' (Warren, 2000) </quote><fnote>Warren M (2000): Economic Analysis for Property and Business. Butterworth Heinemann: Oxford. </fnote>The value an occupier places on a property depends on several attributes that relate to the building with relation to its construction, the site characteristics and the location of the parcel of land within the urban area. This emphasises that land is a factor in determining house prices but only one of many. Demand and supply are a major factor and due to the fact land has an inelastic supply means its impact on house prices is going to remain fairly consistent. 