For authors, language is their vessel which carries the whole of their work and provides the opportunities to enrich their characters, plot and the spectacle of the text. In drama, whether it is the language they give the characters or language to direct and produce the setting; it is always the key in any performance. Shakespeare and Marlowe were both sterling examples of Renaissance English writers who pioneered the use of language in their works, be it prose, poetry or drama. Richard III and Dr. Faustus are a great starting point with which to investigate the relationship between language and spectacle, and how the two different authors dealt with this dynamic. In both of these texts, spectacle would mean a striking performance; something entertaining to the public, unusually noteworthy and dramatic, as they were both intended to be played to an audience. Language throughout both of the plays gains opulence and creates spectacle in differing ways, as well as some of the uses of language being much more traditional and unsuccessful than others. The relationship between the two, though, is based on a culmination of many contributory factors such as the genre, setting, and audience at which they are aimed. Dr. Faustus has two texts, commonly referred to as the A and the B text, the latter being produced more than a decade after the other (1616 as opposed to 1604), and being much longer than the first. It also would have been subject to the change in censorship laws in 1606, which would have resulted in the addition of comic scenes and, to some extent, the lessening of the direct use of religion found in text A 2. I will be examining text A, from the Norton Anthology of English Literature (seventh edition) in this instance, as it is a good example of the use of language for a stage production before the censorship and was possibly one of the last, widely seen productions of its kind before 1606. <fnote>Dr. Faustus, The Norton Anthology of English Literature, Seventh Edition vol 1, ed. Abrama M. H, Greenblatt S, W. W Norton & Company 2000 </fnote><fnote>2 Radical Tragedy, Religion, Ideology and Power in the Drama of Shakespeare and his Comtemporaries p119, Jonathan Dollimore, Harvester Wheatsheaf 1989 </fnote>The opening of Dr. Faustus is in the form of a prologue, traditionally presented by the chorus who appears throughout to narrate and be a trustworthy, measured voice among the course of the play. The story of Icarus, from Greek mythology is used in the prologue to compare to the flight which Faustus embarks on, and leaves some clue as to his downfall; apart from this being a good story with which to compare Faustus, it also may leave possible, the presumption that Humanist theory may play a part in this play as the Humanist around at the time took a great interest in the world of the ancient Greeks and Romans 3. These opening twenty-eight lines introduce the divine influence and conflict which will come, and even from such an early point the 'heavens' are depicted as a force which has 'conspired' against Icarus and therefore by comparison, may already be conspiring against Faustus. Faustus is located in Wittenberg, which the audience may know, is the same place where Martin Luther was while the beginnings of the Reformation were unfolding, therefore allowing the audience to know that Faustus will be knowledgeable in the ways of Protestantism. <fnote>3 Christopher Marlowe's Tragic Vision, a Study in Damnation p 122, Charles G. Masinton, Ohio University Press, Athens 1972 </fnote>Language changes from the use of rhetoric in the prologue, to Faustus' own when he introduces himself in third person, as if he too is watching the action unfold alongside the audience. It is in this opening speech that he appears to come to terms with the harsh reality of the religious life in which he is stuck, quoting from the bible: <quote> 'Stipendium peccati mors est: ha! Stipendium, etc. </quote><quote> The reward of sin is death? That's hard. </quote><quote>Si pecasse negamus, fallimur, et nulla est in nobis veritas. </quote><quote> If we say we have no sin, We deceive ourselves, and there's no truth in us. Why then belike we must sin, And so consequently die. Ay, we must die and everlasting death.' (I. 39-46)</quote>Already his use of language is that of discontent, and it is almost gaining the sympathies of the audience because it seems a bleak outlook to be forever trapped in this 'everlasting death'. In true Renaissance man fashion, Faustus aspires to overcome his fate and make himself all-powerful and godlike; he declares to do this in the somewhat unconventional and unorthodox acquisition of skills in magic; <quote> 'Lines, circles, schemes, letters, and chrchets! Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires. O what a world of profit and delight, Of power, of honor, of omnipotence.... ... But his dominantion that exceeds in this Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man: A sound magician is a mighty god.' (I. 51-62)</quote>Faustus, then proceeds to dismiss such traditional forms of knowledge like philosophy, law and divinity, as 'unpleasant, harsh, contemptible, and vile,'(I.109). Magic, would have certainly been viewed by the audience as a dangerous practice, and certainly going against the will which God would like people to follow. The audience at this point would be aware that Faustus' trouble later in the play has been consciously brought on by himself and his steer away from the path of God. This is similar to declaration Richard makes at the beginning of Richard III, announcing himself as taking on the role of the 'villain'(I, 1, 30), which will be discussed later. With the use of language suspense is being built here, because the audience is being prompted of the spectacle which will be shown to them in the forthcoming events; magic will obviously be playing a big part in the play, and the audience will apprehensive as to what spectacle Dr. Faustus can produce. It is not long after this that Faustus summons Mephastophilis and an event quite spectacular in it's stage presence is shown to the audience; the signing of the contract in blood. As Mephastophilis is summoned, language shifts into blank verse to accentuate the shift in tone to something much darker, disobedient and less ordered in orthodox terms. There are constant references in Faustus' speech to the attainment of power, and that he will overcome the will of God who will not be as mighty as him when he has magical powers. It is arguable here that Marlowe's voice and opinions against Calvin's notion of predestination are being voiced through Faustus, as Faustus denies that man must be trapped by a tyrannous God, and that one should 'always be obedient to my will,'(III. 97). However, this emerges as a very confused argument because the only way Faustus can gain power and achieve this freedom is by being bound to Lucifer, and of course without God there would be no Lucifer. Mephastophillis, though, does explicitly warn Faustus of the danger such a binding to Beelzebub will bring, and that there is a worse fate upon him in the hands of the devil compared to the hands of the Lord, (as he himself s experiencing): <quote> 'Thinkist thou that I, who saw the face of God, And tasted the eternal joys pf heaven, Am not tormented with ten thousand hells In being deprived of everlasting bliss? O Faustus, leave these frivolous demands, Which strike terror to my fainting soul.' (III. 77-82)</quote>Scene 5 is the setting of Faustus' spectacular indulgent and ignorant act of conscious sin and betrayal against God whom has offered him 'means to bring thee into heaven,' (V. 17) if only he would follow the path of 'contrition, prayer, repentance' (V. 16). The audience would, not doubt, have been stunned at this display when Faustus' 'blood congeals' (V.62) and the suspense heightens as fire is brought to melt it. Following this, the inscription of 'Homo fuge!', (V. 77) appearing on Faustus' arm is an act which was obviously not magic, but would have seemed miraculous and spectacular to the audience. This is a very significant moment, at a turning point in the play, when language and spectacle come together for full effect on the stage. The significance of 'homo fuge' is so great because it is yet another warning, and this time one of the flesh, from God to Faustus prompting him to fly from the danger he in embarking upon and back onto the righteous path. However for Faustus, the moment of 'Homo fuge!', is quickly brushed aside by Mephasophilis and the 'DEVILS' which are directed to dance for him and present him with a crown and such like. This reiterates to the audience with such a moment of spectacle that Faustus is unable to make his own decisions, and that there is great danger in being manipulated easily by others because he is now bound in contract to the devil as a consequence. Another way of interpreting this scene would be that Faustus has no decision of his own to make, because either way he is surrendering to the will of God or the devil; this increasingly convinces the reader or audience, in quite spectacular fashion that the tragedy lies in how man is merely an instrument for the power struggle between 'good' and 'evil'. With the use of language Marlowe is presenting the danger in being misled by others with bad intentions, and although Faustus is not trusting of conventional methods of knowledge, or Calvinist predestination, he is still treacherously trusting in anybody who presents him with something as simply attractive as magic tricks. After the signing of the blood contract Faustus often summons his magic powers for use in many trivial manifestations and the seriousness of the consequences of what he has undertaken and often undermined by Mephastophilis because he needs to keep Faustus' soul to 'enlarge his [Lucifer's] Kingdom'(V. 40). One example of this would be when Faustus demands, and is then taken to Rome where he mocks, discredits and deforms the Papacy as a no longer sacred figure, but a corrupt one; <quote> FAUSTUS: I'll pledge your grace. [Snatch the cup.] LORAINE: My lord, it may be some ghost newly crept put of purgatory come to beg a pardon of your holiness. POPE: It may be so; friars; prepare a dirge to lay the fury of this ghost. once again my lord, fall to. [The POPE crosseth himself.] FAUSTUS: What, are you crossing of yourself? Well, use that trick no more I would advise you. [Cross again.] FAUSTUS: Well, there's the second time; aware the third! I give you fair warning. [Cross again, and FAUSTUS hits him a box of the ear, and they  all run away.] </quote>Faustus is strongly defacing the head of the Catholic church here, firstly by snatching from him, then by telling him that crossing is a 'trick' and shouldn't be done, and thirdly by hitting him. This short scene is a somewhat comic spectacle of mocking, considering the climate at the time toward the Catholics and how the were discarded, and mocked, this is a good example in blank verse how the common people of the country may have viewed the Catholic church and how the rise in Protestantism had no place for it. Formerly more magic tricks which are performed for the Emperor and the Knight in scene nine, the Chorus appears and sets the scene, 'Faustus is feasted amongst his noblemen./What there he did in trial of his art/I leave untold: your eyes will be performed.' At this point the audience knows the punishment which Faustus is facing for signing his soul to Lucifer, but they are about to be shown that he has only done so for these magic tricks of summoning 'those two descended princes' (IX. 40); the question arises here as to whether Faustus deserves any sympathy as his language has suggested previously, for he has sacrificed something so great only to become a kind of court jester. Before the final section of the play the audience are treated to an important demonstration of Faustus' acquired skills when he summons Helen of Troy in scene 12 after declaring, 'I do repent, and yet I do despair' (XII. 54), because his soul is arrested by Mephastophilis. The summoning of Helen is the last demand Faustus places on Mephastophilis, and is one which he claims will, 'dissuade me from my vow: And keep mine oath I made to Lucifer,'(XII 77-78). However, the sight of Helen has the opposite effect on Faustus, and instead she is a symbol of freedom to him which is able to give him back his soul, as if she is a premonition of God and his pleas to her are those which he wishes to make in repentance. This passage of language is elegant, well constructed and steeped in imagery of astronomy, which is a subject also considered dangerous at the time and draws on the complexity of Faustus' quest for new knowledge and self-gain; <quote> 'I will be Paris, and for love of thee, Instead of Troy shall Wittenburg be sacked; And I will combat with weak Menelaus, And wear thy colors on my plumed crest: Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel, And then return to Helen for a kiss. O thou art fairer than the evening stars, Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter' (XII. 88-96)</quote>Faustus, here, is still obsessed with his vice of power, and possessing what had seemed unobtainable; be it the freedom of his soul, or now the love of Helen who is from an ancient story. Faustus claims that as Helen, 'sucks forth my soul'(XII. 84), he is able to 'see where it flies'(XII. 84), as if he is free but we must be reminded that this is all an illusion brought on by Mephastophilis in Faustus' imprisonment. In the final scene Faustus' fate becomes all too vivid, an unlike the merging of language and stage spectacle in with the summoning of Helen, the language, imagery, and its manifestation on stage become much darker and desperate. Faustus continually pleads with God to save his soul and 'have mercy' (XIII. 89) on it, but he is repeatedly denied and is describing literally being pulled down; 'Who pulls me down?' (XIII. 69). There is no salvation for Faustus, and the Chorus finishes the play with a speech of warning to the reader/audience not to 'wonder at unlawful things' (Epilogue. 6), because the fate of such a dabbling may be equally as dreadful. Marlowe may well have borrowed the morality play structure from his predecessors, but the ending of Dr. Faustus clearly outlines that this is not a morality play of the orthodox kind, such as Everyman for example, where the ending involves the protagonist repenting, being forgiven and therefore having a conventional resolved conclusion; <quote> 'If his reckoning be not clear when he doth come, God will say, "Ite, Maledicti, in ignem eternum!" And he that hath his account whole and sound, High in heaven and shall be crowned, Unto which place God bring us hither, That we may live body and soul together. Thereto help, the Trinity!</quote>Amen, say ye, for saint charity.' Everyman 914-921 In the end here, the people are united with God, unlike in Dr. Faustus where he is separated from him and the Chorus closes the play with words of caution, allowing the play to come full circle with the narrator. However, the beginning of Richard III is not with a prologue introduced by a Chorus, but by Richard himself. The opening soliloquy is quite spectacular itself with the introduction of Richard without any extra stage spectacle because it is made clear that the character of Richard is spectacle enough. Richard's long speech (for the audience alone), gives a clear outline of his 'unfashionable' (I. 1. 22), and 'deformed' (I.1. 19) structure which, 'dogs bark at' (I. 1. 23), as if he is attempting to gain the sympathies of the audience; only before he shifts this but proclaiming his determination to 'prove a villain' (I. 1. 30). There is little, if any sympathy towards Richard in the opening of the play, in comparison to some towards Faustus who faces a conflicting and confusing journey ahead of him, simply because he attempts to make better for himself, Richard, however, is celebrating himself as a villain and affirms that he will relent to gain power and cause tyranny. This is an especially spectacular use of language and outlines the importance of Richard and how he will consistently command the attention of the audience, and the characters in the play with his spectacular use of language. Richard professes that he is evil, and that he will usurp the power of those around him; this plays on the theme of the court and the role which the court held in the period when position and power was more important than anything, and as quoted from Stephen Greenblatt, 'evil comes not from the mysterious otherworld of demons but from this world, the world of court and family intrigue,' 4 perhaps then this story unfolding would not have been a surprise to the audience, but just another version of scandal entwined with entertainment for the audiences enjoyment. <fnote>4 Shakepearean Negotiations the Circulation of Social Energy in Renaissance England, p119 Stephen Greenblatt, Clarendon Press Oxford 1988 </fnote>Spectacle and shock are added to that of Richard's language soon after the opening section when Henry's dead body is left bleeding in the hearse and is 'set down' on stage as Richard woos Anne; <quote> 'More wonderful when angels are so angry. Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, Of these supposed evils to give me leave By circumstance but to acquit myself.'</quote>The scene progresses and Anne cannot overcome Richard's dominance with language and she lapses into confessing, 'I hope so' (I. 2. 112) when Richard offers to lie with her in chambers. From then on Richard dominates the speech and even uses sexual symbols like his 'sharp-pointed sword' (I. 2. 160), to entice her, which she is not able to refuse, nor does she seem to want to. The inability of others to stand up to Richard and his use of language is a spectacular repetition throughout the play, rarely changing, and is a sign to the audience of why the Richard's tyrannous plan is able to succeed for so long. Montainge wrote, 'many of this world's abuses are engendered - or to put it more rashly, all of this world's abuses are engendered - by our being schooled to fear to admit our ignorance and because we are required to accept anything which we cannot refute,' 5; this seems particularly apt here as Richard is not refuted until much later on and is therefore able to commit these numerous 'abuses'. <fnote>5 III. 11 On the Lame, The Complete Essays p.1165 Michel de Montaigne, Penguin Books, ed. M. A. Screech 2003 </fnote>After Richard becomes protector in I. 3, his climb to become King becomes even more realised, but the audience are shown the first example of a near match in language, with a woman of all people. Margaret, is depicted as a shrill 'lunatic' (I. 3. 254), but manages to effect Richard in way not done previously. She manages to accuse him of 'murder to make him a king' (I. 3. 195) and persists with insults, calling him a 'dog' (I. 3. 213), 'abortive rooting-hog' (I. 3. 225) and, 'the slave of nature and the son of hell,' (I. 3. 227). This early on Margaret, may seem wildly outspoken and even mad (as often women were depicted then), but she seems the only one willing to mark out Richard as a villain. Later on, the young princes also manage to do this and to taunt Richard in III. 1, but as a consequence he has them sent to the tower and kills them in order to usurp their power. After Richard succeeds and is crowned King Richard III, his tyrannous plight begins to unravel with the help of Richmond, and this is where Richard's skill with language begins to backfire, diminish and leaves him powerless; <quote> 'What do I fear? Myself? There's none else by. Richard loves Richard; that is, I and I. Is there a murderer here? No.-Yes, I am. Then fly,-What, from myself?-Great reason why:</quote>Lest I revenge.-What, myself upon myself?' (V. 4. 161-165) After the ghosts of the people which Richard has had murdered appear to him, he seems confused, and this scene is another which unites language and spectacle on the stage and the fate of Richard is being unravelled, the common people are dissatisfied with his reign, and Richmond's language and calm and serene is gaining apace over his; <quote> 'Why then, 'tis time to arm and give direction. His oration to his soldiers More than I have said, loving countrymen, The leisure and enforcement of the time Forbids to swell upon. Yet remember this: God and our good cause flight upon our side' (V. 4. 215-219)</quote>Richmond's language, in comparison to Richard's is uniting and reforming, not dominating and manipulative. This is obviously of a considerable less spectacular effect on the stage to cause shock and terror, but it is a imperative means to show how villainous Richard was and how he is overcome by the favoured and uniting force of Richmond. Richard, finally meets his ends by being slain at the hands of Richmond (leaving Richmond as the hero), and to make the final speech of peace to the public; <quote> 'O now let Richmond and Elizabeth, The true successors of each royal house. By God's fair ordinance conjoin together, And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so, Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace... ... Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again. That she may long live here, God say, 'Amen'.' (V. 7. 29-41)</quote>The peace with language in the resolution of Richard III, sets up a positive outlook towards the then monarch Elizabeth I, and with comparison to Richard III shows her in an increasingly positive light at a time when her popularity was waning. Also, this resolution is a stark contrast to Dr. Faustus and the fate which befell him. Both Dr. Faustus and Richard III have language at the centre of their stage spectacle, but as shown, it is a consequence of many different factors throughout the plays. In Dr. Faustus that main area of spectacle is the role of magic, and the depiction of dark knowledge, such as the threat of astrology of the time. Magic on the stage would have been a great show for the audience, but the character of Faustus and his many conflicts is the root of these magic tricks. Richard III, however manages to create a greater spectacle just by the manifestation of the villainous Richard and his distortion of language; Richard III, is almost a Humanist distopia because it shows how language can be manipulated to meet the diabolical aspirations of anyone, no matter how evil, providing they have a skilful command of it. The relationship between language and spectacle in both of the tragedies is one which is very closely intertwined, but in many occasions the power theories in Dr. Faustus are based around the stage tricks, deferring attention from the implications of the religious tone. The subject of magic invites elaborate stage spectacle whereas Richard III offers a more thorough incite into the psyche of a character who is driven on a tyrannous track to power and destruction, with language as his main tool to accompany him in the power struggle. 