<quote>My Magnificent Bull Traditional from the Dinka Tribe My bull is white like the silver fish in the river, White like the shimmering crane bird on the river bank White like fresh milk! His roar is like thunder to the Turkish cannon the sheep shore. My bull is dark like the raincloud in the storm. He is like summer and winter. Half of him is light like the sunshine. His back shines like the morning star. His brow is red like the back of the hornbill. His forehead is like a flag, calling people from a distance. He resembles the rainbow. I will water him at the river. With my spear I shall drive my enemies. Let them water their herds at the well; The river belongs to me and my bull. Drink, my bull, from the river: I am here To guard you with my spear.</quote>This text is, as stated, 'Traditional from the Dinka Tribe'; the Dinka Tribe are traditionally a cattle herding tribe from the Sudan region in Africa who take great pride over their cattle and even when dead, do not eat them. The Dinka, as many other tribes, are inherently expressive and creative with art, music and dances all being part of their lives and their connection to nature. This text deals with the manifestation of feelings towards the bull and the many connotations the bull has to anyone in the Dinka. <fnote> URL  </fnote>This text appears to be a poem, for several reasons; firstly that, like common in much poetry, the line functions independently of the punctuation, e.g. (line 2), 'White like the shimmering crane bird on the river bank', here the line breaks without instruction to do so by punctuation. Also the use if poetic devices like simile, which is recurrent through the text, one example of this is in line 9, 'He shines like the morning star.' Plus rhyme is sometimes used throughout this text both internally (line 4, 'His roar is like the thunder to the Turkish cannon the steep shore.'), and in the form of a rhyming couplet, (lines 17 and 18, 'Drink, my bull, from the river: I am here/To guard you with my spear'). The first line starts with an emphasis on the personal pronoun 'my', which is immediately associated with possession and relationships. However, as the line and the stanza develop it becomes clear that the adoration, respect and protection are paramount in the relationship between the Dinka and the bull. This first section (lines 1-4) introduces the relationship between the bull and the Dinka, and gives some insight into the how the Dinka are protected by the bull and rely on the bull (to mate with cows to give them 'fresh milk'), but that the bull is also vulnerable. The second section breaks into more similes and is primarily concerned with the comparison between the bull and the weather. It is clear with the use of even more possessive and contextual pronouns like 'his', 'him' and 'he' that the voice in this poem is trying to express, how the bull is changing (just like the weather changes); it is even compared to both 'summer and winter' which creates a paradox and would perhaps make the bull sound confusing to someone who doesn't understand it to the same degree as the Dinka. In this section 'flag' is an important verb used in line 11 because the poem is progressing more to the enemy of the Dinka and the bull, and the flag would assume many connotations with oppressing powers trying to occupy the Dinka's land and the fear this creates. Therefore, the flag does indeed call 'people from a distance' but it may also be something very dangerous and menacing. Towards the end of the poem water, care, protection and vulnerability are clearly very important. The Dinka want to defend something which they care for dearly and have great respect for, but there is also something very tender in the declaration, 'I will water him at the river', creating a mood of natural serenity and celebration that their bull is something glorious and natural compared to the man-made 'well' which will suffice for their enemy. Throughout the whole of this text it should be remembered that this must be a translation from the Dinka into written English, and the effect that this would have had on the meaning of many of the words. Plus, the words in this text are mainly monosyllabic and the pace created by this could lead to the assumption that this could be chanted or easily remembered and read aloud to be passed on. There is great hostility towards the 'enemy' in this piece and perhaps, originally, it could have been intended that this was simultaneously some kind of declaration to protect and defend the bull which they loved and a celebration of the thing most dear to them which gave them back so much. There is one single voice in this, which is definitely not anonymous and continuously describes the bull and makes it seem very animate and real because of the comparative descriptions and the deeply personal nature throughout. The organisation of the text is in three clear sections, loosely based around introducing the bull, the complexity and sensitivity of it and the desire to protect and defend it from others. <heading>My response to My Magnificent Bull</heading><heading>My Musician</heading>A: Who do you think is the best musician that ever lived? B: Jimi Hendrix, without a doubt. C: Jimi Hendrix?!?! B: Yeah, just look at him; how he played, wrote, performed. He was everything, he didn't just play the guitar; he was the guitar. Every time he performed he was so natural; each chord coursed through his veins. He gave life to his guitar because it gave life to him. D: But surely it was all because of drugs? I mean, he was off his head for most of the time. It's just like one big acid-trip to me or something. Everyone harps on about him just because he experimented with music, had scruffy clothes and his hair was a mess; you could say the same about Pete Doherty C: ...now he is the best musician ever! B: What are you on about? C: First and foremost, he's a poet like the best of any of the romantics. He embodies a generation, he is an icon of our time that is going unnoticed and he has passion for music like I've never seen before. He is an art form in himself, he lives what he writes. I've seen him on stage, not just on TV and it's something incredible, beautiful and powerful but tragic and vulnerable at the same time. And I don't care what the newspapers make you think, I'll defend him till the end because he's so much more than anything you'll ever see, if you'd just give him a chance. 