<heading>Background</heading>In the last thirty years, ideas of how and even whether to teach pronunciation as part of an English for Foreign language course have changed substantially. In the 1960s and 1970s many course-books, such as Streamline, followed an audio-lingual method, with grammatical structures presented through dialogues and then drilled. Repetition was assumed to 'fix' utterances in the minds of the learners. Reacting against this approach, some writers even dismissed the teaching of pronunciation as unnecessary, concluding that 'little relationship exists between teaching of pronunciation in the classroom and attaining proficiency in pronunciation' (Suter, 1976) cited in Otlowski, 1998).The widely adopted 'communicative approach' with its emphasis on spoken English, again led pronunciation to be given greater prominence. The aim was now not to achieve what is commonly known as 'linguistic competence' or correct manipulation of form, but rather what Hymes (1972) refers to as 'communicative competence', linking grammar with socio-linguistic features such as intonation. The focus of teaching pronunciation is moving, then from the 'correct' production of sounds to chunks or meaningful and conceptualised utterances, with features such as intonation receiving most attention <heading> My professional question</heading>In this paper I will be looking at the role of pronunciation in my professional situation. This centres on a ten-week EAP course designed to prepare students for undergraduate and, less commonly, post-graduate study at University. It is generally accepted hat most students and teachers believe pronunciation is vital to their learning or teaching experiences. However, with the demands of the Academic syllabus and the fact that the course tends to be fairly assessment driven, there often seems little classroom time for pronunciation work . Much recent debate also focuses on the question of what is an appropriate model for students. With English now accepted as the International 'lingua-franca', many are questioning the validity of RP (Received Pronunciation) as an appropriate model, or trying to analyse the characteristics of a new model for the 'World English' spoken between non-natives. (Walker 2002, .Jenkins 2005, Roach 1998). However, the student group I am concerned with will be dealing mainly with native speakers in Britain. As such they tend to be very motivated to achieve a level of oral competency that goes beyond basic intelligibility, and, for this reason, I shall not be exploring this area of discussion. Instead, I will be looking at what aspects of pronunciation should be taught in my teaching situation, and also at possible methodologies for this teaching in an Academic English course. 1 <heading>What should be taught</heading>32Certain recent study has focused on the issue of what aspects of pronunciation are most usefully taught. As previously stated, pronunciation has increasingly been viewed as a feature of spoken discourse, that is in terms of its supra-segmental features, rather than as a study of sounds or phonemes (segmental features). Many widely-read pronunciation courses (for example: Ship or Sheep, Sounds English) did and still do highlight the teaching of minimal pairs and individual sound production. Such methodology is still popular among many teachers, as it is simple and can be introduced as a short feature or warmer into a lesson. Halliday, the eminent socio-linguist, (1970, 1994) instead sees spoken English in terms of its social implications, and feels that words cannot be studied in isolation, but only through their contextual meaning. In his view, features such as intonation therefore become of primary importance. Crystal and Davy ( 1975 ) bridge the gap a little further between Halliday's theory and classroom practice in this area. They present in their book 'Advanced conversational English' ideas of how text-books could better incorporate features of real English; full as it is of hesitation, fillers and weak forms. They therefore reject the highly graded listening texts commonly used for pronunciation practice in EFL books at that time. Like Halliday, they view pronunciation as inseparable from meaning, therefore choosing model texts of 'real' conversational English. Their book is however, aimed at teachers of advanced students, and only for those interested in going beyond basic communicative competence. In more recent years writers have gone further in turning these theoretical ideas into textbook practice. . Brazil (1994) in Pronunciation for Advanced Learners of English looks at the need for improving students' ability to recognise and produce fast speech. He presents streams of un-graded spoken discourse, and then breaks these down into manageable 'chunks' for students to imitate. He then gives students similar tasks to perform, in order to use the features learnt in a more meaningful way. 4While such teaching of pronunciation through its discoursal features is definitely useful, this use of un-graded real conversation as a model is not always appropriate for my particular teaching context. Our students are often at an intermediate level; the level of difficulty of such advanced supplementary books might serve to de-motivate the class, and be aimed at too high a level to help them achieve communicative competence. In spite of the difficulty of such texts, I would accept that a focus not only on sounds but also on chunks of real conversation would at times provide higher level students with a more meaningful and motivating means of tackling the subject both of listening and pronunciation. Where this teaching focus might gain even more relevance, however, is with the practising of presentation skills. One major complaint about L2 speaker presentations is often that the speakers lack the ability to pause appropriately; this along with flat intonation puts tremendous strain on the listener. One ESP course-book, Presenting in English, gives invaluable practice of such supra-segmental skills as intonation and the chunking of a speaking text into 'tone-groups'. <heading>Methodology of pronunciation courses</heading>In addition to the question of which pronunciation features to teach, there is also the issue of appropriate methodology, and at what stage or stages pronunciation should be introduced into the lesson. The resistance of teachers to teaching pronunciation is an area of concern when examining how the subject should be taught. Macdonald's paper ( 2002) discusses this issue, describing a project undertaken at her university, where teachers were interviewed about their attitudes to teaching pronunciation. This recognised a sense of 'reluctance' to the teaching of the subject, which seemed to belie the importance given to it by both students and teachers. Interviewees raised points such as the pressures of the curriculum and the resultant bypassing of pronunciation to make way for other work. A number said that if pronunciation were more obviously integrated into the syllabus and course-books they would be more willing and able to teach it. In spite of the fact that the sample of interviewees only numbered eight, I feel that the conclusions reached were interesting and applicable to EAP courses, where the syllabus is also fairly rigid and assessment driven. If pronunciation were linked to content then it would not be seen as an extra activity to be done 'if we have time'. <heading>The integration of pronunciation. </heading>This linking of pronunciation to content, or 'integration' of pronunciation, is an issue currently being widely discussed. (Griffiths 2002, Otlowski 1998, Thenasoulas 2002, Underhill, 2005) Underhill, for example, writes in favour of the integration of pronunciation at every stage of the EFL lesson. In his teachers' resource book Sound Foundations (2005), he states that learning pronunciation is a holistic experience, and should be experienced on a number of different levels: aurally, orally visually and kinaesthetically. Underhill suggests ways in which his phonemic chart can be used at different stages of the lesson, with training and awareness raising activities at the beginning of course allowing both teachers and students to become comfortable with recognising, producing and writing the symbols. As someone who has used and valued this chart for many years of teaching, I feel that this is a useful tool in training both teachers and students in the sounds commonly used in English. I do not however consider that it should be the only way of introducing pronunciation into the Academic English syllabus. Although Underhill does devote part of the book to the supra-segmental features of intonation, stress and other features of connected speech, it might be true that his emphasis on the chart tends encourage a disproportionate time being spent on teaching at the phoneme level. Some nationalities, especially Arabic speakers, struggle enough with learning the Roman script, without having simultaneously to write in phonemic script as well. This method is also very teacher dependent, and necessitates every teacher being extremely aware of the phonemic chart and its possible uses. <heading>Focus on the student</heading>5Many writers, including Underhill, advocate a learner-centred approach. The 'humanistic' strand of language teaching, led in part by Pilgrims teacher training centre, emphasises the needs and feelings of the learner. Arnold (2003) establishes the necessity of giving students the space and time to produce a sound, rather than forcing spontaneous repetition. She cites anxiety as one of the main reasons that students are not able to effectively reproduce sounds when learning a language, and gives a number of ways in which to reduce these feelings of anxiety, such as fun warm- up and voice exercises. Similarly, Tomlinson (2001) feels that the student's 'inner voice' should be cultivated, with the development of receptive skills encouraged before students are forced to speak. These concerns are largely, I feel, more relevant for beginners or elementary English students. This feeling of nervousness and learner stress is, however, certainly an issue in our EAP situation. Many of the tasks that students are given are assessed, so that students possibly check too much their own speaking, and do not always find the confidence to communicate freely. Perhaps a reduced emphasis on assessment and a greater amount of time given to free conversation and voice training might lessen this problem. <heading>Technology and Pronunciation </heading>There is one area of discussion around the subject of pronunciation that I feel will be very important in the next decade, and that is the area of using new technologies in the teaching of pronunciation. This will be particularly relevant for EAP courses, with Colleges and Universities needing to be at the cutting edge of technology to compete in a global education market. One remarkable new on-line publication is leading the way in this field. Cauldwell's Streaming English (2003) is a course designed to be taken on-line by students with or without a teacher present. Cauldwell cites Brazil in his introduction, and links himself to the school of thought seeing pronunciation as a discoursal feature. In his article 'The two-sides rule', he shows that listening and pronunciation are inextricably linked; students therefore need to be able to listen effectively to streams of unscripted English. His publication allows the students to listen and then attempt to copy sections of these texts, thereafter recording themselves. They are then able to play back and compare themselves with the original. Another innovative part of this course, is that students can choose from a range of academics from different regions giving lectures on various subjects, and this element of choice would I feel add motivation to what is a very challenging task. This type of on-line course will enable teachers to give students practise outside the classroom, and also empower students to make choices about content and amount of time spent at the computer. I feel this, or a similar publication, would also help with the difficult task of fitting enough pronunciation work into an already dense syllabus. <heading>Conclusion</heading>To sum up, the teaching of pronunciation in EAP classes should, in my view, be focusing mainly but not exclusively on the teaching of supra-segmental features. More importantly, it should be integrated and written into our speaking and listening syllabus at every stage and at every level. Students and teachers should be trained in how to master pronunciation more effectively, and tools such as the phonemic chart and on-line courses ought to be readily available to the teaching staff. There is little that has been written so far concerning the teaching of pronunciation in an Academic English course. I feel, though, that our students do have many different needs from the average EFL student, and more research should be done into the best way to help students equip themselves for a long period of academic study in English. (Word count: 2034) 