 FORMULA <heading>Title</heading>A comparison of a diabetes- specific feed and a standard feed to increase glycemic control in hospitalised diabetic patients. A randomised controlled trial. <heading>Name of Investigator</heading>SID: 1425136 <heading>Research Question</heading>Diabetes is a chronic disease caused by either a deficiency in insulin production or the ineffectiveness of the insulin produced. This disease can be either inherited or acquired. (Zazzo, 2005) There are two principle forms of diabetes; type 1 and type 2 and both result in increased glucose concentrations in the blood which will lead to the damage of many body systems. Complications that are associated with diabetes include; retinopathy, nephropathy, heart disease, neuropathy and foot disease. The onset of all of these co- morbidities can be delayed with increased control of blood glucose, therefore, it is important for diabetic patients to be able to do so whilst in hospital. (Bak, Heardal. (1996) and Charney and Hertzler, 2004) Prevalence of diabetic patients in hospitals has been reported to be approximately 20% and these patients are likely to require nutritional support whilst admitted. (Crespillo, Olveiraal. 2003) Enteral or tube- feeding is a method of providing nutritional support to patients who are unable to meet their nutritional requirements orally. (Fish and Seidner, 1999) However, standard nutritional formulas are high in carbohydrate and low in fat and fibre, and have been associated with increasing blood glucose due to rapid gastric emptying rate and rapid nutrient assimilation. Therefore, specific diabetic formulas have been developed to enable better blood glucose control. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005) Therefore, this research aims to evaluate the effectiveness of both a standard feed and a diabetes- specific feed to reduce blood glucose levels in diabetic patients. It aims to provide evidence that a diabetes-specific feed will significantly reduce blood glucose levels in diabetic patients when compared to a standard feed, therefore, reducing the risk of co- morbidities in these patients. <heading>Literature Review</heading>Short and long-term use of diabetes-specific formulas are associated with improved glucose control, and as mentioned previously, this may have implications for reducing complications of diabetes, for example, heart disease. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005) Control of blood glucose can be difficult for diabetic patients on a day-to day basis, therefore, it is clear that controlling it whilst on a feed will produce difficulties. For instance, if blood glucose is inadequately controlled, hyperglycemia or glycosuria may result. (Leon-Sanz, Garcia-Lunaal. 2005) Therefore, it is necessary to closely monitor diabetic patients receiving a feed to include; metabolic, gastrointestinal and mechanical assessment. (Fish and Seidner, 1999) Common complications associated with diabetic patients on feeds are hyperglycemia or hypoglycaemia due to the feed being incompatible. (Barndregt and Soeters, 2005) Numerous studies have compared standard and diabetes- specific formulas and have reported that the diabetes- specific feeds reduced post-prandrial rise in blood glucose. (Elia, Carielloal. (2005), Leon-Sanz, Garcia-Lunaal. (2005) and Crespillo, Olveiraal. (2003)) Many of these studies have compared a low carbohydrate feed to a high carbohydrate feed, as low carbohydrate feeds have been shown to reduce blood levels of glucose and requirements for insulin or other medication. (Leon-Sanz, Garcia-Lunaal. 2005) However, these trials have been conducted using small populations and short durations. Some of this research has tested a feed administered at breakfast only and not for patients requiring total tube feeding. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005) Also, some research has focused on the palatability of oral drinks designed for diabetic patients which is not helpful when considering tube feeding. (Grau, Almazon Arjonaal. 2004) Therefore, it is necessary to conduct research that will compare a standard feed to a diabetes- specific feed for diabetic patients requiring total nutritional support. <heading>Significance of proposed research</heading>Diabetes has been described as a disease with social and economic impact, which is likely to increase along with the rise in diagnosis. (Crespillo, Olveiraal. 2003) In the UK costs associated with the major complications that arise from diabetes range from £872-8458 per patient. Patients with diabetes are also more likely to be admitted to hospital and it has been recorded that they account for up to 25% of intensive care admissions and, therefore, may need nutritional support. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005) It has also been noted that diabetic patients are at an increased risk of dying whilst in hospital along with longer hospital stays which will further increase costs of treatment. (Crespillo, Olveiraal. 2003) Therefore, if this research can provide evidence that diabetes-specific nutritional formulas can increase gylcemic control in diabetic patients, and, reduce the onset of further complications it will benefit both the patients' quality of life and reduce the cost to the NHS. <heading>Research Methodology</heading><heading>Study Population</heading>Patients with diabetes and who require long-term (at least 1 month) total nutritional support as hospital in-patients will be invited to take part in the study. Explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria will clearly define who is eligible to enter the study, see Table 1. (Bury and Mead, 1998) The aim is to recruit 100 participants who will be randomly assigned into, either the intervention group or the control group. The participants will be randomised using a random numbers computer package. This randomisation will reduce bias and decrease the differences between the groups which may otherwise influence the results. (Bowling, 2002) <table/>Table 1: Table to illustrate the inclusion and exclusion criteria for participants to be eligible to take part in this study. The participants will be recruited from several hospitals across the UK, where patients will be informed of the nature of the study and asked if they would be willing to take part. Those patients who indicated they would be willing will be sent further information and invited to attend a group session where the study design will be explained and they will be given the opportunity to consent and begin the screening process. After successful screening, participants will be randomised to one or other arm of the study. <heading>Research Design</heading>This is a small randomised controlled trial, which allows rigorous evaluation of a single variable in a precisely defined patient population. (Greenhalgh, 2001) This design will also reduce bias by allowing the comparison of two similar groups. The population size is fairly small, however, mete-analysis will mean that the results can be pooled with other trials and analysed further. (Senn (1997) cited in Bury and Mead, 1998) After randomisation baseline characteristics will be measured and analysed for equivalence, this will allow any differences that are observed between the control group and the intervention group to be down to the intervention and not due to chance. Both groups will be given continuous feeding via a nasoenteral feeding tube and an fusion pump as their sole nutritional intake for 1 month. Some advantages on continuous feeding include; it keeps the gastric volume small, minimising residual volume and reducing risk of aspiration pneumonia. Also, it has been reported that most patients tolerate continuous feeding better as they are less likely to experience; bloating, nausea, abdominal distension and diarrhoea. (Bak, heardal. 1996) The control group will receive that standard nutritional formula (49% carbohydrate, 35%, lipids and 16% protein) and the intervention group will receive the diabetes-specific formula; Glucerna (33.3% carbohydrate, 50% lipids and 16.7% protein) Both the participants and the researchers will be blind to which group is receiving the diabetes-specific formula, to achieve this both formulas will be manufactured to look the same and have the same packaging. <heading>Data Collection</heading>The primary outcome variable will be mean weekly blood glucose levels; this will be obtained from three daily capillary glucose measurements taken in the morning, afternoon and evening. These measurements will be taken and recorded in pairs to reduce error in recording or technique or any variance in technique. It has been reported that researchers should anticipate potential risks to the participant as a direct result from taking part in a study. (Pompidou, 1996) Therefore, a secondary outcome variable will be participant tolerance of the feeds. Symptoms used to assess tolerance will include; diarrhoea, nausea, dyspepsia, constipation and vomiting. The number of days these symptoms were experienced will be recorded along with the severity of the symptoms. This will be graded as; mild, moderate or severe. <heading>Study Setting</heading>This study will take place in numerous hospitals in the UK, with permission from the trusts involved. It is predicted that many health professionals would be interested n the results from this study, therefore, will be willing to provide space and equipment. <heading>Time points</heading>See appendix 1. <heading>Ethics</heading>Ethical approval is extremely important in the case of tube feeding, therefore, approval from all hospital trusts and administrative sites involved will be sought prior to screening any potential participants. Also, all participants screened will need to give their written informed consent to take part in the study. <heading>Data Analysis</heading>This trial will be analysed on an intention-to-treat basis, where participants will be assessed within the group they were originally randomised too, regardless of whether they complete the trial. Baseline quantitative variables will be compared between the groups to test homogeneity using Students t test or Mann- Whitney U test depending on whether the variable is normally distributed or not. The adverse effects responses will be tabulated and analysed using Fishers exact test. Blood glucose levels are not normally distributed, therefore, will need to be logged and then analysed using an unrelated t test. A 95% confidence interval will be calculated for all comparisons and statistical significance will be p = 0.05. 