<heading>Clear goals</heading>It has been noted that adult learners compared to children already have well-developed ideas about life (Rogers, 2001), therefore, they need to know why a particular task is necessary before they will learn it (Mumford (1995) and Tennant, 2001). Therefore, clear goals were stated at the beginning of the session and learning outcomes were indicated, allowing the learners to realise what was expected from them during the session and why (Habeshawal. 1998). As only one straightforward breathing exercise was taught during the session; the goals were realistic and achievable. Also, many of the learners expressed a wish to learn further breathing exercises; however, due to time constraints this was not possible during one session. However, as noted by the tutor, learners were not informed of the structure of the session; this would have allowed them insight as to when particular tasks needed to be carried out and aid learning and retention. <heading>Adequate preparation</heading>A demonstration of understanding is indicative of adequate preparation prior to the session. Understanding was demonstrated, according to the learners; by organisation, research and adequate information. The tutor agreed that an appropriate amount of material was used. Understanding was also demonstrated by the ability to answer questions fully and clearly as demonstrated on the video tape. All necessary resources were available for the session including; power point presentation, learner handouts, completed teaching plan, flip chart and pens, evaluation forms and music CD. However, many of the learners identified that the teaching room was not large enough for the session. In preparation for the teaching session influences on learners were considered, including; personal learning styles and learning skills (Mumford, 1995). Also the layout of the furniture in the room was considered, as this has been identified as an important factor in determining the success of a session (Habeshaw et al, 1998). Therefore, a circular seating arrangement was suggested to enable all learners to see and communicate with each other (Habeshawal. 1998). The psychological theories of effective learning were also considered including; cognitive, psychodynamic, humanistic and socially constructed. Cognitive theories view the learner as an information processor, for example, Piaget and Vygotsky discussed active learning. Psychodynamic theories described learning as an emotional experience rather than just cognition. Humanistic theories suggest the learner is striving for personal achievement and the socially constructed learner is influenced by social, political and historical influences (Jarvis, 2005). However, it is difficult to apply psychological theories to a specific task, such as; teaching a breathing exercise. Therefore, theories focused on skill teaching were also reviewed. For example, Fitts' 'three-phase' theory which states that learning a skill involves three overlapping phases; cognitive early phase, associative intermediate phase and the autonomous final phase. Also, Normans 'chaos to automaticity' which believes that learning a skill involves a sequence of experiences. Experiences are initially viewed by the learner as chaotic but practice will produce an automatic performance (Curzon, 2004) Both theories view learning a skill as taking part in steps and both emphasise practice. Repetition and rehearsal have been identified as essential ingredients for learning a skill (Howe, 1998), therefore, the breathing exercise was broken down into parts and there was an emphasis on practice during the teaching session with verbal and physical guidance. <heading>Appropriate methods</heading>Learning can be achieved by a variety of different methods; therefore, it is important to establish whether appropriate methods were applied during the teaching session. It has been identified that individuals have likes and dislikes about how they learn, for example; there are different learning styles (Honey and Mumford cited in Mumford, 1995). An activist learning style favours short tasks where learners can get stuck in. Reflectors prefer to listen and observe before acting, theorists enjoy learning about concepts and theories and pragmatists are interested in how a skill can be applied to real life situations (Mumford, 1995) Therefore, all four learning styles were considered whilst preparing teaching methods. For example, all information was displayed visually, spoken and appeared on a learner handout and the power point presentation. Learner handouts and the power point presentation were carried out at the beginning of the session as the learners would have been more receptive to them (Habeshawal. 1998) Also, the session was broken up to contain active tasks, such as ticking the picture that described feelings, brainstorming and practicing the breathing exercise. The brain storm exercise was conducted at the beginning of the session, therefore; the learners thinking would have been expanded on the subject of the session (Habeshawal. 1998). The session also contained a brief overview of yoga and explained the theory of how it can help a person relax. Furthermore, during the session it was discussed how being competent at the breathing exercise could be practical for the learners. It was important to include different methods during the session as successful learning needs to go through a cycle which involves; activity, reflection, theory and pragmatism (Rogers, 2001). However, Tennant suggests that educational growth only occurs when individuals have to move outside their preferred learning style (1998, cited in Quinn, 2000). <heading>Significant results</heading>Learning can also be evaluated through discussing whether the results of the teaching are significant, for example; whether the learners achieved the goals and if the facilitator made a difference to them. Learning has occurred when individuals can demonstrate that they know something that they didn't know before, or when they can do something they couldn't do before (Mumford (1995) and Gross, 2006). All the learners were able to complete the alternate breathing exercise competently at the end of the session and 76% noted that they felt more relaxed at the end of the session and 20% indicated that they felt 'ok'. Whether the facilitator made a difference to the learners was assessed using a written evaluation questionnaire. This approach was used as it enabled the facilitator to focus feedback on specific areas, for example; eye contact and voice projection and it enabled learner comments to be anonymous (Forsythal. 1995). Scalar questions were used for eye contact, voice projection and enjoyment of the session, enabling easy completion and responses are quantifiable (Forsythal. 1995). However, if learners make additional comments the facilitator is unable to gain more information. The feedback from the evaluation questionnaire is considered in more detail in the next section. <heading>Effective presentation</heading>To complete the evaluation is it is necessary to consider whether the presentation of the session was effective, to include; whether the presentation methods were used appropriately and the quality of the presentation performance (Mumford, 1995). The power point slides were clear, colourful, contained images and were not too overcrowded. The slides were also numbered to allow the learners to follow the presentation on their handouts. The aim of the power point presentation was to attract attention and to aid retention (Peel, 1998). The learners commented positively on the power point presentation and the tutor agreed that good use was demonstrated. The handouts that accompanied the presentation were clear, contained space for learners to add comments or notes, and the contents were relevant and up to date (Brown and Race, 1995). No comment was made by the either the learners or the tutor on the handouts. The learners made positive comments on the ticking exercise, where learners were asked to indicate how they felt by ticking the appropriate picture before and after completing the breathing exercise. However, the learners also noted that it would have been more useful to post duplicates of the pictures on the wall to reduce the 'bottle-neck' that occurred during this task. Furthermore, it was suggested that more emphasis should have been placed on how the learners felt before and after completing the breathing exercise to aid understanding and retention. Also, as the breathing exercise needed to be completed with learners sitting cross-legged or in a kneeling position on the floor, they were asked to move chairs etc. after the power point presentation was completed. This was to allow the learners to sit comfortably whilst the background/ theory of yoga was being discussed. However, some of the learners suggested that it would have been more helpful if they sat on the floor during the whole presentation to avoid disruption and allowing more time for practice etc. The learners also commented positively on the music during practice of the breathing exercise suggesting that it aided relaxation. This comment was reinforced by the tutor. The learners and the tutor noted that the demonstration of the breathing exercise was clear and easy to follow. Also, the learners were pleased that understanding of how to complete the breathing exercise was established before they were asked to practice individually. Finally it is necessary to consider what makes a good facilitator and evaluate the presentation skills during the session. A good facilitator has been suggested; as having a warm personality, being organised, enthusiastic, and able to simplify tasks (Rogers, 2001). The tutor and the learners agreed that the facilitator was relaxed, confident and had a friendly manner. Also, the learners identified that the teaching was enthusiastic and a calming voice was used through out. The peer evaluation regarding eye contact, voice projection and enjoyment of the session was very positive. These questions were scaled 1-5, with 5 being very good and 1 not very good. The learners gave an average score of 4.2 for eye contact, 4.3 for voice projection and 4.6 for enjoyment of the session. The video tape identified that the facilitator looked at the screen and cue cards fairly often during the power point presentation; this meant that eye contact was not given to the learners. It also identified that the facilitator moved hair away from face fairly often which could distract learners. Many of the learners indicated an interest in learning more about yoga and further breathing exercises; follow up sessions were suggested. The tutor identified that the summary and conclusion of the session could have been more thorough; as this would have aided learning and retention. 0- In conclusion, the teaching session lasted only twenty minutes which is a short time to teach any subject. Ideally, a short course consisting of approximately 10-15 sessions would be applicable to include more in-depth knowledge about yoga and further breathing exercises for the learners to take home and practice individually. Nevertheless, it is felt that the session went well and there were positive comments from both the tutor and the learners. However, both the tutor and the learners identified areas that need development. Following these comments some action points have been formulated for future teaching presentation sessions; <list>Indicate the structure of the session for the learnersEnsure teaching environment/ room is appropriateFurther improve eye contactLess reliance on cue cards/ power point screenEnsure adequate amount of materials are provided for the number of learners Summarise main points clearly at end of sessionLink theory to tasks performed during session</list>Planning, preparing and teaching the session was challenging but enjoyable. It was beneficial to receive feedback both from the tutor and peers on teaching performance, to allow action points to be formulated and utilised in the future. As a qualified dietitian it will be necessary to be able to teach different subjects to a variety of individuals effectively. Word count: 1, 951 