<heading>1. INTRODUCTION</heading>Funded in 1952, Monarka Hotel Group is a leader in the hospitality industry and the pride of the United Kingdom. It operates worldwide 3 different brands (see appendix 1 for details), mainly through management contracts. The most spread and appreciated brand, Monarka Hotels, is present in every continent including Asia, and mainly targets a westernized luxury market (i.e. United Kingdom, Canada, U.S.A and Australia). Monarka Hotels aim to be the best provider of customer service in the luxury market by delivering a unique customer experience through operational excellence and by providing a great work environment. In fact, the brand targets a European, American and Australian market; a westernised market which corresponds to the high-class level of the society. The Monarka Hotels brand would now like to expand its activities in the Indian subcontinent, and the country that seems the most suitable for the company, mainly because of its particular geographic situation, is Nepal, the Himalayan country. Bounded by China and India, Nepal is a constitutional monarchy, the land of the lord Buddha, and one of the poorest countries in the world. Famous for its landscapes, it contains eight of the ten highest mountains in the world, including the Mount Everest (Nepal Tourism Board, 2006). Its capital, Kathmandu, has a population of 1.5 million and is located in a valley, at an altitude of 1'310 m (Nepal Tourism Board, 2006). The present document is an analysis of the viability of a brand (Monarka Hotel) of the Monarka Hotel Group in Nepal. <heading>2. EVALUATION OF THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT</heading>In order to evaluate and compare the business environment between the two countries (United Kingdom and Nepal), the PESTE analysis is employed. The Political, Economic, Socio-cultural, Technological and Environmental factors are contrasted, and the results are presented in appendix 2. PEST analysis is suitable to compare the business environments since it helps considering growth opportunities (Johnson et al. , 2006). Even though businesses have almost no control over these factors, they nonetheless influence consumer behaviour; thus demand (Bowie and Buttle, 2004), and the company must be aware of the differences between the two countries to adapt its strategies to Nepal's environment. Nepal being one of the poorest countries in the world (CIA, 2006, Country Watch, 2006a) and the UK being one of the most powerful nations (CIA, 2006, Country Watch 2006b), their economic environment present very few similarities. First of all, one of the major differences that the business will have to cope with is the level of corruption in Nepal, which is much higher than the UK's. Corruption in Nepal substantially reduces the attractiveness for investment, especially as the government process in delivering permits and other official documents is often illegitimate (Country Watch, 2006a). Hence, it may be necessary to find an insider to help the company with those processes. In fact, the Asian Development Bank (2006) has categorised Nepal's political and economical future as ambiguous. Another major difference lies with the general barriers that companies have to face, which is measured with the Index of Economic Freedom. While England is in the 5 th position (free), Nepal is on the 125 th (not free) position on 157 countries (Miles et al. , 2006). This massive variance means the entry barriers to the country, the banking system and the fiscal policies are much more complex and problematic for businesses in Nepal than in the UK (Miles, 2006). Then, the government is much more likely to intervene in the business all the more all the banks belong to it, while it is not the case in the UK (Miles, 2006). The Nepalese workforce is also very different than the UK's and will affect the way business is conducted. In fact, there is a severe lack of qualified workforce in Nepal. Given that the literacy rate is below 50% (CIA, 2003) and that Nepal's unemployment rate is nearly ten times higher than in the UK (see Appendix 2), the search for a qualified workforce will certainly be more complex. Also, the management of the workforce will have to be done in a different way than in the UK since Nepal presents a culture that is higher in collectivism and in power distance (see Appendix 2). One important similarity between the two countries is that both are democratic, though to a different level. According to Usnier and Lee (2005), democracy is one of the most important factors for a positive marketing environment. However, Nepal being still an agriculture economy, offers a technological infrastructure which is minimal. A lot of the businesses processes might be affected by a limited technology. For example, the delivery of the goods might be complex and not always consistent. Also, in the marketing process, the means used to reach the Nepalese population, if necessary, will be very different than in the UK. Foreign investment is welcomed in both countries, but precisely in the tourism sector for Nepal, where the process is eased to encourage it (U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service, 2004). Regarding the environmental factor, one major difference is that only half of Nepal's population has access to improved water, whether it is not even a concern in the UK. This might represent additional costs for a hotel in Nepal which want to provide improved water for all its clients. Also, tourism has led in environmental degradation in Nepal. It is also the case in the UK, but since the overall infrastructure is better to prevent and resolve it, the impact is not as important. Finally, though Nepal and the United Kingdom present some similarities in their business environment, particularly in the political factors, the way business is managed in Nepal will be very different, particularly because of the very high corruption and because of the weak economical and workforce condition of the country. <heading>3. EVALUATION OF DEMAND </heading>As the business environment is always changing, hospitality managers need to evaluate the factors influencing the demand for tourism. Middleton and Clarke (2001) propose a framework to do so, evaluating different "determinants of demand" in a particular market (economic, demographic, geographic, socio-cultural, mobility, government, media and communication factors) (Middleton and Clarke, 2001:54). Also, Bowie and Buttle (2004) segment the hospitality market in four types of travellers: leisure international and leisure domestic; business international and business domestic. It can be deducted that Middleton's determinants of demand will directly influence each segment differently since their needs, purpose of travel and expectations are distinct. <heading>3.1 The leisure segment</heading>The leisure segment contributes in 89.1% of the tourists arrivals, which makes it the largest segment (London Embassy of Nepal, 2000). As illustrated in appendix 3, the purpose of the visit for the leisure segment can be divided into 4 categories: pleasure, trekking and mountaineering, pilgrimage and others. The Middleton's driver of demand that probably has the most influence on the leisure segment is the geographic factor, which is one of the principal determinants when choosing a destination (Middleton, 2001). Nepal is recognized worldwide for its magnificent and unique sceneries. It is categorized as the biggest natural museum on earth (NTB, 2006a). The socio-cultural background can also be one of the drivers for the international leisure demand. Nepal, country of the origin of Buddhism was also longly the only Hindu kingdom in the world - until became secular in May 2006 (NepalVista, 2006). Hinduism and Buddhism have always been major components of the Nepalese culture, and this is reflected through the numerous religious festivals, Hindu temples and Buddhist shrines (NTB, 2006a), which certainly influences demand, mainly for the pilgrimage segment. In terms of the mass media communication, the new tourism brand launched by the Nepalese government and tourism board in March 2006: Naturally Nepal - Once is not enough (NTB, 2006b), will hopefully influence the international and domestic leisure demand, as expected. There certainly is some domestic leisure tourism in Nepal. However, with the weak economy of the country, and since a very high proportion of the population is living below the poverty line (see Appendix 2), a great majority the Nepalese population can probably not afford to travel, even in its own country. <heading>3.2 The business segment</heading>The international business segment accounts for 10.9% of the tourist arrivals in Nepal, which includes business, official and meeting and seminar purposes (London Embassy of Nepal, 2000). Very few information is available on this segment, but the drivers of demand that are most likely to influence it is probably its geographical situation, which makes it an exotic destination for an incentive journey or for a congress (Shangri-La, 2006). There is also certainly some domestic business tourism, as almost all the five-star hotels in the Kathmandu valley have business rooms and facilities. The weak economy of the country and the lack of general infrastructure (see Appendix 2) definitely influence the low demand for business travel. <heading>3.3 Tourist area life cycle and Plog's psychographic analysis</heading>Plog (2001) developed a psychographic system that categorizes travellers into 4 different personality types, according to their travelling patterns and destinations. From venturer to dependable, the country of Nepal is still categorized as a venturer's destination, which implies the destination is most visited by travellers who prefer exploring new destinations than popular ones. It also suggests a potential growth for the destination. As more venturers will visit Nepal, the destination will become "safer" from the point of view of the other types of travellers that are not as adventurous, and will eventually become a potential destination for them as well (Plog, 2001). In fact, the Kathmandu region being better developed than the rest of the country targets not only venturers, but also near-allocentrics (less adventurous travellers), by its better developed offer and infrastructure (NTB, 2006) Following the stages of the product life cycle, the tourist area life cycle (TALC) is also another useful tool to anticipate demand for a destination (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). However, it is a model that has been primarily developed for resorts, and is less applicable in a situation where tourism is a support to economy (Gale and Botterill, 2005), as it is the case in Nepal. The model is even though also suggesting a potential growth, since, by its increasing number of tourists over the years (see Appendix 3), it must be still in the exploration stage, slowly leading through development. Despite the political and economical instability, the demand analysis for tourism in Nepal shows a potential growth with Plog's psychographic analysis and with the TALC. Also, the international leisure market is clearly the most important market (90%) and within this market, the leisure purpose of travel is the most significant (59.2%). There seem to be an important British demand for tourism, since in 2002 UK was the third-largest country of tourist arrivals in Nepal, after India and 'others' (NTB, 2006). <heading>4. SUPPLY FACTORS IN THE HOST COUNTRY</heading>According to Porter (1985), the bargaining power of suppliers, of buyers, the threat of substitute product, of new entrants and the rivalry among competitors are the five forces that drive competition in an industry. Porter provides a framework enabling managers to determine the strength of each of these forces, and to evaluate how each of them interacts with each other (Porter, 1985). The understanding of competition is at the core of strategy formulation (Porter, 1979) since it provides a basis to differentiation. <heading>4.1 Threat of new entrants</heading>The weight of the threat of new entrants largely depends on the entry barriers of an industry (Porter, 1979). Among the six major sources of barriers to entry mentioned by Porter (1979), the government policy and the capital requirements are the factors that increase the threat of new entrants in Nepal. The government of Nepal lowered the barriers to entry by making some exceptions in its foreign direct investment policy to encourage investment in the tourism sector (US and FCS, 2006). Also, capital requirement in the hospitality industry is often low compared to other industries and it is even lower in Nepal since the abolition of the minimum required foreign investment in 1996 (U.S. and FCS, 2006). Hence, the barriers to entry in Nepal are low, which creates an important threat of new entrants. <heading>4.2 Threat of substitutes</heading>Porter (1979) defines substitutes as product or services that can perform the same function as the one offered by the industry. The main substitute to Monarka would be tourists staying with friends and relatives in Nepal, or deciding to choose another category of hotel (three or four star). Substitutes could also be another destination that fulfils the same functions as a stay in Nepal. Substitutes to the hotel facilities would be a ready-to-eat meal bought in the supermarket instead of a meal at the hotel restaurant (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). However, the threats of substitute are not highly affecting the competitive environment in this case since the brand aims a specific target market. <heading>4.3 Bargaining power of customers</heading>From the factors identified by Porter (1979) that increases bargaining power of buyers, some of them affect the competitive environment in Nepal. Buyers have a high bargaining power if the products are not differentiated, as they tend to be more sensitive to prices (Porter, 1979). For Monarka, this factor can be negligible if the strategy formulated offers a highly differentiated offer. Also, being a five-star hotel, it does not target consumers that are price-sensitive. <heading>4.4 Bargaining power of suppliers</heading>As mentioned by Bowie and Buttle (2004), in a service industry one of the major supplies required is people, and being a five-star hotel increases the level of qualification required (e.g. multilingual proficient staff, professional service) (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). However, as discussed earlier, there is a severe lack of qualified workforce in Nepal. Hence, the scarce qualified workforce will have a high power by being highly demanded by all the competitive sector and will most likely chose the unit offering the best conditions (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). However, the availability of qualified workforce might increase in the future since the Hotel Management Academy started a new bachelor program in 2003 (Ministry of finance, 2006). Another point increasing the overall power of suppliers is the fact that, being a landlocked country, the power of other suppliers as water, electricity and food is quite high; especially for the water, considering that half of the population doesn't have access to improved water sources (see Appendix 2). <heading>4.5 Intensity of rivalry</heading>The factors determining the intensity of rivalry are, amongst others, the number and size of competitors and the industry growth (Porter, 1979). According to the Nepal Tourism Board (2006), the five-star hotel market counts 6 establishments, 5 of them being in Kathmandu (see Appendix 4). They have between 155 and 283 rooms, all offer extensive services, large meeting rooms and three of them are international brands (Crowne Plaza, Radisson and Hyatt). Extensive information (as occupancy or RevPar) does not seem to be available, but it is interesting to notice the general managers of these hotels are all local, according to their name, which might facilitate good relationship between the establishments, favouring a healthy competitive environment. By weighing each of the Porter's five forces (see appendix 5), it is possible to determine which are the key drivers of competition in the five-star hotel market of the Nepalese hospitality industry, and to measure the intensity of the competition. The threat of new entrants and the power of suppliers are the major drivers of competition emerging from this analysis. The weighed 5 forces result in a competition that can be estimated at 47% (see Appendix 4). This number is based on the previous analysis and presumes that the competitive environment is quite competitive, but not excessively. <heading>5. MARKET ATTRACTIVENESS</heading>The elements to consider when evaluating market attractiveness can be classified in two categories: the "environmental characteristics" and the "firm characteristics" (Lee and Carter, 2005:95). Being an underdeveloped country with much political instability (appendix 2), Nepal as a new market for Monarka presents a certain risk. However, the geographical attributes, the rich culture, the variety of activities and the outcomes of the demand reveal certain market attractiveness. In fact, the growing tourism and the facilitated processes of entry by the government, as mentioned previously, make the destination attractive. This, on the other hand, causes a relatively high threat of new entrants in the industry. It is also important to consider the high corruption rate and the unqualified labour market as an important risk of doing business in Nepal. Regarding the firm characteristics, Monarka Hotels has a successful international experience until now and to have Nepal as a new market would meet the firm's objectives for internationalisation (appendix 1). According to the evaluated country risk, a suitable market entry mode can be chosen: ownership, franchise or management contract. <heading>5.1 Ownership</heading>To chose ownership as entry strategy would allow the company to have full control and involvement on the organisation (Lee and Carter, 2005), until the governments limitations (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). However, the level of risk involved with ownership is considerable since the initial investment is high (Lee and Carter, 2005) and might not be the best option in a country with a high political risk as Nepal. <heading>5.2 Franchising</heading>The franchising option lowers the risk since the initial investment for the hotel group is minimal. However, since it is not the firm that runs the hotel (Contractor and Kundu, 1998), there is a risk to loose control over the brand standard. However, it would be easy to repatriate the profits through royalty fees. Furthermore, franchising is not yet a common method of entry in Nepal (US and FCS, 2006) <heading>5.3 Management contract</heading>The management contract is the most frequent managerial mode in the international hospitality industry (Contractor and Kundu, 1998). It provides a daily, often long term control on the organisation, without owning it (Contractor and Kundu, 1998). The risk is then low since the initial investment is minor compared to ownership. Nepal's political and economical futures are too uncertain to take the risk of investing a lot in the country. The best entry strategy is through management contract. In fact, the risk and the invested capital are low, the hotel group still has control of the management in the property, and the profits are expatriated through the management agreement, so there is less risk if the country's situation deteriorates. <heading>6. KEY TARGET MARKETS</heading>The identification of the target markets must be strategic, according to the analysis of demand, of competitors and of the company's resources and values (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The main driver of demand for tourism is clearly the international leisure segment, followed by the international business segment. As shown in appendix 2, there is a significant growth for the European travellers and for the leisure segment in general. Also, the United Kingdom tourists represent the most important part of the European market (appendix 3), followed by Germany and France. However, the Indian arrivals are the most important, and must not be neglected, as well as the Americans'. Because of Nepal's overall weak economy and unstable political condition, it is not expected that the country's market will be significant in the leisure, but certainly in the business segment. The hotel group being global because of its international presence, it still targets a niche market for its luxury brand. It will target, for the leisure segment, the customer described by Plog (2001) as a near-allocentric traveller. Geographically, the first market the hotel group should focus on is the westernised tourist; and as a second target, the westernised business segment, which makes it targeting a global market as a primary market. <heading>7. STRATEGIC ORIENTATION</heading>Centricity, defined as an "approach to international management", influences global performance and business behaviour in a several manners (Roper et al. , 1997:199). The centricity of a firm is determined, amongst others, by the country of origin and the methods of growth the company chooses (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The table in appendix 7 presents the different forms of centrism in a marketing perspective. The level of centricity varies into the firm, and it is very rare that a firm adopts a pure model. Generally, there is a predominant model, with some influences of the others (Lee and Carter, 2005). According to Wind et al. (1973), the ethnocentric orientation is the most suitable when the international demand is low, since it targets only home-country consumers (appendix 7). It is most appropriate for a small company entering a new market, and that can not afford to target international markets. This orientation often reduces a lot of costs, but it might also discard lucrative international opportunities (Wind et al., 1973). This situation does not apply to Monarka, which desires to target a global market. The polycentric approach has most of its activities centred upon the host-country (i.e. Nepal) as it takes into account the local cultures in terms of pricing and marketing policies (appendix 7). This approach might not be suitable for a company who desires to be highly standardised since each subsidiary has a higher range of autonomy (Wind et al., 1973). It is not an appropriate option for Monarka, mainly because of the low demand for the local market. Both regiocentric and geocentric orientations expand their target market further than the national frontiers (appendix 7), requiring a higher standardisation of the processes, but also creating greater economies of scale (Wind et al., 1973). The geocentric approach allows the firm to adopt one marketing strategy, since it targets similar customers in term of culture and socio-demographic characteristics (appendix 7, Wind et al., 1973) worldwide. It is the orientation that is the most suitable for Monarka in Nepal since it aims to target global customers, i.e. the westernised leisure luxury market. <heading>8. BRAND IMAGE AND COMPETITIVE POSITIONING STRATEGY</heading>In order to be competitive, the company must have a well defined brand image, which is reinforced by its competitive positioning strategy. The positioning strategy of Monarka in Nepal can be achieved by analysing the features of the competitors (appendix 4), and then determining distinct characteristics that will position Monarka as offering a highly differentiated service compared to its competitors. <heading>8.1 Competitive positioning strategy</heading>The competitors that are analysed are the five star hotels of the region of Kathmandu, as they seem to be the only ones in the country (excluding the luxurious resorts). Four of them are evaluated according to the features offered, which are classified into four distinct categories (Prager, 2005). First of all, the antes are the facilities offered by all the competitors that all hotels of this market segment should also have. These include pool, restaurants, bars, room service, fitness room and meeting facilities. The neutrals are features that do not add value to the service. These, in the competitor set, might include the hotels that offer a casino, if it does not influence the customer's choice of hotel. However, if several customers chose the hotel because of this feature, it might become a driver, which differentiates the hotel product, and provides added value. Also, most of the hotels provide hair salon and beauty services, which also might be a neutral feature if not used by the clients of the hotel. None of them seem to have any fools gold, which are unique features, but that do not enhance performance or brand recognition (Prager, 2005). However, as one of them offers massages, none of them offer extensive therapeutic services. Monarka could take opportunity of this gap and offer a broad range of healing facilities in order to differentiate its offer. Also, Kathmandu being known as the most important gambling city of the Indian subcontinent (Asia Planet, 2006) in order to target the westernised market as desired, the presence of a casino in the hotel might be important, depending on the offer that is developed. <heading>8.2 Brand image</heading>By having a common name (Monarka) in the three different brands (appendix 1), an endorsed brand strategy has been adopted through the hotel group. This guarantees credibility through the different brands by letting the customer know they can expect Monarka's standards in all units (Aaker and Joachimsthaler, 2000). Also, as an international brand, it is ensured that it has an easy pronunciation in almost all languages, so there is no communication obstacle (Usnier and Lee, 2005). The brand, apart than being for legal purposes, also has an image, a personality and even a relationship in the customer's mind (Lee and Carter, 2005) and must be managed carefully because its positive image is long to form , but very easily damaged in customer's mind (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). Over the years, it has become a trusted luxury brand, starting with its strong image in the UK. The brand standards are adapted to a suit a luxury westernised market, and a global strategic orientation. Even though Monarka adapts some features of its hotels to the national culture, it is considered as a harder brand as it aims to deliver a high level of consistency in terms of services, in its locations and in its pricing through a standardised offer (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). <heading>9. MARKETING MIX </heading><heading>9.1 Adaptation versus standardisation</heading>In order to develop a consistent marketing mix, i.e. a coherent combination of the means used to influence demand (Bowie and Buttle, 2004) for Monarka in Nepal, it is essential to determine if the product offer will be standardised or adapted. Marketing standardisation refers to the use of a common product, price, distribution and promotion program through the international brand (Jain, 1989). On the other hand, marketing adaptation is when the offer is adapted to the local culture. Adaptation is argued to be more suitable when a firm targets a local market whose economical, political and cultural differences are important compared to the parent country (Usnier and Lee, 2005). Also, Wind (1986) argues that marketing should be adapted since there are strong obstacles to standardisation. As a matter of fact, the degree of standardisation then depends on the target market, the market position (its development, conditions and competition), the nature of the product (the type and its positioning), the environment (PESTE) and the organisational factors (corporate orientation) (Jain, 1989). An argument for standardisation is that many national differences are being eliminated by the globalisation of markets (Levitt, 1983). It relates to the theory of convergence that customer aspirations are getting more similar as cultural gaps are narrowing between countries. This is occurring, on one hand, with the emergence of global brands (such as Levis and Coca-Cola for example) and on the other hand with technology and easy access to information (Levitt, 1983). Despite this debate, authors agree that neither method is better than the other, and that a mixed approach should be adopted (Jain, 1989, Levitt, 1983, Usnier and Lee, 2005, Wind, 1983). Considering Monarka as a harder brand and having a geocentric orientation, it is logical that its offer is more standardised than adapted. To adopt a more standardised approach is coherent with the harder brand in the sense that the brand name is the same worldwide and the level of service, the type of location and the targeted market are also consistent across all hotels. This orientation will allow the hotel group to generate substantial economies of scale (Bowie and Buttle, 2004, Levitt, 1983) through the product development, the marketing campaigns and the operations management. As it will be applicable through all the hotels, it will provide the brand an increased recognition (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). According to the evaluation of the Nepalese demand as being weak, it would not be relevant to completely adapt the product. However, even though many operational and services features will be standardised, some elements as the décor, the design, some aspects of the food and beverage offer and even of the architecture should be adapted to the local culture. <heading>9.2 Dhobi Khola river, Kathmandu as a location </heading>The decision of Monarka's location in Nepal is one of the most important. Not only it is an irreversible decision, but is also crucial for the hotel's profitability, according to the level of demand for that location. Also, one of the brand standards being the consistency in the locations (appendix 1), Monarka should be in one of the cosmopolitan areas of the country. Kathmandu, Patan, Bhaktapur and Pokhara are the major tourist areas and Pokhara the most popular for its astonishing view on the Himalayas (NepalVista, 2006). Kathmandu, the largest city, is also expected to generate a high level of demand for the leisure market. Moreover, even though business and governmental markets are not the primary but the second target market, it is expected their demand will be substantial. Indeed, as the capital of the country, Kathmandu hosts all the embassies, which contribution in the business segment can help maintaining reasonable room occupancy during the low season. Therefore, Kathmandu, a premium site, should be the chosen location for Monarka in Nepal, more precisely in the area between the Dhobi Khola River and the centre of the city. As mentioned previously, the group should operate through management contract and the best way of obtaining it is by finding a potential existing hotel that can be rebuilt and refurnished to meet the brand standards. <heading>9.3 Monarka's hospitality product</heading>The definition of Monarka's offer in Kathmandu must be based upon an understanding the target market, its desires and requirements (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The offer, as all Monarka hotels, will aim to provide an exceptionally high product and services standards, and their consistent application in daily operations. Monarka hotels have between 85 and 230 rooms (appendix 1), and the offer of competitors identified in the Kathmandu region have between 155 and 290 rooms (appendix 4). To ensure brand standards are met, and due to the scarcity of skilled workforce in Nepal, the hotel will have less rooms than its competitors with 135 rooms. This might even provide the hotel a competitive advantage in terms of its privacy. It will provide its customers all the facilities of Monarka: indoor and outdoor pool, sauna, fitness centre, executive lounge, 24-h room service, concierge and valet parking service. Additionally, it will also offer free internet in all the hotel (which the competitors do not offer yet) and exclusive spa services (massages, therapeutic baths). The hotel will have one French cuisine fine dining restaurant with local flavours. It will also have a bar on the last floor of the hotel, with access to the roof terrace and outdoor pool, where light dining is possible during the day. Due to the size of the hotel, the meeting facilities will not be extensive, with 6 meeting rooms and a capacity varying between 18 and 300 people (theatre style). The décor will be contemporary while maintaining a traditional Nepalese architecture, creating a warm ambiance. The safety and hygiene regulations will not present any limitation in standardising the offer, except perhaps the water supply. In fact, since there are limited sources of improved water in Nepal (appendix 1), the standards for the bathroom (shower and toilet) may need to be adapted, in order to reduce the consumption. <heading>9.4 Distribution channels</heading>In order to reach the target markets, Monarka in Kathmandu will have to use several intermediaries. Even though it can rely upon the hotel's group website and the central reservation system, it will also have to rely upon leisure travel agents serving mainly the American and European market to achieve a high occupancy rate, though at a higher cost. It will also be important to work with the Destination Marketing Organisation (Nepal Tourism Board) to ensure a good visibility to a potential traveller searching information on the country. The hotel might also want to work with incentive travel houses because of its heavenly location, high standards and privacy. To meet the secondary target market, i.e. westernised business segment, it will not be necessary to work with business travel agents due to the limited size of the hotel, but it might be very profitable to work with the many different embassies in Kathmandu, offering them preferential rates for their visitors, as for the IATA members, due to its proximity to the airport. <heading>9.5 Pricing the offer</heading>Having established Monarka's product offer in Kathmandu, the price tactic can now be fixed. Bowie and Buttle (2004) mention that the pricing is one of the most complicated component to standardise since it varies upon many factors as economical growth, markets and competition. While the positioning strategy is developed according to the brand standards, the pricing tactic varies upon the country. The economy of Nepal being weak and still agricultural (appendix 1), the prices, even for five star hotels, are not very high compared to other countries for a same currency. The pricing strategy that Monarka should adopt in Nepal is a market leader strategy. Aiming to be one of the leaders in the luxurious offer by delivering an exclusive customer experience, the company must charge prices accordingly, i.e. fix its prices as one of the highest in the market sector (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). <heading>9.6 Marketing communication (marcom)</heading>When targeting an international market, it is crucial to take into account the cultural differences in the establishment of the marcom strategy. When communicating the offer in low context cultures i.e. Westernised, the main part of the message is transmitted explicitly; whether in high context cultures i.e. Asian, the message is very implicit, more subtle (Usnier and Lee, 2005). In the continuation of the standardisation process, the brand values should be expressed as to be suitable for both types of cultures. Even though the primary target market concerns the westernised cultures, it is better to adopt a universal approach, so it also suits high context cultures and is applicable in the long term. The marcom goal is to generate sales by influencing demand. This is done through the sales team, the promotions, the corporate identity and the advertising (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The marcom strategy for Monarka in Nepal must be standardised to the brand. The logo being consistent worldwide, the brand image should also be the same in the westernised countries, allowing once again substantial economies of scales in term of advertising and printing. In fact, one same message should be adapted to be suitable in several countries, enhancing the brand image and awareness. Even though the local market is not a main target market for the brand, it is still important to launch it strategically in the host country. The best way to launch the brand is Nepal is certainly through a relationship communication strategy. It is critical that alliances are built with the Nepal Tourism Board, the government and some local travel agencies. Also, to reach the Nepalese high class, the best advertising media would certainly be through some trusted newspaper or some specialised business magazines. To maintain healthy relationship with the local customers is very important to project a good image in the country. This could be done by offering them a membership that automatically gives them access to the executive lounge for example. They could also be given some extra amenities that are not very costly for the hotel but that reinforce the relationship, creating repeat business, positive word to mouth, and being very profitable in the long-run. <heading>10. CONCLUSION</heading>This marketing research aimed at analysing the viability of a brand of Monarka Hotel group in Nepal. Despite the agricultural state of the economy, there is still substantial demand for tourism in the country, mainly due to its unique geographical attributes. Nevertheless, the research has shown a highly unstable and corrupted environment, as opposed to the UK. These conditions suggest that the country is still too unstable and weak for the firm to enter the market. However, very recently, a peace accord was signed between the Maoist rebels and the Nepalese government, putting a term to a revolution that had been lasting for more than 10 years (BBC, 2006). This accord has the potential to substantially stabilise the country, creating a much more favourable business environment for the proposed venture. Hence, it is recommended that the firm should go ahead with the proposed venture if the situation remains stable. The research being conducted in the UK, it is based on secondary data only. Nepal being underdeveloped, some information seems not to be available (e.g. occupancy rates, RevPar) at all, which limits to some extent the strength of the analysis. Furthermore, the validity some sources can be questioned since a lot of information on the country has been found on government websites, which could tend to modify some information to their advantage. Nevertheless, substantial theoretical research has also been conducted, which provides a strong basis for the viability of the Monarka brand in Nepal. 