This essay will discuss how lexicon is currently organised. First of all I will start by briefly talking about what the lexicon is. The essay will continue to the summary on how the lexicon is structured in recent perspectives. It will be explained with three approaches, lexicalization, sense relations and lexical composition. As dimensions of lexical composition, qualia and semantic primes otherwise known as primitives are described. It will also evaluate these approaches while explaining the contribution to the lexical field by theoretical and descriptive linguists. Finally there will be a conclusion about the new trends in the lexical field. To begin with according to Crystal (2003) lexicon for linguistics means all the meaningful elements in a language. It includes morphemes such as prefixes and suffixes as well as the words and idioms. Singleton (1999) gives more detailed explanation on the meaningful units. He argues that these meaning units for example show colligation, collocation and lexical semantics. Colligation simply refers to grammatical necessity. The basic example of this is a restricted range of relations such as between a verb and the following complements (Singleton, 1999). For instance prevent from Xing, interfere with X. Collocation means combinations of lexical elements such as compounding words. For example it is an important element that a word, green collocates with house in the lexicon (Singleton, 1999). In addition lexical meaning is traditionally defined as a concept carried with a lexical form. Alternatively sense relations which will be talked about more later on are mentioned to define lexical meaning in a recent perspective (Singleton, 1999). It is said that a great number of approaches towards lexicon have been seen moreover new approaches have also been generated. Some of the recent approaches explained here are lexicalization, sense relations and lexical composition. As a current perspective, the number of English vocabulary has been expanding because of the needs towards new issues in current affair or development of innovative words between young generations. Advertising campaigns have also stimulated the situation. Therefore a number of new words are coined or existing words expand in use (Jackson, 2002). Lexicalization is an approach to generate new lexicons in order to deal with the recent trend. It is originally a coinage term from Quirk et al in A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. There are notions has been expressed differently depending on speakers or writers since there is not yet a word for the particular notion. Jackson (2002) defines lexicalization as uncertain processes to name for such notions. Dieselization and feasible are lexicalized words by Quirk et al (Jackson, 2002). Although it is assumable that the former infers a process by diesel oil the latter is not clear what it is meant by. In other words it is sometimes hard to recover the precise form therefore it is impossible to guess the original meaning. In addition conversion from nouns to verbs is considered a process of lexicalization. For example the following nouns, a cup of coffee and a mug of coffee are both commonly used. However mug cannot be a verb whereas the verb version of cup is acceptable such as He cupped his hands and drank from the stream. Back-formation is another process of coining new words. According to Katamba (2005) back-formation is a process forming a word by removing affixes from a base. For example television was firstly created as a noun and the verb version, televise was coined from the noun. It has been also aimed to lexicalize a notion with clipping. Clipping is another process taking out a lexicon of words and shortening the form while keeping the same meaning. For example plane is fore-clipping of aeroplane and mike is back-clipping of microphone (Katamba, 2005). Sense relations are another current approach analysing how lexicon is structured in particular how a lexicon relates to the other. Cruse (2004, pp 143) defines sense relation as 'a semantic relation between units of meaning'. Furthermore the relations are between discrete units of sense (Cruse, 2004). The two main sense relations, syntagmatic and paradigmatic relations show the structure in different ways. According to Cruse (2004) syntagmatic relations occur between two lexical items in the same sentence. The relations are therefore found by looking at how a complex unit defined as a syntagm can be combined with other units (Lobner, 2002). Moreover it is necessary to consider whether a particular combination does make sense or whether the combination is normal or abnormal (Cruse, 2004). There are two kinds of abnormality between two senses, semantic clash and pleonasm. Semantic clash means that meanings do not match together in a sentence. For example the sentence, my geraniums have kicked the bucket has a semantic clash. Since kicked the bucket is considered as a human action geraniums and kicked the bucket do not go together in the meaning. On the other hands pleonasm occurs when nothing new leads to the other unit although one meaning adds. Therefore the combination results in an unnecessary process. For instance a female aunt, I heard it by listening include pleonasm (Cruse, 2004). It is clear that a lexical unit, female or by listening are unnecessary as the semantic meaning is already stated in the other units. In addition differences between syntagmatic and paradigmatic relations are stated as follows. The former is an expression of coherence constraint while the latter works in sets of choices (Cruse, 2004). Furthermore the choices in paradigmatic relations are classified as inclusion and opposition. For example hyponymy, meronymy and synonymy are some representatives of inclusion. Hyponymy refers to relations such as between apple and fruit (Cruse, 2004). In other words apple is a type of fruit as are bananas or strawberries. Meronymy is another pattern of inclusion although they look similar. For instance in the relations between finger and hand, finger is considered as meronym while hand is said to be holonym. While the meaning of holonym includes the sense of meronym as a part hyponymy does not work like this (Cruse, 2004). In other words the meanings of hand somehow match the sense of finger. Synonymy happens in two words having more salient semantic similarities between them than the differences. For instance big and large refers to almost same meaning. On the other hand antonymy is used as a synonym for opposite. This is a basic relation showing opposite meanings between two words as long and short does (Cruse, 2004). The last approach is called lexical decomposition. The term is defined as 'an analysis into meaning component' by Lobner (2002, pp125). He argues that a meaning of lexical items is determined by identifying what components are in a lexicon and how they are combined each other. On the other hand the analysis is the converse process of how we fix on a meaning of complex words or phrases towards the components or the form (Lobner, 2002). That is where the name originally comes from. Lobner (2002) states the objects of lexical decomposition as follows. It aims to provide the meaning, to reduce it to the basic meanings and to give precise interpretation of the lexicon. It is also meant to explain semantic relations, to describe the components of lexical items and lastly to enable to compare the meaning across languages (Lobner, 2002). Qualia structure is one approach of the lexical decomposition. The approach initially proposed by American linguist, James Pustejovsky helps to achieve the semantic composition of verb and its object (Jackendoff, 2002). This approach starts with dividing features of lexicons into a number of distinct kinds called qualia. The lexical properties should include rich internal structure. Furthermore the information within qualia works functionally in co-composition which is a process of constructing relations among lexical semantics in a sentence (Jackendoff, 2002). In the Pustejovsky theory qualia are divided into four patterns. As Cruse (2004) points out, formal quale enables to find a kind in contrast with other kinds. It means the hierarchical relationship such as among living things, animals, dogs and poodles tells the differences between poodles and other variety of dogs. It also distinguishes dogs from the other pieces such as deer or zebras (Cruse, 2004). Secondly constitutive quale informs structural information as a whole consisting of parts such as sensory and part features. Sensory attributes means for example, size, shape, colour and smell of the object. On the other hand part attributes shows information such as horse includes body, legs and mane as a part (Jackendoff, 2002). The other two quaila are agentive and telic. The former shows mainly its origin and where an entity will develop into. The latter includes information about a certain purpose such as characteristic action, current action or proper function. For example the proper function of a pencil is for writing with whereas action moving across the sky is a characteristic of moon (Jackendoff, 2002). Another type of lexical decomposition is semantic primes introduced by Anna Wierzbicka. The approach aims to describe all the meanings in every language while using a limited concept of semantic primitives. It is a system called Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) in her theory (Lobner, 2002). NSM is composed of a combination of semantic primes and syntax. The semantic primes qualify two conditions. Firstly it is not possible to define the meaning of semantic primes while using the other expressions. It is also lexicalized universally in all natural languages. NSM is often concerned with other approaches to decomposition which are Dowty's decompositional semantics and Jackendoff's conceptional semantics. Although it is similar that the two approaches are also a combination of syntax and primitives there are a few differences to NSM. For instance the two approaches only deal with verbs whereas NSM enables to describe various word classes. For example emotional words such as envy and interjections such as yuk are also able to decompose (Lobner, 2002). In addition NSM is capable to define and compare word meanings in different languages more than the other approaches (Lobner, 2002). Before making a conclusion it is worth looking at how theoretical and descriptive views have been contributed to lexical field including the recent approaches. Lexical decomposition known as formula approaches has rich structures to represent meanings. Furthermore NSM enables to achieve language comparison (Lobner, 2002). These points are contributions of theoretical linguists who deal with developing models of linguistic knowledge. The linguists also have much concern on explaining linguistic universals in other words linguistic properties common in all languages (Wikipedia, 2006). However the approaches are weak in analysing meaning relations between lexical items. It also lacks the preciseness since the primitives are very general (Lobner, 2002). In addition it is not certain whether qualia structure is able to cover every single lexical meaning. Furthermore it is uncertain if these approaches can deal with the incredibly huge number of lexicon which is still expanding (Jackendoff, 2002). On the other hand lexicalization is relatively successful process of coining words by derivation or transformation from existing words which is what descriptive linguists approach in a lexical field (Wikipedia, 2006). However Jackson (2002) suggests the shortcoming as follows. it is not clear which meaning is converted into the coinage when a lexicon has multi-meanings. In the lexical field there is a new approach recently introduced by Cruse (2004). The approach called dynamic construal approach seems a relatively neutral approach. It mainly enables semantic meanings to be highly context-dependent. In other words since lexicons carry no basic meaning every meaning is temporary in a sentence. The lexical semantic therefore vary in the use of sentences. This is dissimilar to theoretical approach which lexical composition composed of syntax and primitives is highly context-independent. This approach also results in showing the semantic meaning much closer to the actual use which is what descriptive linguists aim for (Cruse, 2004). To sum up although a number of approaches towards lexicon have been investigated it is seen that every approach including the recent ones has had shortcomings in different ways. Therefore it is best to analyse how lexicon is organised from various views. It results in the advent of new multiplicity approaches like dynamic construal approach. Overall the lexical field will continue to extend further. In order to achieve this, further researching is still required in the fields. Word count: 2031 words 