It has been researched that there are 380 million people with English as a first language in the world (Wikipedia, 2005). It is certain that there are a huge number of dialects according to regions such as Cockney, Newfoundland English (Wikipedia, 2005). However it must have been true that English has a standardised form, which is called Standard English amongst various local dialects. In addition recently there has been a huge debate about the definition of Standard English between linguists. The main purpose of this paper is to examine the definition of Standard English. The paper will be organised based on the definition of Standard English by Peter Trudgill. Bex and Watts (1999) has suggested it seems crucial to look at the Trudgill's work as the starting point in order to achieve a deep understanding of Standard English because of the clear discussion. The paper will give a clear definition of Standard English at the end. This paper will firstly talk about the definition of Standard English by Trudgill and give a brief idea of the definition. It will then comment on his definition with contradicting ideas by James Milroy and Lesley Milroy. It will be also questioning whether his definition is totally acceptable with reasons. Finally this paper will discuss what is a reasonable definition of Standard English. In his paper 'Standard English: What it isn't' (1999), Trudgill firstly emphasises that Standard English does not mean a language but it is one type of dialect in the English language which will be explained more later on. He also suggests that Standard English might be the most important variety of English because the dialect is generally used in all written documents. Furthermore it is strongly associated with the education system in English-speaking countries. It is also the dialect which non-native English people have learned (Trudgill, 1999). Trudgill (1999) basically defines his argument by looking at what is not Standard English concerning three perspectives which are accent, style and register. He firstly talks about relationship between Standard English and accents. It is common that Received Pronunciation (RP) has a high social prestige in England as an upper class or upper-middle class accent. It has been claimed that all those who has RP accent speak Standard English but not vice versa. However Standard English can be also spoken with some type of regional accent which has phonologically and phonetically dissimilar features to RP. It has been researched approximately 9 to 12 per cent of the British population speaks Standard English with a local accent. Therefore it is concerned that Standard English must have been used in the other English speaking countries such as the USA, Scotland or New Zealand. In other words Standard English is not always necessary associated with the standardisation form of RP accent (Trudgill, 1999). Trudgill (1999) secondly refers to Standard English from perspective of styles. Style of language is regarded as degree of formality towards particular social situation. For example formal language will be preferred in ceremonial occasions while conversations with friends will be taken place in a casual way (Wardhaugh, 2002). It is considered that lexis or vocabulary mostly enables us to differentiate various ranges of style. Trudgill shows the following three sentences having a same semantic meaning as an example of different styles,  FORMULA  (Trudgill, 1999, P120) Trudgill (1999) refused that informal style of language like the above last sentence corresponds to non-Standard English. In his argument speakers of Standard English use swearing expressions or slang as those who speak the other dialects do. In addition Trudgill (1999) insists that Standard English has nothing to do with linguistic register. Register means linguistic items such as lexis or syntax form relating to certain limited occupational or social groups. The examples are surgeons, airline pilots or bank manager according to their habitual routines (Wardhaugh, 2002). Trudgill (1999) argues that there is no associated vocabulary to Standard English because all English words can be generally learned without acquisition of Standard English. Trudgill (1999) finally demonstrates Standard English from two perspectives. Firstly Standard English is an essential part of a standardisation process. It meets three stages, determination to be standard, codification for linguistic form and stabilisation with prescriptive rules towards education system. Therefore Standard English has slightly different grammatical features while the other directs have not. For example Trudgill indicates that the following sentence is acceptable in non-Standard English,  FORMULA  (Trudgill, 1999, P121) However it is impossible to structure the above sentence in Standard English because the dialect has to have irregular forms of the verb to be both in the present tense (am, is, are) and in the past (was, were) (Trudgill, 1999). Secondly Standard English is not a geographical dialect but solely a social dialect. It also consists of a number of forms such as English Standard English or American Standard English. According to Wardhaugh (2002), social dialects are a factor to distinguish social position of speakers such as occupation, place of residence as well as education. The reason is that the social factors have strongly influenced how people speak. Social dialects are also established amongst social groups particularly based on social class, religion and ethnicity (Wardhaugh, 2002). Trudgill (1999) adds that Standard English still includes a historical feature in other words class having the highest level of power, wealth and prestige. It is certain that some ideas by Trudgill are highly acceptable however his theory seems to be leading to a contradiction somehow. Here will be discussed the argument from two different perspectives. Firstly definition of social dialect is not entirely clear what social position or group Standard English belongs to. Although Trudgill (1999) Standard English is associated with the highest status group it will contribute further disagreement. James Milroy (1999) argues that Standard English is no longer necessarily related to high prestige. In Britain distinctive class or status system have been kept in society since the nineteenth century and before. Standard English had been spoken by elites who were less than five per cent of the British population. However in the later history the lower middle class also endeavoured to acquire the dialect. Furthermore development of sound broadcasting enabled them to achieve it easier. As a result Standard English has resulted in losing the high status. At the same time while initial Standard English should be used in formal, well-mannered situation, situational change has contributed to make it used in a casual way (J Milroy, 1999). In addition Trudgill (1999, P119) claims that 'Standard English speakers can be found in all English-speaking countries... they speak this variety with different non-RP accents...' However it is doubtful whether Standard English is regarded as one social dialect which is commonly recognisable throughout the English- speaking world. Lesley Milroy (1999) gives an interesting argument here while comparing the situation in the United States. In the United States class cannot be separated by race and ethnicity whereas in Britain class hierarchy is more clearly distinct from race than in the United States. For example the United States has no accents related to class although Britain has a RP accent. On the other hand it has racially categorised languages such as African- American Vernacular English (AAVE) (L Milroy, 1999). As Lesley Milroy (1999) points out, in the United States 'network American' is commonly acknowledged as Standard English. It is true that Standard English is neither an accent nor a geographical dialect in Trudgill's view. However network American seems a geographical dialect for the Northern Midwest having no particular accent (L Milroy, 1999). Therefore Trudgill's concept seems not fully agreed outside England and in all English-speaking countries. It is also fairly hard to recognise Standard English as a common social dialect throughout all English-speaking countries. Furthermore it is doubtful whether Trudgill's numerous forms of Standard English can be categorised as a part of a same Standard English. In other words it seems reasonable to regard each Standard English as different dialects of English language. According to Trudgill and Hannah (1994) there are generally several different rules between English English and North American English for example in grammatical, orthographical and lexical use. Here is an example of grammatical difference. In English English adverbs, yet and still cannot occur in simple past tense whereas it is possible in American English. The examples are as follows. English English and American English American English only  FORMULA  (Trudgill and Hannah, 1994, P77) The other difference is seen in spelling. It is well known that some English English words are spelled different from American words for example colour, favour are spelled as color, favor in American English (Trudgill and Hannah, 1994). Vocabularies are also not completely identical between the two countries. A good example is that English English words pram is not existed in American English and Americans use baby buggy instead of the English English word (Trudgill and Hannah, 1994). As a result of these differences it seems that these English languages seems not to be defined as an exactly same language. Therefore Standard English can be separated to various types of dialects depending on every English-speaking country. It seems true that the definition of Standard English is starting to appear gradually while looking at Trudgill's ideas. Therefore facts about Standard English should be redefined in both clear and careful way here. To start with it has already indicated that Standard English is neither a social dialect associated with the upper class status nor able to be defined as a same dialect internationally. It is certainly hard to define all features of Standard English however it is possible to announce some features of the definition in England. It is also true that the concept of Standard English has been based on historical context. Therefore it seems worth looking at how Standard English occurred in the first place again. According to Holborow (1999) the concept of Standard English initially appeared in the Victorian period when England had an enormous social change. The period faced capital expansion with increased levels of productivity or industrial revolution. While having huge economical and social wealth, ruling class aimed to invent a standard language separating it from the other dialects. The Standard English was socially accepted in the period and resulted in being fundamental to the education system. By the end of the twentieth century, it was completely separated it from people's spoken language. Therefore the concept of Standard English has been historically more likely to be associated with higher class or educational elites (Holborow, 1999). It might be true that the historical evolution of Standard English has contributed to the confusion of the definition. Therefore it might reach to Trudgill's idea that Standard English is associated with high prestige. However it is uncertain that initial Standard English has kept the exact same concept until these days. As most languages have modified some features depending on various situations in society throughout the history Standard English has also gradually changed with society (Crowley, 1989). Last but not least a definition of Standard English is as follows. Standard English has a slightly different definition between each English-speaking country. Therefore it is not possible to define as the same social dialect all over the English- speaking countries. As Trudgill points out, it is neither related to accent, style nor register of the language however it has certain rules in grammars. It is a social dialect which is historically associated with higher prestige in England. In conclusion it is hard to define a concept of Standard English, as a huge debate shows this. However it is possible to describe some features of the dialect and it helps to identify the definition. Standard English also needs a careful examination because it is changeable according to social change. 