This paper is based on what I have discussed in my presentation which is meronymy of the English language. I will first explain the basic concepts. I will then give a detailed description about prototypic features in the relations. Finally I will conclude it by bringing the main points together. To begin with meronymy is a semantic relation between units of meaning as hyponymy and synonymy (Cruse, 2004). Meron means part and holos refers to whole in ancient Greek. A system based on meronymies is called mereology (Lobner, 2002). Mereological form is shown as below (Lobner, 2002: pp96): If A is a meronym of B, then B is a holonym of A. As the term suggests meronymy shows a part-whole relation. For example the figure below shows meronymy of body parts. <figure/>body head neck leg arm ear face hand eye nose mouth finger palm lip tongue For example finger is a meronym of hand means a finger is a part of a hand while hand is a holonym of finger refers to hand has fingers. In addition there is a logical form in meronymy as follows (Cruse, 2004: pp150): X is a meronym of Y.  For an entity A, A is in X entails A is in Y.  For example canteen is a part of Oxford Brookes University. Therefore John is in the canteen entails John is in Oxford Brookes University. However there are exceptions of this structure. For instance wheel is a part of a car. The wasp is on the wheel does not entail the wasp is on the car. It should be the wasp is in the car (Cruse, 2004). Meronymic relations also apply to transitive structures as follows (Cruse, 2004: pp153): If A is wholly located within the part of B and B is wholly located within the part of C, Then A is necessarily wholly located within the part of C. This form is acceptable with the following concepts, Fingers are part of the hand. The hand is a part of the body. Then, Fingers are a part of the body. However all the relations do not always meet the transitive structure. This fact is easily understood when finger, hand and body relation is changed to finger, hand and arm relation. The latter relation is shown as follows (Cruse, 2004: pp153): Fingers are parts of the hand. The hand is a part of the arm. Fingers are a part of the arm The last sentence does not sound correct which will be explained more later on. So far it has been discussed basic forms and functions in meronymy. It is said that there is sometimes a disagreement whether units of meaning are regarded as meronymy. For instance it is not entirely certain whether a pan lid is or is not part of a pan. It is affected by contextual factors such as whether the pan means a saucepan or a flying pan. The decision is also different between people (Cruse, 2004). Cruse (2004) suggests that prototypic features enable people to find meronymic relations. In other words units of meaning which have the features between them are generally more accepted as meronymy. The prototypic features are necessity, integrality, discreteness, motivation and congruence. The first feature is necessity. It is to consider whether a part is essential for well-formed structures (Cruse, 2004). For example beard is part of face but it is only optional. On the other hand nose is an essential part of well-formed face. Therefore it is said that nose-face relations are more prototypical than beard-face relations. The second characteristic is integrality. It is to think about whether a part is integrated or attached to the whole. For instance the handle is a part of the door sounds normal when it changes to the handle is attached to the door. However the fingers are attached to the hand does not sound right compared to the previous sentence as the relation is more integrated than simply being attached to (Cruse, 2004). In this view it is said that hand-finger relations are more prototypical. The third aspect is Discreteness. It is about how a part moves independently from the whole. For example the tip of the tongue is not clearly separated from tongue while the division is rather clear in arm-body relations (The Everything Development Company, 2002). In this aspect the latter relation is more prototypical. The fourth feature is Motivation. It is about whether a part is functional to its whole. For instance the handle of a door enables people to grasp and open or shut the door as an identifiable function. The wheels of a car are for the car moving smoothly over the grounds (Cruse, 2004). In other words these parts are more prototypic as a meronymic relation. The last feature is Congruence. There are separated features, range and phase. The first feature is range which shows how limited meronym is related to the holonym. Supermeronym is a meronymic relation with more than one holonym (Cruse, 2004). For example leg has chair, table, and human body as holonym. It is said that supermeronym is less prototypical meronymy since the meronym has a broad sense of holonym. The other feature of congruence is phase. It is to think about whether parts and wholes exist at the same time (Cruse, 2004). For instance grape juice and wine are both made of grapes and it is possible to say wine is a part of grape juice. However flour-bread relations are not the same case since flour is not quite part of bread but rather one ingredient of bread. Therefore the latter relation is less prototypical. In conclusion meronymy is simply defined as a part-whole feature. However each unit of meaning is related differently. Therefore how meronymic relation is structured is only found by looking carefully at each relation with prototypical features. Word Count: 980 words 