<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The notion of teachers creating their own approach to teaching (Brown, 2000) has grown out of a century's SLA teaching tradition. Despite criticism of lack of clarity, it is now widely used by teachers. This paper highlights the justification for such an approach by first looking at its validation and rationale, and then focusing on how this can be implemented. The approach of 'principled eclecticism' is looked at from within a specific context, focusing on conditions necessary for learning that can be enhanced by the teacher in any situation. The final section concludes that variety and balance within a teacher's approach are necessary and offers a recommendation for activity types. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Teachers today are in a wonderful position. We have at our disposal a rich history of language and language learning theories that have informed a great variety of methods. One possible drawback to so much variety is that there is little consistency in teachers' approaches and a doubt in teachers' ability when left to choose their own approach to language teaching. However, in my view, this variety is a positive factor in ELT and can inform our teaching to the benefit of more learners. By drawing on current literature and my experience as a teacher and student, the pros, cons and implications of an eclectic approach are examined. <heading>Part 1</heading><heading>1.1 Difficulties of Unifying an Approach</heading>In the last 100 years language teaching has seen the acceptance, rejection and recycling of a number of theories and methods. Even though it seems that there is little consistency across methods such as from the grammar translation method to Suggestopedia, (Richards and Rodgers, 2001), all approaches have the same goal, that of teaching students to comprehend and/or produce the target language (TL). Furthermore, if we look at Larsen-Freeman, (2000), where she cites over 11 different methods in use today, we can see that there are essential similarities or a "significant...overlap". Though all methods share the notion that language learning will be improved by changes in teaching methodology (Richards and Rodgers, 2001), there is still a great range and a certain lack in consistency (even within any one method). Thus, inconsistency leads some to claim that students' learning is being hampered resulting, in some cases, in a call for a uniform approach to language teaching. There are, however, a few problems and questions associated with uniformity, such as, which of the many approaches is best. There is no conclusive evidence indicating overarching success of any one teaching methodology. " Research evidence cannot be conclusive"(Gabrielatos, 2006). We must therefore recognise that to adopt one method or theory exclusively would be to seriously limit our students and do a great disservice to them. Furthermore, we might find that 'standardisation' limits classroom activity possibilities and results in the static prescribed proceduralisation of former years. Mellow (2002), criticizing the reliance on one single theory of teaching as inherently incomplete argues that it leads to procedures becoming mechanised. A further problem is one of teachers having to adopt an approach or prescribed principles and procedures without necessarily believing in or understanding the underlying theories. Arguably any prescription does not take into account either the teacher or the students. This situation can be seen in various teaching contexts around the world, I will not comment on these here but limit the scope to address those contexts where there is a choice. However it is arguable that having at least some choice in a learning/teaching context is preferable. Even given little choice, no two teachers will teach in the same way. We can suppose that not only their personalities, but also their beliefs will affect how they teach. If we take as given that: 'all classroom practices reflect teachers' principles and beliefs' (Richards and Rodgers, 2001 p251), and we also recognise the validity of research by Clark and Peterson (1986, cited in ibid) that a teacher's concepts are situated within their general belief system which is socio-political, cultural, and personal, it is difficult to imagine that we can create any homogeneity or uniformity. Finally, even if we were to unify our approach, by its very nature an approach allows for varying interpretations (Richards, and Rodgers, 2001). For example, experienced teachers who share principles, reason the use of diverse classroom practices, equally, similar practices can stem from different principles (Breen et al., 2001). <heading>1.2 Principled Eclecticism: Validation and Criticism</heading>A much-recognised solution is to adopt 'principled eclecticism' or pluralism, an approach that is eclectic in nature (Brown, 2001) (Larsen-Freeman, 2000 p182), and advocated by many (Brown, Palmer, Prabhu, Nunan, and Girard). A precept underlying this approach is: "some truth can be found in virtually every theory." (Brown, 2000, citing Kuhn, 1970). We see through historical evidence that there is no 'one size fits all' approach or method, but rather that the best approach we can have is one of coherent pluralism; tailoring our teaching to fit the changing classroom and choosing any option available to us which achieves our aims and is in line with our principles. The teacher who has a consistent philosophy or rationale can be said to make principled decisions about what and how to teach. This approach addresses the present multiplicity of contexts and differences of learners themselves. It is an approach that draws on all the experience and training of a teacher; it builds on what we know and is not exclusive, benefiting from hindsight and history. Additionally it takes into account the learners, the context and teacher and regards the learners as paramount in directing the learning process. Furthermore it does not impose on the teacher or learner a syllabus or procedure which is contrary to needs or beliefs. Allowing the well-informed teacher to make judgements and adjust to each particular situation is arguably superior to following directives that come from outside of the class. Neither researcher nor theory can address individual contexts as efficiently as the experienced teacher who is inside the process. Nevertheless a teacher must have training and motivation to develop their knowledge, skills and beliefs (Gabrielatos, 2006), placing the novice teacher at a clear disadvantage and perhaps requiring the novice to adhere to a less fluid teaching style initially. I believe that to advocate eclecticism without also promoting the need for regular self-assessment and development is potentially harmful. Prabhu (1987), advocates professional debate to help a teacher identify, develop and articulate their beliefs. When a teacher seeks corroboration or clarification or engages in a questioning process, they are ensuring an ongoing commitment to critical development. Many suggest this should be a life long commitment to learning (Wallace, 1998). Criticism to this approach highlights the lack of clarity regarding definition, principles and procedures, a point that can be levelled at many approaches. "There is often no clear application of (...) assumptions and principles" (Richards and Rodgers, 2001, p245). It is a valid criticism and one which has no definitive answer. The problem lies within the very nature of eclecticism; there are a few salient concepts however: (the following being an amalgamation of proponents' views.) The teacher's choice and action is principled, and follows a reasoning which can be articulated. Principles should stem from a): "[an integration of] linguistic and psycholinguistic research and b): previous pedagogical principles and research." (Mellow, 2002) It follows from these two points therefore that teachers should have a good understanding of historical methods and present-day theories. Experience and intuition lead to a balance or a means between extremes, with the understanding that some value can be found in all methods and irreconcilable differences are limited. (Prabhu 1987, p108) Teachers should maintain 'professional activism' (ibid) by self-development, training and debate, thus leaving the teacher open to adapt to new research and insights. A rapport and atmosphere which is conducive to effective learning is necessary (Nunan, 1996 p2) Further criticism emphasizes the idea that there appears to be: "no right or wrong way of teaching," and no detail of procedures, which is therefore left to an individual teacher to interpret (Richards and Rodgers, 2001). Admittedly it is difficult if not impossible for an inexperienced teacher to implement and as stated earlier, because of these difficulties it is not suitable for a novice teacher. Finally, critics stress the possibility of adopting principles that might be contradictory and irreconcilable (Larsen-Freeman, 2000; Gabrielatos, 2006; Mellow, 2002). For example a teacher who claims that they believe in the importance of comprehensible input (Krashen) in the form of 'teacher talk', yet is also an advocate of The Silent Method would seem to be contradicting themselves. But it seems unlikely that an experienced teacher would not recognise that inconsistency or be able to provide a rationale for it. <heading>Part 2</heading><heading>2.1 Implementation</heading>I believe there are two basic requirements for a teacher to implement their own approach: Context should direct the teaching; a needs analysis is therefore necessary. Principles and rationale in relation to the context need to be made explicit. I will look at these from the perspective of my personal teaching context although much will be generalisable to other contexts. The scope of this paper does not allow for detailed descriptions of specific classroom contexts and therefore issues relevant to my teaching contexts are included in 'Personal Approach'. If we are to treat the learners and learning situation as paramount (as above), the syllabus will be directed by our students' needs and aspects of our methodology will be directed by regarding the learners as individuals. (Harmer, 1991; Nunan, 1989; Nunan 1996). We can determine our students' linguistic needs and their learning style preferences, biases, aptitudes, and beliefs about themselves as learners. (Williams and Burden, 1997; Ellis, 1994). See appendix 1 for a range of needs analysis. Not only do analyses enable the teacher to plan a syllabus or specific activities to address relevant issues, but the students can also become aware of their learning styles and their own ultimate responsibility for their success in learning. Additionally, students are aware of their needs being taken into account and therefore feel that they have a choice in what and how they learn, which ultimately leads to better motivation. Needs analyses should also look at local context such as culture, politics and the institution. As teachers for example, we have all probably found some mismatch occurring with a communicative teaching approach and teaching in a culture where attitudes about communication are widely divergent from our own. We need to recognise and adapt, otherwise our insistence on a particular approach could be ineffective, or harmful and possibly viewed as "cultural imperialism" (Richards and Rodgers, 2001) <heading>2.2 Personal Approach</heading>Describing one's approach to teaching is a potentially exhaustive task. An approach must take into account contextual issues, language learning and learning theories and one's principles and rationale. These combined should direct the teaching process to facilitate and enhance students' learning. All approaches or theories agree that motivation matters; a basic premise I work from is that motivation is the key. I believe I am responsible for facilitating motivation; I have a responsibility to be aware of any factors within a class that could positively or negatively affect students such as relationships they have between themselves and the teacher. To aid this, I might ask them to confidentially write a list of their preferred partners. This means that prior to the lesson I can plan various combinations to accommodate all participants; student pairing or grouping is crucial for a successful class. From my own reflections as a student this came as a significant realisation: if my partner is someone I find difficult to work with, my capacity to learn and enjoy is radically compromised. Therefore, to further minimize the adverse impact a single student may have on another student, I now group students in threes rather that twos. If I involve students in making decisions, I can help students motivate themselves (Errey and Schollaert, 2003). For example at any stage in a lesson I can ask students: to make a choice between 2 activities; how long they want to spend on an activity; or which role in a role play they would prefer. Also, it is possible to involve students in negotiating topics or outcomes, a major feature in the TABASCO project (ibid) and in Community Language Learning (CLL). Following CLL, or humanistic techniques (Richards, and Rodgers, 2001), I believe it is extremely difficult to learn when you feel resistance or anxiety in the environment (Larsen-Freeman, 2000). As Brown (2000, p61) observes: "all second language learners need to be treated with affective loving care." This is the foundation from which I work; it is impossible to separate the desire to motivate from any aspect of my teaching. Class atmosphere must be such that each student feels able to get what they want from the learning process. After the initial hard work of establishing the atmosphere, it takes much less effort and time to maintain it. This leaves the way open for students to feel increasingly confident to tackle challenging language and take risks. Because of the variety of cultures and learning preferences of my students, I believe a balanced approach is necessary (Harmer 1991). In my experience, although most Asian students have good grammatical competence for their level (in tests, writing and exercises) they complain of the inability to speak, whereas European students often have the reverse complaint. I accept that for all of them the purpose of language learning is communication (Larsen-Freeman, 2000). This theory from CLT (Communicative Language Teaching) informs most of my classes. However, while the goal is the same, their different abilities in communicative competence require a variety and balance of focus within any day's lessons. Some predominant views of language and the learning process are that learning is facilitated by interaction and directing attention to real life issues rather than to language itself, and that "language forms do not occur by themselves they occur most naturally within a context" (Larsen-Freeman, 2000 p42). These theories direct my approach in two ways: a), that of looking at language within a context and b), providing students opportunities to use real language in real contexts. A developed context using pictures and classroom areas helps students understand meaning and also helps in activating episodic memory and recollection of the target language (TL) especially for visual/spatial learners. Activities which promote meaningful interaction might include 'interviewing' each other or native speakers, problem solving, such as moral or social dilemmas, ranking and information gap activities. Ideally these could initially come from the students' interests, maximising the real life potential. Not only will meaningful communication help students practice the language they need, I believe it is effective in engaging learners. If they really need to ask a question or interact, students can become immersed in the immediacy of the activity and be less hampered by affective factors. A basic premise of CLT is that by learning to do something useful and meaningful it will promote motivation. If learners can see the relevance of their language use and how it fulfils their needs, they will be motivated. Using some authentic material can also be motivating (although care must be taken that tasks are level-appropriate and achievable); as a 'foreign' object in the class it is interesting in itself. It comes from the real world, belongs to the community which they aspire to be a part of, and constitutes a good example of language as it used in a real context. It might also help students to transfer what is learned in the class to outside, (as in the case of a tourist brochure) and could also help students develop strategies to understand in the real world. In the case of my learners this authentic material could be CDs chosen by students. Activities designed by focusing on the cover/lyrics/music could develop receptive skills. However, given teachers' limited time, coursebooks such as 'Cutting Edge', 'True to Life' and 'Inside Out', which often have authentic adapted texts, can also provide excellent practice in skills and language focus. A discussed issue in ELT these days is that of teaching communicative competence (CC) (as coined by Hymes in 1972), and to what extent each area of CC should be taught. Although I see a need to place equal emphasis on all macro areas of CC (see appendix 2), it has been my experience that students from different countries need very different specific foci. For example many Japanese students need to develop strategic competence such as taking linguistic risks and keeping a conversation going, whereas Arabic speakers usually lack linguistic competence in terms of spelling, script and syntactic accuracy. For my Japanese students, in order to focus on these strategies, we might watch a video clip of native speakers and highlight strategies such as rephrasing, using fillers and fixed phrase to bide for time. These could then be practiced and included in activites such as role-plays, dialogues or paraphrasing games. Yet, for my Arabic students there is still a need to focus on lexico-grammar or form. Even though language can be regarded as a system for conveying meaning, it also consists of rules which can help a learner understand use. Although perhaps unfashionable, grammar exercises or controlled practice are also important; repetition is helpful when trying to learn any new skill, or to correct fossilized errors. I might incorporate drilling a form or phrase helping with automaticity. Errors at this and other stages need correcting. I believe self-correction or peer correction facilitates learning whilst there is good evidence to show that teacher recasts are ineffective (Spada, 1993). Despite arguments to the contrary I consider that grammar instruction facilitates learning. It can help with noticing, reasoning, analysing contrastively and can address students' questions arising from hypothesising (Hedge). Following the notion of a varied and balanced approach, structures and lexical items can be presented inductively or deductively, within a context. As in Task Based Learning (TBL) focus on form can occur through students becoming 'text investigators' (Willis 1996), at the end of a task, or through consciousness raising activities (CR). Or it can be teacher-led and part of a pre-determined syllabus in exam classes. Because students have different speeds of uptake, my objective is that all students will understand the TL but for some, due to their developmental stage, it may not be acquired. For others it will be consolidation. (Lightbown and Spada, 1993; Hedge, 2000; Larsen-Freeman, 2000). <heading>Conclusion and Recommendations</heading>Richards and Rodgers (2001) suggest that previous approaches: 'draw on a large amount of collective experience and practice from which much can be learned'. Rather than disregard years of language teaching, teachers can benefit by using what is useful in their specific situation. I suggest that teachers being able to tailor their classes to fit the learners, compensates for any inconsistency in approches. Using an eclectic approach means any lesson or activity within a lesson can be tuned to match the learners' individual needs to be challenged or supported. To ensure the continued development in this approach, in addition to reflective dialogue, discussion groups could be a regular part of staff meetings. In such a setting, novice teachers stand to benefit from the expertise of experienced teachers. Finding the balance between challenge and support, between focus on form and fluency, and between field dependent or independent learners is no easy task. It requires listening to the students, sensitivity, experience, and knowledge of human behaviour and theories of language learning. But teachers want to work and plan efficiently and must be able to rely on published material as well. A book I believe to be extremely effective in dealing with many aspects of language learning simultaneously is 'Grammar Dictation' (Wajnryb, 1990). The activity proposed, 'Dictogloss', provides opportunities for listening, speaking and writing, within which there is negotiation of meaning and focus on form. It includes roughly tuned input with opportunities for new lexis and can be learner-centred with students choosing the topic. This type of activity, focusing on contextualised form that 'necessitates reflection and decision-making' (Hedge, 2000) fulfils many goals and requirements simultaneooulsy. The implications are that within a balanced approach, the more balanced or inclusive any activity or process, the better. We need to be realistic, using and adapting coursebooks and giving students as much variety as possible. The more all-encompassing a teacher's use of materials and ideas, the more likely they are to achieve successful outcomes. 