<heading>Introduction</heading>This essay aims to describe the main methods of local government revenue collection in the UK, their pros and cons and some similarities and differences. It then goes on to discuss their implications for local democracy. <heading>Different Methods of Local Government Revenue Collection</heading><heading>Taxation</heading>Various types of local taxes have been imposed over time. They include rates, the community charge and council tax. Rates were imposed until 1990, and were the main source of local authority revenue dating back to 1601. They were imposed on occupiers of non-agricultural land, domestic dwellings and industrial and commercial properties. Rateable value was usually taken to be the net annual value, being the amount for which the property could be let. Some advantages of rates were that the tax base was certain and the yield was predictable. Taxpayers were used to this tax - the old saying "an old tax is no tax" (Harvey and Jowsey, 2004) holds true. The taxing authority was also the spending authority in the area and was accountable to the local electorate. Taxpayers knew in advance what the tax liability in the forthcoming year would be. Rates were easy to collect, cheap to administer and difficult to avoid. One of the disadvantages of rates was that they were a regressive tax. Unlike user charging, they were not directly related to the use made of local services. Rates were based on old rental values which few people understood. They lacked buoyancy and did not rise with inflation (Trotman-Dickinson, 1996.) In spite of modifications, rates remained unpopular with the general public and the Conservative party introduced the Community Charge/Poll Tax, in 1990. This was very unpopular and lasted for only 3years. It took the form of a flat rate of tax payable by all adults with few exceptions. It was levied on the principle of the benefit theory of taxation (Trotman-Dickinson, 1996.) This was a 'visible tax, since everybody had to contribute something.' (Trotman-Dickinson, 1996, p319) The Conservatives believed that it would give the public an incentive to put pressure on local authorities to keep their expenditure down. They felt the charge would have no disincentive effects as it was not related to income. Disadvantages of the tax were that, similarly to rates, the charge bore little relationship to the use of services made by taxpayers and it lacked buoyancy. Many people considered it unfair because it was regressive. It was much more expensive to collect that the old rates and proved a bureaucratic nightmare. It was seen as a tax on voting, those seeking to evade the new tax avoided registering to vote. Council tax replaced the community charge in April 1993. It is similar to rates, as it is a tax on property. The council tax is paid by residents to the local authority, based on the market value of their dwellings. It is a price the property was worth in April 1991, and the amount of tax payable depends on the valuation band. There are certain exceptions e.g. for students. The actual tax levied depends not only on property band but on the money needed by each local authority for its expenditure. The proportion of total revenue councils derived from the Council tax can vary considerably between different local authorities, the average Council in recent years has raised about a quarter of its spending needs from the tax. (Coxall et al, 2003) An advantage of the council tax is that it promotes local accountability. Also, there is certainty of yield as they are based on fixed property. Local property taxes are generally accepted, as they have been levied for nearly 400 years. Since property taxes are lump-sum tax on housing it penalises under occupation and thereby provides an incentive to let rooms or move to a smaller property (Harvey and Jowsey, 2006) As Council tax is a selective outlay tax, a disadvantage is that it distorts market prices and will have an allocative affect. (Harvey and Jowsey, 2004) There is no direct link between this tax and the use of local services. Council tax may accentuate relative differences in local authority's resources. An authority with a low rateable value may have more to spend on housing and infrastructure and may therefore be forced to levy a high Council tax rate. <heading>User charges</heading>In some cases local authorities may charge users according to their use of services. For example those who benefit by using public transport would be charged according to their use of it. There are different pricing policies which can be used: cost price, subsidised price, economic price or deterrent price. Advantages of user charging are that it promotes economy and use and achieves equity in that the beneficiary pays. The recent shift towards them aims to avoid increasing taxation to pay for services (Harvey and Jowsey, 2004.) Another advantage of charges is that they can throw up a valuable guideline for investment, as they can reveal demand at the current price and from this some estimates of future demand can be made. However, 'most local government activity is concerned with providing collective, community and merit goods, whose cost has to be covered mainly from taxation' (Harvey and Jowsey, 2004, p427) If services are charged at less than their full economic cost, this can lead to a heavy burden on taxation. If it has been decided to cover the cost of a service by charges, difficulties may arise where there are relatively high fixed costs. <heading>Borrowing </heading>Local authorities borrow both short-term and long-term, the former mainly to cover shortfalls between revenue and current expenditure, the latter to meet the cost of capital projects, such as schools and housing construction. However because central government retains overall control of public sector spending, the amount which local authorities can borrow is subject to government approval. <heading>Government Grants</heading>Some of the proceeds from national taxation are transferred to local authorities by the means of grants. This is because local authorities gain inadequate revenue from local taxes and charges. Grants help to equalise resources between local authorities, allowing them to provide services that are required at a comparable standard. It allows central government to influence the pattern of local government expenditure. A disadvantage of grants is that, similarly to borrowing, they reduce local authorities' independence. Some critics also say they encourage excessive spending by local authorities. This is because increases in expenditure add little to the local tax burden since the cost of providing benefits falls largely on central government. 'Local taxpayers, therefore stand to gain more than they lose, and the local electorate does not have incentive to check increases in spending' ( Trotman-Dickinson, 1996) <heading>Business rates</heading>Since 1990, the government has taken away the power of the local authority to levy business rates. Prior to this, business rates were fixed by the local authority, and could vary greatly between different authorities. There is now a Uniform Business Rate. A rate is set for England and Wales by the ODPM. Revaluations of the ratings list take place every five years. Introduction of a uniform national business rate "has the advantage that it does not distort the location of industrial, commercial and financial undertakings" (Trotman- Dickinson, 1996.) Compared with old rate there has been a reduction in rate bill payments in some areas such as the North of England. Disadvantages include that there could be less accountability under the UBR. Although businesses still rely on local authorities for services, they are now paying a national rather than local tax. There have been large rises in rates for businesses in some areas. This may be passed to the consumer in the short term, however in the long-term it is likely the firm will have to bear most of the increase, as it has to sell in competition with other firms. <heading>Which System Best Protects Local Democracy? </heading><quote>"Local authorities, are the only political bodies, besides Parliament that are elected by the people and play an important part in preserving democracy."(Trotman-Dickinson, 1996)</quote>Some argue that if only a small proportion of local spending is funded locally, this takes it difficult for a voter in a local election to evaluate the value for money which the council is providing and so make a rational choice at the ballot box. (Bow Commission, 2002) If voters feel that their vote will not make a difference, they may not vote and this would damage local democracy. Real accountability at the local level will be ensured by making a clear link between local taxes paid and services received. The current system in the UK is highly centralised, so giving local authorities more powers to raise their own finances would give them greater freedom from central government control and allow them to develop local approaches to issues. Voters would have a better idea of the cost of the services which they were receiving, allowing them to make rational decisions at the ballot box. Therefore, raising more revenue by local property taxes, user charging, a local sales tax or local income-tax would have advantages. Local property taxes promote local autonomy and accountability. They provide a clear base and give local authorities their own source of revenue, providing them with a degree of financial independence from central government. (Harvey and Jowsey, 2006) Also, as they are raised locally and the rate is determined annually it makes local authorities responsible to local people. However, such accountability is limited in that only residential properties are directly linked to the electoral process. User charging may give voters an idea of the cost of the services they receive. However, they can only be used for some services, (those people can choose whether or not they wish to use,) and only those which benefit consumers personally and directly. Local sales tax would encourage visitors to pay for services. However, it would bolster tax income in urban areas at the expense of rural areas and could be undermined by people shopping in areas where tax rates were low. Local income-tax, as recommended by the Layfield committee report, would help to make local authorities self financing. The local income-tax would impact directly on residents in each local authority area and so link local payment of tax to receipt of services. If the tax is progressive, this would also ensure that the populations of less affluent local authority areas would not have to spend a higher proportion of their aggregate income on local tax than the populations of more affluent areas. However, administrative and collection costs may be high, and this approach may clash with a government's aim of reducing the basic rate of tax. An argument against local government having more financial control is that central government can redistribute wealth to ensure it is distributed fairly. In the US Federal system, funding is very local, and arguably this results in poverty in some of the poorest states. In some areas, too much local control may emphasise local divisions e.g. the conflicts between the French and Dutch speaking areas in Belgium. <heading>Conclusion </heading>There are many different methods of local government revenue collection. Currently the main methods are through taxation, borrowing, UBR and grants. A good financial system will be one where taxation is 'fair, practicable and cheap to collect, ensures the authority's accountability to local voters and harmonises local autonomy with the central government's macro economic policy requirements.'(Harvey and Jowsey, 2006, p428.) Each method of taxation has advantages and disadvantages. However arguably the system which best protects local democracy is one where there is real accountability at a local level, where local authorities raise as much of their finance themselves as is possible. In my opinion local property taxes, local income-tax and user charging would be the methods which best support these aims. 