<heading>Introduction</heading>This essay aims to discuss the current system of local governance in the UK, identifying recent changes. <heading>Levels and Sectors in English Local Governance</heading>The system of local governance in England varies between different areas of the country, and it has changed and evolved over time. Currently there is a mixture of "two tier" and "unitary" systems. In the two tier system, local government functions are divided between an upper level e.g. counties, and a lower (more local) level e.g. city councils. In the unitary system all local functions are controlled by one layer of local government. Local government is controlled and influenced by central government, as "effective power is concentrated in central government by the constitutional doctrines of the unitary state, which enables national government to change local government boundaries, powers and functions, and finances at will." (Budge et al, 2004) Central government control over local authorities is insured by two legal principles: 'Ultra Vires, 'which means that they must do what the law requires of them, and 'Manadamus,' that they may do only what the law expressly allows them to and no more. Local government is also influenced by higher levels -- not just central government, but the EU and international legislation. The EU has a large and growing impact on local government both as a source of funding and through legislation such as the EU Habitats Directive. Within local government there is also horizontal division of powers. There is a mixture of elected officials, those who are appointed and also a multitude of public, private and voluntary agencies. Within local government there are elected councillors who are democratically accountable to residents of their Ward. (This is an unpaid position.) These may be of a different political party that the party in power, and county and district councils may be in the hands of different political parties. Councillors are supported by full-time paid officers who are politically impartial. Local councils are executive bodies as well as legislative ones. They can delegate some functions to committees e.g. like a licensing and regulatory committee. Currently, local governance does not just involve the institutions of local government, there is also a "whole process of delivering local services and governing community's through complex interrelationships of public private and voluntary bodies." (Coxall et al, 2003) For example, much remaining social/public housing is provided by Housing Associations. These are voluntary organisations e.g. The Family Housing Association in Kensington. The provision of local health services is now mainly the responsibility of hospital trusts and primary health trusts. There are often partnerships between the authority and public agencies/quangos, businesses and voluntary organisations e.g. Public Private Partnerships such as In the Case of the Redevelopment of Elephant and Castle, London. There is currently a redevelopment project underway which is a partnership between the local authority and commercial developers, and will provide a mixture of social housing and commercial premises. This multitude of sectors and tiers and the relationship between them is seen by some as needlessly complicated and confusing. As the discussed by Budge et al (2004) a quote made by an MP in 1871 may still stand true today "the truth, sir, is that we have the chaos as regards authorities, chaos as regards rates, and a worse chaos than all as regards areas." <heading>Example - Cowley Road, Oxford</heading>The following example demonstrates the range of agencies and bodies that were involved in a recent road project in Oxford. The projects aim was to improve road safety and reduce congestion on the Cowley Road. This project was funded by the Department of Transport who provided Oxfordshire County Council with a one million pound budget. This scheme is run by Oxfordshire County Council. The county council were asked by the Department of Transport to involve the local community in consultation, and a local community group called East Oxford action ran this consultation. In October 2003 East Oxford Actions 'community involvement team' contacted a wide variety of people including local residents and businesses to get their views. They also held open days in shops and contacted people using questionnaires and surveys. The schemes designers and engineers were Halcrow (a private company.) In February 2004 an exhibition was held with draft plans of the scheme. The plans and the budget were approved by the county council executive on June 1 st 2004. Further approval then had to be gained following statutory consultation on the traffic regulation orders. The county council executive then gave permission for the scheme to go ahead. The budget approved was £1.3 million - this is made up of £1 million grant from the Department of Transport and £300,000 from the County Council's Transport Capital Programme budget. This amount covers payments to the consultants and contractors to carry out consultation work, design and build the scheme. It does not cover the cost of the Council Officers time which is paid for separately from the County Council's Transport Revenue budget. <heading>Recent Changes in Internal Management </heading>There have been repeated reorganisations of local government and the pace of this change has been great since the 1960s. . Under Thatcher many of the powers and functions of local government were reduced and much of their service provision was privatised New Labour has left some Thatcher/Major reforms in place, and local government remains under the close control and supervision of central government. Some changes have been introduced, and Tony Blair is quoted as saying in 1998 that "at its best local government is brilliant and cannot be bettered. But to play its full part in modernising Britain local government itself needs to modernise." (Cullingworth, 2002) The local government acts of 1999 and 2000 have resulted in the following changes: Local authorities have been given four options for new political structures. The new system creates a local executive (leader/Mayor and Cabinet) and a legislative Council and committees with monitoring and scrutinising powers. Local authorities now have the choice of contracting out services under the compulsory competitive tendering system (which was introduced by the Conservatives in 1988) or of delivering services themselves. They must produce a performance plan which shows that they have chosen the 'best value' option and this plan must be approved by the 'best value Inspectorate' which is part of the audit commission. There has been a shift from service provision to facilitating and from local government to local governance. Local authorities are now supposed to enter into partnerships with public agencies, quangos, businesses and voluntary organisations to produce public services. They are encouraged to use instruments such as public private partnerships and private finance initiatives rather than to directly deliver services themselves. Local authorities have been given the power to promote the economic, social and environmental well-being of their communities and authorities who are judged to perform well in these can be awarded 'Beacon' status. London government has been reformed with the introduction of a directly elected mayor and a 25 member assembly. Devolution has occurred in some areas e.g. the creation of a Scottish assembly The Nolan report, which was an investigation carried out into the standards of conduct in local government, has also had an impact on the way that local authorities are run. It outlined a set of principles that those in public office should stick to. By May 2000, every authority was required to adopt a"code of conduct" that sets out the rules governing the behaviour of its members. This includes things such as - members have a positive obligation not to use undue influence, and to treat others with respect. Equally members have an obligation not to disclose confidential information without valid consent. Under the Local Government Acts of 2000 the Standards Board for England was set up. The role of the Standards Board for England is to promote and maintain high standards of conduct in local government and to investigate allegations of misconduct. Under the Local Government Act 2000 each principal authority must set up a committee called a Standards Committee. They have functions such as giving the Council advice on adopting a local code of conduct and monitoring the effectiveness of the code. <heading>Role of the planning policy sector</heading>The local planning system is guided by central government legislation. Central government guidance on planning matters is issued by way of circulars, orders and policy guidance notes. Regional planning bodies also prepare regional planning guidance (which is first approved by the Secretary of State.) Local authorities must take these into consideration when writing their local plan or when determining planning applications. Unitary authorities are responsible for preparing the structure plan and local plan for the area. Within the two tier system county councils are responsible for preparing the structure plan, minerals plan and waste plan whereas district councils are responsible for preparing the local plan. Within the Council, planning officers process planning applications and make recommendations as to whether applications should be approved or refused. The Planning Committee is responsible for making the final decision on planning applications, where these are not decided by officers under delegated powers. The Planning Committee is made up of elected councillors, which as stated in the Nolan report means that "as politicians, local councillors must listen and be responsive to the views of their constituents. As members of the planning committee, they must make a decision using only planning criteria. This may be a delicate balance to achieve." (Nolan Report, 1997) The Secretary of State has extensive formal planning powers. These effectively give the department the final say in all policy matters. The Secretary of State can call in a local plan and require the local authorities to make modifications to the plan. Decisions made by the local planning authority on applications for planning permission can be called in by the Secretary of State and also modified on appeal. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The system and structure of local government in England has changed and evolved over time, under the influence of successive governments. There are both advantages and disadvantages to all structures and disagreement on how best they should operate. Currently there is a highly centralised system, where central government has tight control over local authorities and their planning functions. There is cooperation and in some cases partnership between different agencies and sectors, including the planning sector. Some feel this 'network' is the best way to manage and deliver services to people. Others feel that this has resulted in a fragmentation of government, and subsequently problems of duplication and inefficiency. 