<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The present study sought to determine the chemical values of various fish and meat products, as well as evaluating some methods of analysis. It was concluded that the methods are generally reliable in determining protein, lipid, water and mineral values in fish and meat. However, it is evident that great care must be taken in the execution of such food analyses. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Food products are analysed for a variety of reasons, e.g., compliance with legal and labelling requirements, assessment of product quality, determination of nutritional value, detection of adulteration, and research and development. The analyses of the present study sought to establish the contents of proteins, lipids, water, minerals and carbohydrates in a variety of fish and meat products. The following terms are central in these food analyses: <heading>Protein</heading>For more than 100 years, protein determinations have been performed on meat products by procedures that measure the nitrogen content of the sample. Nitrogen percentage is converted into the equivalent protein content by an suitable numerical factor. For the purpose of the present study a general factor of 6.25 was used. <heading>The Kjeldahl Procedure</heading>The most common analytical procedure for determining nitrogen content of foodstuffs is the Kjeldahl procedure, developed in 1883 by the brewer Johann Kjeldahl. The nitrogen in the food sample is converted to ammonium sulphate during the digestion of the sample, and the digest is then made alkaline by the addition of sodium hydroxide. The amount of nitrogen present is determined by titration of the remaining ammonia, where the concentration of acid (in moles) required to reach the end-point (a greyish colour tone) is equivalent to the concentration of nitrogen that was in the original food. The amount of protein present is then calculated from the nitrogen concentration of the food, using a conversion factor. A conversion factor of 6.25 (equivalent to 0.16 g nitrogen per gram of protein) is used for many applications. However, this is only an average value, and each protein has a different conversion factor depending on its amino-acid composition. The Kjeldahl method is widely used internationally and is still the standard method for comparison against all other methods. Its universality, high precision and good reproducibility have made it the main method for the estimation of protein in foods. However, since not all nitrogen in food is in the form of nitrogen, the Kjeldahl procedure does not give a measure of the true protein content. Different proteins need different correction factors because they have different amino acid sequences. The technique is also time consuming, and may be hazardous to carry out. <heading>Lipids</heading>There are several reasons for determining the lipid content of food. One being economic, so as not to give away fat which is an expensive ingredient. There are also legal reasons of identity and labelling of food, as well as the more obvious reasons like health concerns, quality, and processing. Fats, or lipids as they are called in the nutrition jargon, are defined as those substances that are soluble in organic solvents, such as ether, hexae and chloroform, whilst being insoluble in water. This group of substances includes triacylglycercols, diacylglycercols, monoacylglycercols, free fatty acids, phospholipids, sterols, caretonoids and vitamins A and D. <heading>The Soxhlet Extraction</heading>The method described by Soxhlet in 1879 is the most commonly used example of a semi-continuous method for extracting lipids from foods. According to the Soxhlet procedure, oil and fat from solid materials are extracted by repeated washing with a warm organic solvent. At the end of the extraction process, which typically lasts a few hours, the flask containing the solvent and lipid is removed, the solvent is evaporated and the mass of lipid remaining is measured, and the percentage of lipid in the initial sample can be calculated. The method is fairly simple to use and is the officially recognised method for a wide range of fat content determinations. The main disadvantages of the method are that a relatively dry sample is needed, to allow the solvent to penetrate, and it is time consuming to carry out. Also, significantly, the fat content found will depend on the solvent used, as not all organic solvents will dissolve the same materials. Furthermore, the method does not disrupt the structure of the food, meaning that fatty material may be trapped inside the sample, and thus the entire lipid content may not be detected. <heading>Moisture</heading>The percentage moisture in meat and meat products is usually determined gravimetrically by heating a food sample to constant weight, and calculating the difference between the weight of the sample before and after drying. The advantages of this procedure are that it is a relatively cheap procedure, is easy to carry out, many samples can be analysed simultaneously, and that it is an officially recognised procedure. There are also some disadvantages, however: the method is destructive, time consuming, and is unsuitable for some types of food. <heading>Minerals</heading>The ash content is a measure of the total amount of minerals present within a food. It is the inorganic residue remaining after the water and organic matter have been removed, by heating at a high temperature, which provides measures from which one can calculate the total amount of minerals within a food. Analytical techniques for providing information about the total mineral content are based on the fact that the minerals can be distinguished from all the other components within a food in some measurable way. The most widely used methods are based on the fact that minerals are not destroyed by heating, and that they have a low volatility compared to other food components. Ash contents of fresh foods rarely exceed 5%, although some processed foods can have ash contents as high as 12% ( e.g. dried beef). The advantages of this measurement of minerals are that it is a safe method, few reagents are required, many samples can be analysed simultaneously, it is a rather easy procedure to carry out, and that the ash can be analysed for specific mineral content. There are also some disadvantages, in that the procedure takes a long time to carry out, and that there may be a loss of volatile minerals at high temperatures. <heading>Carbohydrates</heading>Carbohydrates are one of the most important components in many foods. Some carbohydrates are digestible by humans and therefore provide an important source of energy, whereas others are indigestible and therefore do not provide energy. Indigestible carbohydrates form part of the dietary fibres. Consumption of significant quantities of dietary fibre has been shown to be beneficial to human nutrition, helping reduce the risk of certain types of cancer, coronary heart disease, diabetes and constipation. As well as being an important source of energy and dietary fibre, carbohydrates also contribute to the sweetness, appearance and textural characteristics of many foods. <heading>Meat</heading>Water is quantitatively the most important component of meat, comprising up to 75% of its weight. The water is inversely related to fat content, but is unaffected by protein content except in young animals. Water in meat is associated with muscle tissue, and proteins have a central role in the mechanism of water binding. Meat is considered a high protein food. Of the total nitrogen content of muscle ca. 95% is protein and ca. 5% smaller peptides, amino acids and other compounds (Vernam & Sutherland, 1995). The quality of the protein is very high, the types and ratios of amino acids being similar to those required for growth and maintenance of human tissue (Ellis, 1994). <heading>Fish</heading>The chemical composition of fish comes close to that of land animals. The principal constituents are water (66-84%), protein (15-24%), lipids (0.1-22%), and mineral substances (0.8-2%) (Jacquot, 1961). Within these principal constituents there are large variations between sea foods, mainly in the lipid content. A general distinction is made between species with lean flesh (e.g. Cod, Haddock, Plaice) and those with fat tissues (e.g. Herring, Mackerel, Salmon). There are also semi fatty species (e.g. Barracuda, Mullet, Shark). The lipid content in some species of fish can, however vary depending on when it was caught. The lipid content in a fish classified as fat may be lean in some circumstances, but the reverse is extremely rare. Protein levels in the same species of fish have also been reported to vary according to the gender of the fish, where female fish tend to have higher protein content than males. Other factors that may cause variation in the composition of the flesh of seafood are seasonal changes, stage of sexual development and feeding conditions (Jacquot, 1961). The amount of carbohydrate in white fish muscle is generally too small to be of any significance in the diet. In white fish the amount is usually less than 1%, but in the dark muscle of some fatty species it may occasionally be up to 2% (United Nations Foundation, 2006). Table 1. shows commonly reported values for the various foodstuffs analysed in this study. A comparison of these previously reported values with the values established in the present study will be addressed in the discussion. <table/><heading>Materials and Methods</heading>The methods used in this analysis are the Kjeldahl procedure, for determining protein content; the Soxhlet procedure, for determining lipid content; and the mineral and water content are determined gravimetrically. For a presentation of the materials used, and details of the procedures, please see the U16503 Food Science module handbook pp. 7-11. To detect variances in lipids extracted by different solvents; chloroform & methanol, and petroleum spirit were used for the lipid determination. The calculations used in these procedures are as follows: For protein determination:  FORMULA  The nitrogen level found by this calculation is then multiplied by 6.25 to get the protein % of the food sample. For lipid determination:  FORMULA  For moisture determination:  FORMULA  For mineral determination:  FORMULA  For carbohydrate determination:  FORMULA  To give an example, the values for white fish (coley) before and after extraction were found to be as shown in Table 2. Table 3 provides the values for protein determination. <table/><table/><heading>Results</heading><table/>The results of this study are shown in Table 4. When compared with the commonly reported chemical values of published reports, there are some clear discrepancies. The analyses of the fish samples have primarily found values in the range of the expected values. Except for the mineral values, which are slightly lower in the present analysis: 0.93 % for white fish, and 2.4 % for smoked oily fish, compared with published values of 1-2 % and 3.6 % respectively. The meat product values are quite dissimilar to those of the published findings. The discrepancies are especially evident in the sausage values for lipids and carbohydrate; the lipid, water and carbohydrate values for minced beef; and the lipid, water, mineral and carbohydrate values of unsmoked bacon. There are no obvious systematic variances. <heading>Discussion</heading>The values reported in the results section show that there are some discrepancies in the chemical values found in this study compared with those values previously reported. The discrepancies are especially evident in the meat products. There are several possible explanations for this. One might be that these are processed meat products. The chemical aspects vary according to the processing methods of meat, and different brands may differ in production methods. The area of the animal the meat is taken from also has different chemical values. Other factors affecting the nutritional values of processed meats may be additives, the age and physical state of the animal, feeding of the animal, and the country and place of origin. Methods of extraction in the laboratory may also vary. Food for analysis should resemble the sold product as closely as possible, and the product should not be left unpackaged for long periods of time before the analysis commences. These are areas where there might be variations in method, as well as in how the procedure is carried out (although following the correct guidelines, equal analyses should principally correspond with each other). As was discussed in the introduction, there are also variances within the methods of analyses. Aspects such as application of different solvents, and which methods are appropriate for specific food samples should be considered. Another problem with the present study concerns the lipid values of the white fish. The combined weight of the dish and sample after extraction (c&m: 39.7237g, p.s.: 55.1884g) is less than that of the empty dish (39.7724g and 55.2072g), resulting in negative lipid values of -0.5963g and -0.0261g respectively. It is evident that something has gone wrong in the analysis. However, it is not exactly clear what that is. One possible explanation is that the lipid content of white fish is so small, that the negative values are a result of measurement inaccuracies. Another possible explanation might be that the flasks used for the extraction may not have been completely dry, thus adding the weight of residual water to the weight of the empty flask. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The analyses carried out in this study demonstrate that there may be variances between and within methods of chemical value determination. The production of certain meats may also affect the nutritional values of the end product. An important discovery of this study is the importance of precise technique and measurement in analysing chemical values of food samples. 