Yes, functionalism offers a more plausible theory of intentional states than it does of sensations and other states of consciousness. I intend to argue my thesis by initially providing an account of the functionalist theory. I will then outline the criticisms that have been raised in response to functionalism concerning the theories' ability to account for sensations and phenomenal consciousness and evaluate whether they are successful in disproving functionalism. Finally I will illustrate how I arrived at my thesis - that functionalism offers a more plausible theory of intentional states than it does of sensations and other states of consciousness as the functionalist theory cannot provide a satisfactory account with reference to qualia and Nagel presents the most influential criticism of functionalisms ability to account for phenomenal consciousness. Functionalism maintains types of mental states are types of functional/causal states. What tokens of any distinct mental types have in common is the functional/causal role they play. For example, pain plays a distinct causal role in our internal economies and is specified by a number of generalisations; pain is caused by tissue damage/types of nerve stimulation, pain causes worry, moaning, crying etc. Occupying the causal role is part of the essence of pain. Therefore, to be in pain is to token an internal state occupying the relevant causal role. Each distinct type of mental state plays a particular causal role central to its identity. To token a state of any given mental type is to token an internal state playing the appropriate role in ones internal economy. The majority of functionalists are physicalists as they regard minded agents to be complex physical systems and maintain that the token states occupying these roles are internal physical states of such systems. An object possesses a functional property in virtue of filling a particular role; something occupies a particular role if it responds in certain ways to causal inputs and produces certain kinds of outputs e.g. a heart pumps blood around the body, consequently an object possesses the property of being a heart provided it occupies this causal role. <fnote>Heil, J (2005) "Philosophy of Mind: A Contemporary Introduction" 2nd ed. London: Routledge </fnote><fnote>Cain, M (2002) "Fodor: Language, Mind and Philosophy" Cambridge: Polity Press </fnote>Functionalism regards mental states to be multiply realisable, mental properties are realised by physical properties. The same mental property might be realised by one property in a human being and another in a different creature; for any type of mental state (M), the physical state occupying the M role in one system may vary considerably from that occupying the M role in another system e.g. the pain role may be occupied by C fibres firing in humans yet occupied by O fibres firing in octopi. This is a strength of the theory. Block (1980) argued what makes pain pain is not having a particular physical nature but occupying the right causal role. The causal roles of mental states interact with and cause behaviour in collaboration with other mental states. For example, pain can cause worry, the belief ones body is being harmed and desire for pain to stop. How a mental state manifests itself in behaviour depends upon other mental states one is experiencing. It's impossible for one to characterise a mental state without referring to other mental states. To tell us what pain is we must simultaneously characterise all other mental states that causally interact with pain. <fnote>Smith, D and Thomasson, A (2005) "Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind" Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote>Functionalism appears to account for mental causation and coheres with the sophisticated understanding of the nature and structure of science. However, responses have been raised in criticism of the theory. Block argued no version of functionalism can avoid both liberalism and chauvinism. I adopt this view as when constructing a functionalist theory of pain one can characterise the inputs (stimulation of systems outer surfaces) and outputs (system behaviour) in specific terms associated with human pain. One is able to describe crying in detailed terms and include a characterisation of a relevant output in ones theory of pain. This theory will be chauvinistic as it implies octopi cannot feel pain as their pain behaviour is different from humans (it does not include crying). Alternatively, characterising inputs and outputs in more general terms fitting human pain behaviour in addition to octopi pain behaviour makes it possible that we will imply certain other systems experience pain when they do not. It has been argued that functionalism does not provide an altogether plausible theory of intentional states as it is possible for a particular belief to occupy a different causal role in creatures belonging to different species. I find this to be a problem regarding functionalisms concept of intentional states as it is possible to conceive of a species of monkey that climbs the nearest tree and starts shrieking when it believes a snake is nearby to warn fellow monkeys, whereas another species of monkey does not respond in the same way when holding the same belief. I regard this to be a problem for functionalism as in this instance a particular belief occupies a different causal role in different creatures. <fnote>Chalmers, D (2002) "Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings" Oxford: Oxford University Press </fnote><fnote>Cain, M (2002) "Fodor: Language, Mind and Philosophy" Cambridge: Polity Press </fnote>Functionalism has been criticised as it fails to account for the qualitative properties of sensations ('what it feels like' element/subjective character). Fodor (1993) and Block maintain the qualia associated with pain are central to its identity - if ones internal state does not feel like pain, it is not pain despite its causal role. Functionalism cannot account for this aspect of pain as it does not seem to be a feature/product of its causal role. I find this to be a successful criticism of functionalism as it is possible to imagine a robot functionally equivalent to humans (in terms of inputs and outputs) however it does not feel pain as it has no inner qualitative character - qualia is absent. Functionalism therefore implies the robot is experiencing something it is not, committing liberalism. Consider the possibility of 'inverted qualia'; it is conceivable that when I look at a tomato my colour experience is like the colour you experience when you look at spinach and vice versa. Your experience of green is like my experience of red. These differences are not revealed in any observable behavioural differences - we both say "red" when asked what colour a tomato is and "green" when asked the colour of spinach. Therefore it is conceivable that your colour spectrum and my colour spectrum are systematically inverted without being revealed by behavioural differences. If inverted/absent qualia are possible in functionally equivalent systems, qualia cannot be captured by functional definitions. It has been replied that in the functionalist account, mental states are realised by the internal physical states of the psychological subject, therefore for humans the experience of red as a mental state is realised by a specific neural state, consequently two people cannot differ in respect of the qualia they experience if they are in the same neural state. If they are both in the same neural state, either both experience red or neither does. I do not find this response to be sufficient in overcoming the criticism as it does not successfully render qualia inversion to be impossible and does not address the problem presented by absent qualia. <fnote>Smith, D and Thomasson, A (2005) "Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind" Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote><fnote>Kim, J (2005) Philosophy of Mind" 2nd ed. Oxford: Westview Press </fnote>Kim (2005) presents another example of inverted qualia in response to functionalism. He presents an idealised model of how pain and itch mechanisms operate. Each of us possesses a 'pain box' and an 'itch box' within our brains. It is imaginable this pain box consists of numerous neural fibres that are activated when one experiences pain and similarly for the itch box. When ones pain sensors are stimulated, neural signals are sent along the pain input channel to the pain box which activates and sends signals along its output channels to one's motor signals causing appropriate pain behaviour, (the itch mechanism works in the same way). Suppose ones brain is rewired so the input and output channels of ones pain and itch centres are crisscrossed. Signals from ones pain receptors now activate ones itch box which instigates ones motor system to display pain behaviour (crying, moaning etc). Correspondingly signals from ones itch receptors activate ones pain box which sends signals to ones motor system causing itch behaviour (scratching). Even though ones brain is cross wired with reference to mine we both emit the same functional psychology - we both scratch when bitten by a mosquito and moan when we burn our hands, to the functionalist we instantiate the same itch/pain psychology. The functionalist would argue that when one with this cross wired brain cuts themselves they are in pain and ones former itch box has become ones pain box, therefore when activated one is in pain. However I do not find this to be a sufficient response as if ones brain has been cross wired what one experiences when cutting themselves is an itch not pain despite the input/output relation exhibiting behaviour appropriate for pain as it will feel like an itch. <fnote>Kim, J (2005) Philosophy of Mind" 2nd ed. Oxford: Westview Press </fnote><fnote>Kim, J (2005) Philosophy of Mind" 2nd ed. Oxford: Westview Press </fnote>Phenomenal consciousness maintains a mental state is conscious when there is something that it is like to have that state. Nagel (1974) presents what I regard to be the strongest criticism of functionalism as a successful theory of mind with his paper 'what is it like to be a bat?" Nagel argued forms of physicalim, including functionalism cannot account for consciousness. The argument upholds that there is something that it is like to be a bat - something it is like for the bat and to have a bat's sensations/experiences. Correspondingly there is something that it is like to be human and to have any human experience. This 'what it is like' aspect of experience is connected to holding a point of view which is further connected to possessing a particular kind of perceptual system. Bats hold a different point of view to humans and we therefore cannot appreciate what it is like to be a bat and bats cannot appreciate what it is like to be human. The 'what it is like' aspect is intrinsic to it and appreciating the aspect involves adopting the relevant point of view. If functionalism is to explain consciousness it must explain the intrinsic element of experience. However, functionalism cannot do this as uncovering a systems' physical properties e.g. a bats brain, doesn't necessitate one to adopt that particular point of view as we do not have its kind of perceptual system - we can uncover the physical properties of a bats brain without being able to appreciate what it is like to be a bat. I find this to be a significant criticism of functionalism as the properties concerning what it is like to be a particular creature or have a particular experience cannot be physical properties and understanding physical properties of a certain creature/experience is insufficient in explaining what it is like to be that creature. Nagel therefore successfully shows that phenomenal consciousness is a mystery with reference to functionalism as it is not physical and consequently cannot be explained in physical terms. Therefore functionalism fails to provide an account for phenomenal consciousness. <fnote>Chalmers, D (2002) "Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings" Oxford: Oxford University Press </fnote>This apparent mystery of consciousness presents a problem for all forms of physicalism including functionalism. Physicalists have attempted to overcome this problem of consciousness by proposing several responses; Fodor and Chomsky (1968) maintain physicalism cannot explain phenomenal consciousness in lower level scientific terms due to our cognitive limitations. McGinn (1991) argues consciousness is grounded in properties of the brain however there is no hope of understanding how the physical accounts for consciousness. He maintains that to identify a theory for consciousness one must either refer to introspection or to the scientific study of the brain. Introspection involves looking within our minds to discover a physical basis for consciousness however McGinn maintains this will not provide a theory of consciousness compatible with functionalism/physicalism as introspection does not reveal any physical properties which make consciousness intelligible. Similarly scientific study of the brain will not provide a theory of consciousness as science observes phenomena and explains these phenomena by constructing theories which usually postulate further unexplained phenomena; scientists refer to the theory proposing the best explanation. The properties of the brain scientists observe wont explain consciousness and neither will the unobserved properties postulated by scientists as these properties will be directed at explaining observable properties of the brain, therefore scientific study will not provide an explanation of consciousness as it seeks to explain a different type of phenomena. I do not find either of these arguments to successfully defend functionalism as Fodor, Chomsky and McGinn are simply providing excuses for the theory regarding sensations and other states of consciousness rather than providing a sufficient explanation. <fnote>Cain, M (2002) "Fodor: Language, Mind and Philosophy" Cambridge: Polity Press </fnote>Ultimately, despite problems that arise for functionalism regarding intentional states, functionalism offers a more plausible theory of intentional states than it does of sensations and other states of consciousness. It is extremely difficult to provide an account of functionalism that is neither chauvinistic nor liberalistic weakening the overall theory and consequently its ability to provide a plausible account of all aspects of functionalism including sensations and other states of consciousness. Functionalism fails to provide a successful theory of sensations as it does not account for the qualia of a sensation as this is not a feature/product of its causal role. Kim successfully illustrates this criticism by providing examples of inverted and absent qualia that cannot be explained with reference to functionalism. I regard Nagel's argument, 'what is it like to be a bat?' to be the most significant criticism of functionalism as the properties regarding what it is like to be a particular creature or to have a particular experience cannot be physical properties and understanding physical properties of a certain creature/experience is insufficient in explaining what it is like to be that creature. Therefore functionalism fails to provide a plausible account of phenomenal consciousness. The responses raised by Fodor, Chomsky and McGinn are unsuccessful in defending functionalism, consequently functionalism offers a more plausible account of intentional states than it does of sensations and other states of consciousness. 