<heading>Cover Letter for Angel of the Night Jane Murray Hodder Headline 338 Euston Road London NW1 3BH 28 th April 2005 REF: Angel of the Night Dear Jane</heading>I enclose a sample chapter of my book Angel of the Night. My book is aimed mainly at women aged 20 and above. Detective Adam Belmayne is recovering from a recent divorce and decides to throw himself into his work. The latest case is of a famous actor who has been brutally murdered in his home. Following a suspicious suspect to Barbados, a beautiful and defiant Marie Clarendon, Belmayne searches for answers. In this racy thriller, Belmayne struggles with his growing infatuation with Marie and with his fervent battle for the truth. I can see my book fitting into your Hodder Headline imprints, among authors such as Sandra Brown and Charlotte Lamb, as my book combines racy crime writing with an element of romance. My work also has the potential to become a serial with my main character Detective Adam Belmayne. I currently study English at university and have had the opportunity to enter into various writing competitions and I have submitted several articles to a local school magazine in London. I look forward to hearing from you in the near future. Yours sincerely  <heading>Draft Synopsis</heading>A famous film star is brutally murdered in his London home. Gary Jackson has had a long successful acting career and is constantly in the media, being portrayed as being sleazy and womanizing, despite being married. Detective Adam Belmayne is on the case, still reeling from a recent divorce. Determined and fierce, Belmayne puts all his energy into the case. He is convinced that the prime suspect is Marie Clarendon, a woman seen many times in the company of Gary Jackson and is rumoured to have been one of his mistresses. But Marie is quickly ticked off the list of suspects, when her alibi proves convincing to the police. Jackson's wife, Clare is being held as the prime suspect and Marie is let off. She travels to Barbados as part of a business trip with her brother Robert who is slightly younger than her. Belmayne follows her there, convinced that there is more to Marie than she's letting on. He still believes she played a major role in the murder of Gary Jackson. Marie appears to be head-strong, defiant and aloof. In Barbados, Belmayne questions Marie repeatedly, and finds that she doesn't give any clear answers, and her story constantly changes. He delves into her private life and her history, trying to prove that she had a connection with the murder. He witnesses Marie's strange relationship with her brother. They have been very close since they were young, when Marie had to look after her brother while their mother worked. They had no father. Belmayne witnesses Marie's protectiveness of Robert and so finds it strange when he secretly finds them in heated arguments that he cannot understand. On one occasion in Barbados, Belmayne feels the tension between Marie and Robert. She tells him it was just an argument about work, but Belmayne suspects that there's something going on. Robert then leaves to go back to London for a few days, leaving Marie and Belmayne on their own. Belmayne finds himself slowly drawn to Marie, battling with his conscious about wanting to find the criminal and wanting to fall for her. Meanwhile, Jackson's wife Clare is convincing the police that Marie had something to do with the murder. Scheming and conniving, Clare tells them about Jackson's affair with Marie and how Marie got angry when Jackson told her that he wouldn't leave his wife for her. Clare tells the police that Marie threatened him and Clare and that's how Clare found out about the affair. News of this reaches Belmayne and he begins to fiercely interrogate Marie again. Robert meets with a mystery lover in London, talking of Jackson's murder and the effect on the media. Meanwhile, Belmayne travels back to London to question Clare. He instantly recognizes Clare's guile and questions her for hours. When he leaves, he is convinced that he knows who the murderer was. Marie leaves Barbados and arrives back in London. After another heated debate with Robert, she is visited by Belmayne who is acting angry and aggressive. He unravels the case in front of her. He admits to delving into her history and reveals that Jackson was Marie and Roberts's real father, which explains Marie's connection with him. He admits that he knows about Roberts's affair with Clare Jackson and the conspiracy to murder her husband, which Robert did himself. He explains why Marie kept altering her stories to confuse the police and protect her brother. Robert kills himself, leaving Clare facing imprisonment. Distraught and helpless, Marie leaves London and stays in a country home in Wales. Belmayne follows her there where they begin to recover from the shock and trauma together. 610 words <heading>Draft Sample Chapter</heading>I looked down at his body and felt the bile creeping up my throat. I could smell fresh blood. My body began to convulse. I forced myself to wipe the gun down and frantically stuff it into the back pocket of my jeans. I knew exactly where to put it. I crept closer to the bed and peered over him. A mixture of elation and anguish overwhelmed me. His blood was now soaking into the cream sheets and dripping on to the floor. I stepped back as a small splash of blood almost caught my shoe. I screwed my eyes shut tightly and sent a small prayer up to God. "Forgive me," I whispered. The glossy photograph showed the famous actor Gary Jackson spread-eagled on his large four poster bed. His face had been gruesomely twisted into the satin sheets which were soaked in blood. There were two bullet wounds. One in his chest and one in his stomach. Detective Adam Belmayne sighed and looked to the tabloid newspaper spread on his desk. The same Gary Jackson looked back at him from a photograph. He was good looking, despite his fifty-four years. He was smiling, his dark eyes shining like wet slate. He was sitting in a swanky London restaurant, dressed immaculately in a black pin striped suit. The woman he was with was younger and strikingly beautiful. She was looking into his face, her features twisted in what looked like anger or frustration. Belmayne looked over his desk at the interrogation room where the same woman was being questioned. She still had that aloof, defiant look in her eyes. She caught him looking and held her stare until Belmayne looked away uncomfortably. He read the article in the tabloid which referred to the woman as Gary Jackson's mistress. It was possible. She was young and beautiful and had been spotted several times with him. She was certainly not the first of Jackson's mistresses. He took a sip of his steaming coffee, clutching the Styrofoam cup in his hands and staring at the photograph of a different woman on his desk. She was smiling warmly, her chocolate brown eyes soft and slightly squinted in that way he loved. Her hand was in the middle of flicking strands of hair away from her face. Belmayne shut his eyes. How had it gone wrong? A flurry of activity in the interrogation room caught his eye and he stood up, placing his cup of coffee back onto his desk. Chief Inspector Brian Coleridge walked out of the room and over to Belmayne. "She's clean," he said. "Was spending the evening with a friend. Cheryl York. We've spoken to her." "She was top of the list," Belmayne protested. "Her alibi is water tight." Coleridge replied. "On to the wife." Belmayne watched him walk away and felt eyes boring into the back of his head. He turned swiftly and caught the woman's eye. She was still sitting in the interrogation room. And she was staring right at him. He didn't waver this time. He stared straight back at her. Her eyes seemed to flicker and then she looked away. He smiled to himself. He definitely noticed fear in her eyes. Marie Clarendon climbed the stairs of her London flat two at a time. She clutched the plane tickets tightly to her chest, banishing the memory of that morning from her mind. She fished in her bag for her mobile phone and dialled Robert's number. It went to answer phone. Swearing under her breath, she turned the key in the lock and slammed the door behind her. She gasped when she noticed her house-sitter Mimi sitting with a man in the living room. The same man that was at the police station that morning. Mimi stood up unsteadily. "Sorry Miss Clarendon. . . the man. . .he with the police . . ." she stuttered in her Bulgarian accent. The man stood up and pulled his ID from his blazer pocket. "Detective Adam Belmayne," he offered firmly. Marie nodded at Mimi to leave the room. She set her bag down on the floor beside the couches and placed the flight tickets on a nearby table. She remained standing, her hands on her hips. Belmayne noticed that she looked flushed. Like she had been running. "What can I do for you detective?" she asked, impatiently. "I just have some questions for you." He replied. Her eyes flashed. "I've already been questioned. And I was let off." "It won't take long Miss Clarendon. If you could just sit down." Belmayne said. "I really don't have the time detective," she replied resolutely. "I have to start packing." She walked over to the kitchen, leading off from the living room. Belmayne followed her. The kitchen was bright, the walls adorned with 1920's prints of Parisian coffee shops and café's. "I don't think you can leave the country." Belmayne said, picking up the plane tickets that she had placed on the coffee table. "Why not?" she called from the kitchen. "I wasn't told that I couldn't and besides. . ." she walked out holding a glass of water. ". . .I have to go. For work." Belmayne looked at her. Her eyes were the colour of whiskey. "And what is it that you do?" he asked, looking down at the tickets, heading for Barbados. "I have my own marketing company. We market hotels in the Caribbean." "Sounds glamorous." "You'd think." She replied, taking another long swig of water. She raised her eyebrows at him questioningly. She cocked her head slightly, studying the man before her. He was tall, lean, good looking in a clean-cut, boyish sort of way. But his jaw was set, his eyes probing and sharp. And she noticed lines on his forehead. Lines that seemed to have been there a while. "How did you know Gary Jackson?" Belmayne asked, still holding the tickets. Marie sighed loudly and placed the glass of water down on the coffee table, leaving a ring of water on the mahogany wood. "I've already answered all of these questions," she replied shortly. "And I've already said, I don't have time to answer any more. I'm leaving for Barbados tomorrow morning with my brother." "Your brother?" "Yes. He works with me." Belmayne nodded and handed her the tickets. "Sorry for taking up your time Miss Clarendon." He said, making his way towards the door. She nodded stiffly. He turned round before leaving. "What part of Barbados are you going to, Miss Clarendon?" he asked. She frowned. He noticed her lips quiver slightly. "Christchurch. Why?" He smiled. "Just wondering." Belmayne pushed his gear into reverse. His mind was reeling. She had been shifty. Her eyes were untrusting. There was definitely more to Marie Clarendon. He made a mental note to look up her brother and cursed when he realised that he hadn't asked for his name. As he eased the black Audi from his parking space, his mobile phone began to vibrate in the pocket of his blazer. "Yes?" he answered impatiently. "Belmayne, what are you doing?" Coleridge barked into the phone. "I was questioning Marie Clarendon." He replied. He heard Coleridge sigh softly. "What for? Look, we're onto Clare Jackson, so just forget about Clarendon and - " "Brian, I think this woman is hiding something!" Belmayne protested. "Forget it Adam, she had an alibi. She didn't kill Gary Jackson." "But she might know something." Coleridge breathed heavily into the phone. "Adam," he said, exasperated, "Just get down here." <heading>Synopsis</heading>A famous film star is brutally murdered in his London home. Gary Jackson has had a long successful acting career and is constantly in the media, being portrayed as being sleazy and womanizing, despite being married. Detective Adam Belmayne is on the case, still reeling from a recent divorce. Determined and fierce, Belmayne puts all his energy into the case. He is convinced that the prime suspect is Marie Clarendon, a woman seen many times in the company of Gary Jackson and is rumoured to have been one of his mistresses. But Marie is quickly ticked off the list of suspects, when her alibi proves convincing to the police. She was with a friend the night of Jackson's murder Jackson's wife, Clare is being held as the prime suspect and Marie is let off. She travels to Barbados as part of a business trip with her brother Robert who is slightly younger than her. She has her own marketing company for hotels in the Caribbean. Belmayne follows her there, convinced that there is more to Marie than she's letting on. He still believes she played a major role in the murder of Gary Jackson. Marie appears to be head-strong, defiant and aloof. In Barbados, Belmayne questions Marie repeatedly, and finds that she doesn't give any clear answers, and her story constantly changes. He delves into her private life and her history, trying to prove that she had a connection with the murder. He witnesses Marie's strange relationship with her brother. They have been very close since they were young, when Marie had to look after her brother while their mother worked. They had no father. Belmayne witnesses Marie's protectiveness of Robert and so finds it strange when he secretly finds them in heated arguments that he cannot understand. On one occasion in Barbados, Belmayne feels the tension between Marie and Robert. She tells him it was just an argument about work, but Belmayne suspects that there's something going on. Robert then leaves to go back to London for a few days, leaving Marie and Belmayne on their own. Belmayne finds himself slowly drawn to Marie, battling with his conscious about wanting to find the criminal and wanting to fall for her. Meanwhile, Jackson's wife Clare is convincing the police that Marie had something to do with the murder. Scheming and conniving, Clare tells them about Jackson's affair with Marie and how Marie got angry when Jackson told her that he wouldn't leave his wife for her. Clare tells the police that Marie threatened him and Clare and that's how Clare found out about the affair. News of this reaches Belmayne and he begins to fiercely interrogate Marie again. Robert meets with a mystery lover in London, talking of Jackson's murder and the effect on the media. Meanwhile, Belmayne travels back to London to question Clare. He instantly recognizes Clare's guile and questions her for hours. When he leaves, he is convinced that he knows who the murderer was. Marie leaves Barbados and arrives back in London. After another heated debate with Robert, she is visited by Belmayne who is acting angry and aggressive. He unravels the case in front of her. He admits to delving into her history and reveals that Jackson was Marie and Roberts's real father, which explains Marie's connection with him. He admits that he knows about Roberts's affair with Clare Jackson and the conspiracy to murder her husband, which Robert did himself. He explains why Marie kept altering her stories to confuse the police and protect her brother. Robert kills himself, leaving Clare facing imprisonment. Distraught and helpless, Marie leaves London and stays in a country home in Wales. Belmayne follows her there where they begin to recover from the shock and trauma together. <heading> Sample Chapter</heading>I looked down at his body and felt the bile creeping up my throat. I could smell fresh blood. My body began to convulse. I forced myself to wipe the gun down and frantically stuff it into the back pocket of my jeans. I knew exactly where to put it. I crept closer to the bed and peered over him. A mixture of elation and anguish overwhelmed me. His blood was now soaking into the cream sheets and dripping on to the floor. I stepped back as a small splash of blood almost caught my shoe. I screwed my eyes shut tightly and sent a small prayer up to God. "Forgive me," I whispered. The glossy photograph showed the famous actor Gary Jackson spread-eagled on his large four poster bed. His face had been gruesomely twisted into the satin sheets which were soaked in blood. There were two bullet wounds. One in his chest and one in his stomach. Detective Adam Belmayne sighed and looked to the tabloid newspaper spread on his desk. The same Gary Jackson looked back at him from a photograph. He was good looking, despite his fifty-four years. He was smiling, his dark eyes shining like wet slate. He was sitting in a swanky London restaurant, dressed immaculately in a black pin striped suit. The woman he was with was younger and strikingly beautiful. She was looking into his face, her features twisted in what looked like anger or frustration. Belmayne looked over his desk at the interrogation room where the same woman was being questioned. She still had that aloof, defiant look in her eyes. She caught him looking and held her stare until Belmayne looked away uncomfortably. He read the article in the tabloid which referred to the woman as Gary Jackson's mistress. It was possible. She was young and beautiful and had been spotted several times with him. She was certainly not the first of Jackson's mistresses. He took a sip of his steaming coffee, clutching the Styrofoam cup in his hands and staring at the photograph of a different woman on his desk. She was smiling warmly, her chocolate brown eyes soft and slightly squinted in that way he loved. Her hand was in the middle of flicking strands of hair away from her face. Belmayne shut his eyes. How had it gone wrong? A flurry of activity in the interrogation room caught his eye and he stood up, placing his cup of coffee back onto his desk. Chief Inspector Brian Coleridge walked out of the room and over to Belmayne. "She's clean," he said. "Was spending the evening with a friend. Cheryl York. We've spoken to her." "She was top of the list," Belmayne protested. "Her alibi is water tight." Coleridge replied. "On to the wife." Belmayne watched him walk away and felt eyes boring into the back of his head. He turned swiftly and caught the woman's eye. She was still sitting in the interrogation room. And she was staring right at him. He didn't waver this time. He stared straight back at her. Her eyes seemed to flicker and then she looked away. He smiled to himself. He definitely noticed fear in her eyes. Marie Clarendon climbed the stairs of her London flat two at a time. She clutched the plane tickets tightly to her chest, banishing the memory of that morning from her mind. She fished in her bag for her mobile phone and dialled Robert's number. It went to answer phone. Swearing under her breath, she turned the key in the lock and slammed the door behind her. She gasped when she noticed her house-sitter Mimi sitting with a man in the living room. The same man that was at the police station that morning. Mimi stood up unsteadily. "Sorry Miss Clarendon. . . the man. . .he with the police . . ." she stuttered in her Bulgarian accent. The man stood up and pulled his ID from his blazer pocket. "Detective Adam Belmayne," he offered firmly. Marie nodded at Mimi to leave the room. She set her bag down on the floor beside the couches and placed the flight tickets on a nearby table. She remained standing, her hands on her hips. Belmayne noticed that she looked flushed. Like she had been running. "What can I do for you detective?" she asked, impatiently. "I just have some questions for you." He replied. Her eyes flashed. "I've already been questioned. And I was let off." "It won't take long Miss Clarendon. If you could just sit down." Belmayne said. "I really don't have the time detective," she replied resolutely. "I have to start packing." She walked over to the kitchen, leading off from the living room. Belmayne followed her. The kitchen was bright, the walls adorned with 1920's prints of Parisian coffee shops and café's. "I don't think you can leave the country." Belmayne said, picking up the plane tickets that she had placed on the coffee table. "Why not?" she called from the kitchen. "I wasn't told that I couldn't and besides. . ." she walked out holding a glass of water. ". . .I have to go. For work." Belmayne looked at her. Her eyes were the colour of whiskey. "And what is it that you do?" he asked, looking down at the tickets, heading for Barbados. "I have my own marketing company. We market hotels in the Caribbean." "Sounds glamorous." "You'd think." She replied, taking another long swig of water. She raised her eyebrows at him questioningly. She cocked her head slightly, studying the man before her. He was tall, lean, good looking in a clean-cut, boyish sort of way. But his jaw was set, his eyes probing and sharp. And she noticed lines on his forehead. Lines that seemed to have been there a while. "How did you know Gary Jackson?" Belmayne asked, still holding the tickets. Marie sighed loudly and placed the glass of water down on the coffee table, leaving a ring of water on the mahogany wood. "I've already answered all of these questions," she replied shortly. "And I've already said, I don't have time to answer any more. I'm leaving for Barbados tomorrow morning with my brother." "Your brother?" "Yes. He works with me." Belmayne nodded and handed her the tickets. "Sorry for taking up your time Miss Clarendon." He said, making his way towards the door. She nodded stiffly. He turned round before leaving. "What part of Barbados are you going to, Miss Clarendon?" he asked. She frowned. He noticed her lips quiver slightly. "Christchurch. Why?" He smiled. "Just wondering." Belmayne pushed his gear into reverse. His mind was reeling. She had been shifty. Her eyes were untrusting. There was definitely more to Marie Clarendon. He made a mental note to look up her brother and cursed when he realised that he hadn't asked for his name. As he eased the black Audi from his parking space, his mobile phone began to vibrate in the pocket of his blazer. "Yes?" he answered impatiently. "Belmayne, what are you doing?" Coleridge barked into the phone. "I was questioning Marie Clarendon." He replied. He heard Coleridge sigh softly. "What for? Look, we're onto Clare Jackson, so just forget about Clarendon and - " "Brian, I think this woman is hiding something!" Belmayne protested. "Forget it Adam, she had an alibi. She didn't kill Gary Jackson." "But she might know something." Coleridge breathed heavily into the phone. "Adam," he said, exasperated, "Just get down here." 