<quote> There are parts of the universe which seem not to serve some purpose . . . So little finished is every part, and so coarse are the strokes with which it is executed.</quote><fnote>Hume, David (1779) Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, ed. Henry D. Aiken, London: Macmillan, p.77 </fnote>Philo in Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, is articulating the common objections to the Design argument, known also as Natural Theology. As an a posteriori argument, Natural Theology posits the idea that you can seek knowledge of God through observation of nature and the world. The fact that there is apparent order and purpose in the world suggests the need for a designer, rather than leaving it to chance. The universe is decidedly complex, so the simplest explanation is that there must have been a designer. And that designer is God. Gurney's hymn states, "Yes, God is good, all nature says . . ." This echoes the main ideology behind the Design argument. William Paley defined the argument by positing his watchmaker theory. <fnote>Gurney, H. John (1802) Hymn Number 363, Hymns and Psalms, London: Methodist Publishing </fnote><quote> Suppose I found a watch upon the ground . . . We come to inspect the watch, to perceive that its parts are framed and put together for a purpose . . . to produce motion.</quote><fnote>Hick, John (1964) The Existence of God, Basingstoke: Macmillan, pp.99-100 </fnote>The main push of Paley's theory suggests that if we were to stumble upon a complicated mechanism such as a watch, we would propose that there was a creator, for the watch cannot create itself or "just appear." Paley argued that even if parts of the watch were lost, or it if it did not work properly, we would still postulate a designer. Richard Swinburne furthered the argument, suggesting that the fantastic order and beauty in the world points to a designer God. "Order is a necessary condition of beauty . . . And the world is beautiful rather than ugly." <fnote>Davies, Brian (1993) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p.96 </fnote>As already demonstrated, one of the common objections to this theory is that the world is not necessarily ordered and beautiful, as, by viewing the world, we can observe chaos and disorder. <quote> Look round this universe. . . You admire this prodigious variety and fecundity. But inspect a little more narrowly these living existences . . . How hostile and destructive to each other!</quote><fnote>Hume, David (1779) Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, ed. Henry D. Aiken, London: Macmillan, p.79 </fnote>Indeed, many aspects of the world produce chaos and suffering, such as earthquakes and hurricanes, suggesting that the worlds' order is not particularly perfect. But does this disprove God? Paley took great pains to reassure that disorder does not discredit a designer. "It is not necessary that a machine be perfect, in order to show with what design it was made."  <fnote>Rowe, L. William and Wainright, J. William, eds (1998) Philosophy of Religion: Selected Readings, Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, p. 151 </fnote>Swinburne reinforced this idea, suggesting that people expect too much from God. He believed that God made a world where humans are free to learn and develop and in turn, choose to do either right or wrong. Pain and suffering is therefore crucial in order for humans to develop. "Why God should make the universe ugly would be to give creatures the opportunity . . . to make the world beautiful for themselves." <fnote>Swinburne, Richard (1979) The Existence of God, Oxford: Clarendon Press, p.146 </fnote>However, John Stuart Mill argued that even if God is testing humans, his attributes are compromised. Natural Theology can indeed point to a designer of the universe, but it certainly cannot point to a Christian God. God's common attributes are omnipotence and omni-benevolence, which cannot be possible in the face of extreme pain and suffering. <quote> If the maker of the world can do all that he will, he wills misery . . . nature (cannot) be made to resemble the work of a God both good and omnipotent.</quote><fnote>Vardy, Peter (1990) The Puzzle of God, London: Harper Collins, p.90 </fnote>In short, if God were all-powerful, he would not be all-good and vice versa. However, one may ask why the designer God needs to be a Christian God? This argument only stands if Natural Theology aims to prove the existence of a God who embodies these traditional attributes. Hume wonders why the world's designer needs to be "God." If that is all we can settle for, then why stop there? Perhaps there was more than one creator. Perhaps a novice God created the world. <quote> If design needs to be explained, then explain it: but only by appealing to a design-producing being. To say that this being is God is to go beyond the evidence presented by design.</quote><fnote>Davies, Brian (1993) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p.98 </fnote>This remains problematic for the Design argument as it articulates the philosophical leap that is also evident in the Ontological and Cosmological arguments. When trying to explain how the universe began, these arguments always seem to shift towards "God." As if this isn't enough to contend with, this God is usually a Christian God. Considering issues such as pain and suffering, Hume questions what kind of God we are dealing with if we are to accept the Design argument. Has he not done a very good job? "Because of this ambiguity in the facts one cannot be justified in ascribing to God any infinite attributes of perfection." <fnote>Phillips, D. Zephaniah (1976) Religion Without Explanation, Oxford: Blackwell, p.22 </fnote>The objections raised by Hume and Mill certainly pose problems for the Design argument to a certain extent, but they do not comment on the arguments' validation, but rather focus on what kind of God we end up with if we are to accept Natural Theology. The argument is only postulating the existence of God. It is not commenting on the nature of God. Who are we, anyway, to try to understand God's plan if he does indeed exist? As God said to Job, "where were you when I made the universe?" Perhaps we as humans will never have the capacity to know or understand God. <fnote>Job 38: 4 </fnote>This idea stands as the basis of Immanuel Kant's challenge to the Design argument. He opposed the view that as humans, we can explain God by observing the material world. He maintained that the laws of cause and effect are limited to the physical world, as this is the only way we can think and reason. "According to Kant, we are unable to experience 'things in themselves.'" We have no justification to apply the same rules of cause and effect to the spiritual world. Therefore, it is implausible to move from the physical world to the metaphysical world. "The attainment of absolute totality is completely impossible on the path of empiricism." <fnote>Ibid., p.97 </fnote><fnote>Kant, Immanuel (1781) Critique of Pure Reason, ed. Vasilis Politis, London: Everyman, p.426 </fnote>However, many would argue that rejecting Natural Theology for this reason does not reject the concept of God. Kant's objection merely states that understanding God through use of the material world is impossible. Adding to the debate is Darwin's theory of natural selection. The concept of evolution suggested a mechanism by which species adapt to their surroundings, allowing them to survive and develop by natural selection. Creatures can be formed from existing ones, without the need for an external designer. "Those who had supported the Design argument had seen all the intricacies of nature as being the work of God." However, with Darwin's theory of natural selection and the survival of the fittest, it was possible to see how evolution can explain the complexities of the universe. <fnote>Vardy, Peter (1990) The Puzzle of God, London: Harper Collins, p.91 </fnote><quote> This might look like design, but it is not; it is in fact a perfectly natural process which does not require a designer. . .the design argument has been rendered redundant by science.</quote><fnote>Clack, Beverly and Clack, Brian (1998) The Philosophy of Religion: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Polity Press, p.28 </fnote>However, Darwin's theory does not take into account certain human attributes, such as altruism and duty. If the survival of the fittest allows to eliminate the weaker species, why do we as humans care for the handicapped or weak in society? Swinburne and F.R. Tennant try to reconcile evolution with Natural Theology by theorising that evolution was "the mechanism that God uses to bring about his purposes," suggesting that evolution was part of God's design. God, according to Tennant created the world in such a way to allow intelligent life to evolve. <fnote>Vardy, Peter (1990) The Puzzle of God, London: Harper Collins, p.92 </fnote><quote> A teleological interpretation of nature does not require that every detail was purposed or pre-ordained. Processes may produce by-products which were not purposed, but are the necessary outcome of processes by which a purpose is fulfilled.</quote><fnote>Hick, John (1964) The Existence of God, Basingstoke: Macmillan,p.122 </fnote>Swinburne accepts the theory that species reproduce through generations, but he questions the existence of the first species. As we know that the world has not been going on forever, something must have initially produced these species. For Swinburne, evolution points to God. "It is very probable that they were made by a rational agent - only clearly more powerful and knowledgeable than men." <fnote>Swinburne, Richard (1979) The Existence of God, Oxford: Clarendon Press, p.135 </fnote>In light of the various objections raised against Natural Theology, the theory of a designer God remains ambiguous. Can God's existence be proved? Kant demonstrated that it certainly cannot by observing the material world. "No one will be so bold as to profess that he comprehends the relation of the magnitude of the world as he has observed it to omnipotence." Perhaps we cannot understand God by using the facts of this world. But this does not disprove God. Perhaps the Design argument is "half way there." <fnote>Davies, Brian (2000) Philosophy of Religion: A Guide and Anthology, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p.273 </fnote>The problem of evil and ugliness opposes the view that the world is apparently ordered and beautiful. If beauty is considered perfection, then the world, some may say, is opposite to beautiful. Therefore, whoever made the world is decidedly imperfect. And this, says Hume, is not what a believer wants God to be. Despite his criticisms, however, Hume seems to accept the force of Natural Theology. Although he suggests that the argument is too idealistic, he disregards the point. Hume is concerned with God's character, which does not reject the existence of God, but rather highlights the implications of adopting the argument. It seems that Natural Theology has triumphed. But the argument is flawed. It postulates that there once was a designer, but there is no proof that the designer still exists. The argument makes no assumption about a sustainer. Hume also asks, who designed God? He believes that the argument is prone to an infinite regress. "If the material world rests upon a similar ideal world, this ideal world must rest upon another; and so on, without end." <fnote>Ibid., p.99 </fnote>In an attempt to prove the existence of God, therefore, the Design argument remains inconclusive. It rests on individual judgement. As Vardy states, it owes more to its "persuasive power than to its logic." <fnote>Vardy, Peter (1990) The Puzzle of God, London: Harper Collins, p.98 </fnote><heading>Annotated Bibliography</heading>Clack, Beverly and Clack, Brian (1998) The Philosophy of Religion: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Polity Press <heading>Clark, R.L. Stephen (1986) The Mysteries of Religion , Oxford: Blackwell</heading>A chapter of about twenty pages was dedicated to the Design argument. While I did read through the entire chapter, I did not feel the need to use it for my essay. I found the writing very hard-going and particularly one-sided, as it seemed to favour Hume's arguments. I also felt that the essay digressed from the point. Unlike the other books I used, this book did not outline the main point of the Design argument, but merely discussed the concept of a creator in several religions. There were no quotes from thinkers or philosophers and names that were becoming familiar to me, such as Kant and Swinburne, did not crop up in this book. Although this was a fairly deep, slightly unique way to engage with the Design argument, I felt I did not gain much from reading it. <heading>Davies, Brian (1993) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion , Oxford: Oxford University Press</heading>Among others, this was the book I found most useful when writing my essay. There are sections dedicated to each argument and objection in regards to the Design argument. Hume's arguments were clearly laid out, with reference to his work Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. Objections raised by Swinburne, Tennant and Kant were also included, giving a clear and concise understanding of the overall debate concerning the Design argument. I would recommend this book to anyone approaching the Design argument with a blank slate as each section is broken down and explained thoroughly. I found it particularly useful to quote from, as the book has been written quite simplistically, so the quotes were not too long or detailed. Davies, Brian (2000) Philosophy of Religion: A Guide and Anthology, Oxford: Oxford University Press Gurney, H. John (1802) Hymn Number 363, Hymns and Psalms, London: Methodist Publishing <heading>Hick, John (1964) The Existence of God , Basingstoke: Macmillan</heading>This was a collection of writings and statements by various philosophers and thinkers. The ones particularly useful to my essay were the chapters on John Stuart Mill and F.R. Tennant. I was glad I chose this book as Mill and Tennant were not dominant in my essay but I liked to include them as they offered valid points towards the Design argument. I also found that there was not much literature on these philosophers on the reading list so I was glad to have some of their own writing to incorporate into my essay. While the other books offered the views and ideas of Mill and Tennant, they did not offer much of their own writing. This would be good for a student who was looking for a collection of writings by many philosophers all in one book. Therefore, this would be a good investment as it will come in handy when writing any essay for Philosophy. Hume, David (1779) Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, ed. Henry D. Aiken, London: Macmillan Kant, Immanuel (1781) Critique of Pure Reason, ed. Vasilis Politis, London: Everyman <heading>Phillips, D. Zephaniah (1976) Religion Without Explanation, Oxford: Blackwell</heading>This book had a whole chapter dedicated to Hume's main arguments against the Design argument, titling it as "Hume's Legacy." His arguments were broken down into three sections. Each section had excerpts from Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion to back up the points in the arguments. I found that the only thing lacking were counter-arguments or objections to Hume's ideas, although D.Z. Phillips did include other thinkers and philosophers who agreed with Hume. I found this book useful in explaining and breaking down Hume's main arguments and was particularly good for making the dialogues between Cleanthes, Demea and Philo clear. <heading>Rowe, L. William and Wainright, J. William, eds (1998) Philosophy of Religion: Selected Readings , Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich</heading>There were two sections in this book dedicated to the writings of both William Paley and David Hume. Large excerpts were taken from Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion and Paley's The Evidence of Design. The section dedicated to Paley's writing was particularly useful as I did not have any books specifically on Paley's own writings about the Design argument. It was good to have the watch maker theory in Paley's own words to include in the essay. I had no need to use the section on Hume as I already had Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. The sections did not have any further literature, to criticise or explain the writings. This would be useful if one could not find the original works of Paley and Hume. <heading>Swinburne, Richard (1979) The Existence of God , Oxford: Clarendon Press</heading>I managed to use several chapters of this book, among them being the discussions about Teleological Arguments and The Problem of Evil. This book was useful as Swinburne appeared much in my essay and I wanted to have quotes and writings from his own book, rather than use a critic. His writing was intricate, yet easy to understand and his objections were broken down nicely. I found this book crucial to my essay as I referred to it constantly. Each section had a sub-title, which meant it didn't get too confusing and in depth. This book would be crucial for anyone studying the Philosophy of Religion and I would strongly recommend it. <heading>Vardy, Peter (1990) The Puzzle of God , London: Harper Collins</heading>I would definitely recommend this book to anyone writing an essay on the Design argument. Each section explained and analysed the various arguments and objections outlined by Hume, Kant, Swinburne, Mill and Tennant. At the end of each section, Vardy offered bullet points to summarise the main points of the section, which proved very useful when I wanted to refresh my memory. The chapter was quite detailed but didn't become confusing. I used this book as my main reference source, quoting some main points that I managed to glean from it. I especially liked this book as it was not biased in any way. I found the author very neutral as he merely outlined the various arguments for and against the Design argument. 