Having researched the crime/thriller market, I have noticed that there are many types of crime/thriller. Books written by authors such as Harlan Coben, James Patterson and Martina Cole are tense, action-packed thrillers with many twists and turns. Novels by authors such as Nicci French and Jilliane Hoffman tend to be darker, psychological chillers. There are also traditional crime novels which include the conventional hard-boiled detective, such as those written by Agatha Christie. Novels by authors such as Patricia Cornwell and P.D. James take a detailed look at the medical side of crime writing, including forensic detail. Historical crime novels are also becoming popular with titles by Anne Perry and Jacqueline Winspear. There are also crime novels written by authors such as Nora Roberts and Sandra Brown which are racy blockbusters with plenty of romance and unexpected twists. There is often a scandalous situation involving members of the elite, usually to do with sex, lies and politics. I feel that my book would fit into this category, as it is packed with deception, murder and romance and includes an exotic location which is common in these types of books. For example, the novel Deep and Silent Waters, by Charlotte Lamb is set in Venice and the book French Silk, by Sandra Brown is set in New Orleans. The intended market for my book is primarily females from the age of twenty. I feel that my book and my style of writing would appeal to both young females and to an older female audience. My story is exciting and tense with enough twists and turns to keep reading while the writing is easy to read as well as being racy and sharp. A common factor of crime and thrillers is to create a serial with a detective or a main character. Among many are Alex Cross, Dr Kay Scarpetta, Myron Bolitaire and William Monk. The detective which features in my novel is Detective Adam Belmayne and I can see him becoming a famous serial detective. I have chosen Hodder Headline as my publisher as they are a well-established company with a good reputation and the existing books in their lists are successful and well-known. I feel my book would fit well into their lists as it includes authors such as Vena Cork, Elizabeth George and Sandra Brown whose writing is similar to mine. As Hodder Headline is a well-known publisher, I feel my book would receive a lot of recognition and I feel the publisher would have a lot to offer in terms of marketing and promotion. There are many ways in which my book can be marketed. As a first novel, there would be cost limitations, which would result in promoting the book locally. A common and effective strategy is to use posters. Teaser posters are often effective, starting off with a tiny bit of information and increasing the information slowly over time. These posters could appear at bus stops, in bookshops, libraries and sometimes in local magazines or newspapers. Exclusive book clubs such as World Books or Escape Fiction often have double page spreads on new authors, giving some detail about the book and the author. As the author, appearing on local radio stations and agreeing to participate in book signing in local libraries and bookshops is a good way of raising recognition and promoting the book without it being too expensive. Money-off vouchers are also effective as it gives the reader an incentive to buy the book at a cheaper price. These vouchers can be offered in local bookshops and magazines. Large bookshops such as Waterstones and Borders also have their own weekly magazine offering reviews and information about forthcoming publications and new authors. This may also be an effective way of marketing my book. Prizes and free gifts are also offered when buying a new book. The novel "Silent Truths" by Susan Lewis was a glamorous novel about the lives of the rich and famous and the book included a competition to win a matching necklace and earring set from Ernest Jones. As my book is set in an exotic country, there could be a competition to win a free holiday to Barbados. This would, however, be fairly expensive for the publisher and so there would be limitations. 