I have the impression that language games and activities are quite embarrassig the very first time in a new module, when you do not know the other people of the class. Also, I think in this moment it does not matter if they are in your mother tongue or in a foreign language - you just feel unsure about the whole situation. However, their great benefit is that they usually ease the tense atmosphere in the class, because you have an opportunity to get to know your classmates a little bit better (e.g. Things in Common, Memory name game, Find someone who...). Then, after the first two or three games, I think these activities can even be funny and enjoyable. Although some people might think that language games are a waste of time, because most of the time they have nothing in common with the actual topic of the lesson, I think that they can be of great value to the students. Even though these activities are called games, they are designed to provoke communication between students. As Harmer (2001) puts it, the games depend on an information gap so that one student has to talk to a partner in order to solve the task. Therefore, as long as the students play them seriously and just speak in their foreign language, these games provide an excellent, authentic opportunity for them to practice their communication skills. They are a useful way of giving students of every level valuable practise, because they often involve oral strategies such as describing, predicting, simplifying or asking for feedback (McDonough and Shaw 1993). In my home country (Germany) we often played language games at school or at university, especially in the modules for the future foreign language teachers. However, it was always dependent on the class whether I liked these games or not. When I felt comfortable in the class then I quite liked playing language games and I also enjoyed trying out new ones. Especially as a young school girl I loved to play a game, which name I do not know, but which is very easy to play. You and your neighbour were a pair and the teacher asked both of you a simple question (e.g. what is the English word for "Hund"? Answer: "Dog"). The one who answered it first won, the other one had to sit down. This went one till at the end there was just one person left, who was the winner and was then called "King". I will definitely include this game as a language teacher, because we all really adored it, even when we were a little bit older. In this module, I liked the "whistle dictation" quite much. I think this could be an easy way to let the students think about short definitions of words they are new to them. It is also a nice possibility for the teacher to check whether they know the correct meaning of the lexis or not. As I mentioned already in my first Portfolio, in Germany you have to decide before you begin your studies if you want to become a teacher afterwards or if you want to get a bachelor or master's degree. Therefore, it is automatically more a long-term career, because many of the modules at university relate to our later future as teachers and we also have to do a lot of practical training at school before our final exams. To conclude, I have not changed my view about the long-term career of language teaching at all and this module confirmed me that I really want to become a foreign language teacher! 