In my opinion the learning of grammar causes students so much worry, because there are always grammar tests for which they really have to know the special rules or otherwise need to have a quite good feeling for the language. Especially tense and aspect tests, where the student has to fill in the correct verb form, are very difficult and I find them even now the most unpredictable part of exams. The teaching of grammar may be worrying for teachers, because they know that students have difficulties with new grammar and often it may be not easy to teach it good and clear enough to weaker students. At school, I always had great difficulties with new grammar in all languages (even German which is my first language) and I found it hard to memorize. Since I am at university it is much more easier for me to learn it and keep it in my mind for quite a long time. Maybe the reason for this is that most of the modules are lead my native speakers. However, I honestly do not know if that is the only reason. After my first semester I was surprised about how much I had learnt over these few months. I always found it useful when teachers gave me comparisons or showed me a diagram for the new grammatical stucture. The diagrams which are shown in Baker (2000) are very good and I will use diagrams like that in my later lessons, because they will be a great help for some students. For me it was really helpful to have something where I could look at and where I saw all new forms and changes. The idea to present grammar indirectly through pictures or real objects is also an interesting approach (Baker, 2000). Sometimes it might be good to teach grammar indirectly (presentation) or directly (self-directed discovery), but I, as a student, think that maybe the direct approach or guided discovery (Scrivener, 1997) might be the best ones for myself, because I like to be guided through new grammar structures. As Gollin (1998) stated, for a teacher it may be the best to choose the approach method according to the available time or character of the class. When I think about teaching grammar, my greatest worry is that I cannot make it clear enough to my students. Probably, this worries me so much, because I had so often problems with it and many of my teachers just were not able to explain them to me in a way I was able to understand. One other thing which worries me is the fact that some students know the rules by heart, but they are unable to use them in a freer sentence structure or in conversation. I really hope that I will find a way to teach them how to use the rules in "real life". In my last Portfolio I wrote that I really enjoyed this course so far. This has not changed at all! It is the most interesting course I have in this semester (although the other ones are quite good, too) and I like that it has so many practical elements in it. The topics are very well chosen and the activities and language games will be very useful for my later teacher practice in Germany. After this four weeks I think that teaching foreign languages is not as difficult as I thougt it might be. And I will buy either the Harmer or Scrivener book (or maybe both if I have the money), because when I had a quick look at them I saw some quite good ideas which I want to try in my later lessons! 