<heading>Dispute settlement procedure what is it for</heading>Dispute settlement procedure is established in order to assure smooth and fluent functioning of world trading system. World Trade Organization (WTO) disputes usually arise due to difference in national regulations of the parts involved in the dispute. Dispute settlement procedure is unique feature of WTO, it allows smaller countries to defend their interests. There is only negative consensus procedure - all WTO members must agree to reject panel report. Usually in all the disputes one of the major trading nation (USA or UE) is a part. WTO disputes are dealt with by Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), which establishes panels, adopts panel reports, scrutinizes implementation of recommendations and authorises retaliatory measures. Settlement of disputes consists of few stages. The first are consultation and mediation, which are based on bilateral talks. Their aim is to make parts understand present situation and if possible settle the issue bilaterally. If parts are not able to resolve the matter on their own within 60 days, they are allowed to request establishment of a panel, this is stage two. On this stage DSB drafts terms of reference and determines panellists, usually three or four. On the third stage, panel examines facts and arguments, meets with the parties and interested third parties, drafts conclusions and recommendations and reports issues to the parties. On the fourth stage of panel works decision or appeal is adopted. Implementation of the decisions is conducted at the fifth stage of the procedure, usually this is time consuming process. The implementation is expected to be completed within 'reasonable period of time'. If the respondent fails to fulfil his duties, parties are allowed to negotiate compensation (3). <heading>Dispute WT/DS291- US / EC dispute on Approval and Marketing of Biotech Products - a brief overview (7)</heading>On 13 May 2003, the United States requested consultations with the European Community (EC) concerning certain measures taken by the EC and its member States affecting imports of agricultural and food products from the United States. According to the moratorium applied by the EC since October 1998 on the approval of biotech products has restricted imports of agricultural and food products from the US. The US pointed out that a number of EC member States maintain national marketing and import bans on biotech products even though those products have already been approved by the EC for import and marketing in the EC. According to the US, the measures at issue appear to be inconsistent with the EC's obligations under: Articles 2, 5, 7 and 8, and Annexes B and C of the SPS Agreement; Article 2 of SPS says, that (...) Members Countries have right to take sanitary and phytosanitary measures to protect human, animal, plant life or health, while those measures are consistent with provisions of SPS agreement and are based on scientific principles and maintained with sufficient scientific evidence (...). Article 5 states that (...) sanitary or phytosanitary measures have to be based on an assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances (...), taking into account risk assessment techniques developed by relevant international organizations. In the assessment of risk, Members shall take into account available scientific evidence, relevant process and production methods (...). In assessing the risk (...) members shall take into account as relevant economic factors: the potential damage in terms of loss of production or sales in the event of entry. (...) Each Member shall avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable decisions in the levels it considers to be appropriate in different situations, if such distractions result in discrimination or a disguised restriction on international trade (...). Articles 7 and 8 treat about transparency, control, inspection and approval procedures and refer to Annex B and C, respectively. Articles I, III, X and XI of the GATT 1994; Articles I of the GATT 1994 refers to the most favoured nation treatment. Article III treats about national treatment of 'like products'. Once the product is into the country, is going to be treated as domestic products. There may be a barrier on the border, but once the product is inside the country, it must be treated the same way like other products.Ana article XI treats about qualitative restrictions. Article 4 of the Agriculture Agreement; Referring to market access: 1. Market access concessions contained in Schedules relate to bindings and reductions of tariffs, and to other market access commitments as specified therein. 2. Members shall not maintain, resort to, or revert to any measures of the kind which have been required to be converted into ordinary customs duties, except as otherwise provided for in Article 5 and Annex 5. <fnote>These measures include quantitative import restrictions, variable import levies, minimum import prices, discretionary import licensing, non-tariff measures maintained through state-trading enterprises, voluntary export restraints, and similar border measures other than ordinary customs duties, whether or not the measures are maintained under country-specific derogations from the provisions of GATT 1947, but not measures maintained under balance-of-payments provisions or under other general, non-agriculture-specific provisions of GATT 1994 or of the other Multilateral Trade Agreements in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement. </fnote>and Articles 2 and 5 of the TBT Agreement They treat in detail about preparation, adoption and application of technical regulations by Central Government Bodies (art 2) and procedures for assessment of conformity (art 5). Similarly like article I of GATT 1994, article 2 of TBT Agreement treats about 'like' and non discriminatory treatments of imported products. It says that regulations adopted by governments should not create unnecessary barriers to international trade. It also talks about mutual adoption of equivalent technical regulations of other Members, even they differ from their own. Article 5 of TBT Agreement says among others, that (...) like products originating form territories of other Member should be permitted under conditions no less favourable than those applied for like products of national origin (...). Conformity assessment shall not be more strict or be applied more strictly than is necessary(...). All information concerning conformity assessment procedure should be with accordance to international standards and (...) should be published promptly and made available for interested parties (...). Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, India, Mexico, New Zealand and Peru requested to join the consultations in dispute WT/DS291. The EC accepted the requests of those countries to participate in the dispute. On 23 February 2004, the United States requested the Director-General to compose the panel. The panel was composed on 4 March 2004. On 12 July 2004, it was clear that the panel would not be able to complete its work in six months, because of the mutual request of the parties to be given additional time to prove that charges made against then were not true. On 18 August 2004, according to the Chairman of the Panel report was expected to be issued by the end of March 2005, as parties requested additional time for preparing their proofs, as well as panel was searching for scientific and technical expert advice according to Article 11 of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and Article 13 of the DSU. On 2 November 2004, the Chairman of the Panel announced that it would be impossible to meet the end of March deadline and issue the panel report on time. The main obstacles were: time taken to identify and select experts as well as request of parties in the dispute for more time to prepare their submissions to the panel. Chairman of the panel reset the data of panel report for the end of June 2005. Then on 13 June 2005 the deadline was postponed by the end of October 2005 and on 11 August 2005 the deadline was postponed once again by the end of December 2005. Finally on 21 December, the Chairman of the panel decided to issue the report on the end of March 2006 due to additional time needed for its preparation. <heading>GMO case in the WTO </heading>News reports indicate that early in 2006, the World Trade Organization is expected to rule in favour of the United States on a Bush Administration challenge to European delays in approving new types of genetically modified (GM) foods and various European Union member state bans on specific GM varieties. The current U.S. case does not challenge present European Community (EC) regulations on Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs), which include rules on safety testing, labelling and traceability, but concerns the EU's delay in granting new approvals of GM crops while the European-wide policies were being put into effect (6). The EU rules on labelling and traceability are in response to the consumers' demands for more and better information on GMOs and in the same time to facilitate the freedom of choice between new and traditional agricultural products. According to the EU officials, EU system is and will be science based, not driven by economic considerations (4). US were accusing EU of 'moratorium' applied in October 1998 in respect to approval of new GM varieties. Since then no GMOs have been authorized for release into the environment in the EU. This happened due to the fact that EU's regulatory regime was incomplete to address recent achievements of quickly changing GM technology. New EU regulatory framework was adopted in March 2001 and was entered into force in October 2001. David Byrne, EU Commissioner for Health and Consumer protection stated: 'We have been working hard in Europe to complete our regulatory system in line with the latest scientific and international developments. (...) This is essential to restore consumer confidence in GMO's in Europe'(4). The Bush Administration claims that the EU's delay in granting new GM crop approvals has resulted in lost markets for American farmers. But clearly consumers' preference for non-GM food is the true engine of the market collapse for American crops. Even before the delay in GM crop approvals began in 1998, U.S. corn sales to Europe had dropped by more than half (6). Commissioner Byrne recalled that it is the lack of consumer demand for GM-products that accounts for the law sales of GMOs in Europe. 'Unless consumers see that the authorisation process is up to date and takes into account all legitimate concerns, consumers will continue to remain sceptical of GM products'(4). From the other hand taking into account example of soy, the US soybean growers cultivate only the GM soybean authorised in the UE, so that they have no problem with accessing EU markets. Different situation is in terms of maize, as in the US various GM maize varieties are cultivated, not only those approved by the EU. Decrease in US soybean and maize sales may also be explained by decreasing competition of the US agriculture on the world market. US farmers are no longer low-cost producers and are less and less able to compete especially with Argentina and Brazil. Those two in turn seem not to be affected by EU rules on GMOs. Contrary to US claims, the UE is one of the largest importers of GMOs and derived food and feed. So far more than 30 GMOs or derived food and feed products have been approved for marketing in the EU (5). Food safety regulations in the UE are far stricter than in the US and logically it takes longer to approve a GMO in the EU, than in the US. Apart form differences in national regulations US refused to sign Cartagena Protocol on Biodiversity, which the EU considers to be the key international agreement governing the transboundary movements of GMOs. The protocol has been signed by 130 countries, its aim is to ensure through international rules, that countries exporting and importing have the necessary information to make informed choices about GMOs (5). In line with Cartagena protocol is that sovereign body like the UE and its Member States or any other country in the world, has the right to enact its own regulations on the food its citizens would eat, providing that the measures are compatible with existing international rules and based on scientific evidence. <heading>Force feeding never works - consumer awareness </heading>North American consumers had begun to share European concerns about the risk of genetically modified crops, which was reflected in drop of GMOs consumption in the US (6). NGOs such as Greenpeace and Trans Atlantic Consumer Dialogue (TACD) closely cooperating with Consumers International played a role in that shift in public opinion, having created an international coalition of organizations that oppose the use of GMOs (3). In the US Consumer Union (CU) is the organization, which is seriously involved into the battle against GMOs, highly specialized experts working for CU, provided many international organizations with their expertise. Consumers organizations on both sides of Atlantic apart form favouring global rule-based trading system highly opposed WTO decision. They however mutually agree that the recent WTO decision will not make European consumers accept GMOs any more than they do presently. As force-feeding never works, it is more likely that the WTO decision will have an adverse effect, if consumers feel that GMOs are being forced at them (1). In case of present dispute 'TACD has vigorously protested the United States suit and has repeatedly urged the US and the EU to resolve disputes over consumer, public health and environmental matters outside of the WTO where public interest regulations are regularly ruled against in the name of free trade'(6). <heading>Conclusions</heading>From the information presented above one can see there are various factors influencing drop in US GMOs sales both in Europe as well in the US themselves. Among those factors are increasing world competition on the GMO crop market, especially faced form Argentina and Brazil, but also increasing consumers awareness and pro-environmental attitudes all over the world. Challenging EU authorisation system and the right to sovereignty of the EU member states, which by the way is in accordance with international biodiversity agreement, seem not to be enough in order to rule in favour of the US in case of such delicate issue. Such questions as public health and environmental concerns seemed not to be addressed, maybe long awaited panel report will revel more firm arguments, on which panel decision was based. 