Frozen desserts include ice cream, frozen yoghurts, ice milk, sherbet and ices (Arbuckle, 1972). Of these, ice cream is considered to be the most commercially important in the frozen desserts category (Varnham & Sutherland, 1994). Within the UK, ice cream is defined as a frozen product containing a minimum of 5% fat and 2.5% cent milk protein. This is achieved by subjecting an emulsion of fat, milk solids and sugar or sweeteners, with or without extra ingredients, to heat treatment and then freezing (Regulations, 1996). An emulsion is a system of droplets that are suspended in a continuous immiscible phase and are separated by an interfacial layer which is occupied by a surfactant material which contain proteins (Friberg et al., 2004). <heading>Structure & Composition of Ice Cream</heading>Ice cream is a colloidal system; small particles of one phase are dispersed into a continuous phase. Ice cream is an emulsion (fat), a sol (sugars, polysaccharides / stabilizers, milk proteins and ice crystals) and a foam (air), often with 50% air, referred to as over run. It is a microstructure which consists of fat droplets, ice crystals and air bubbles suspended in a viscous solution which makes up the matrix (Clarke, 2004). <heading>Milk Proteins</heading>Milk contains approximately 3.5% protein, that fall into two categories, caseins and whey proteins, based on their precipitation at pH 4.6 at a temperature >8ºC. 80% of the total nitrogen precipitates as casein and 20% remains in the whey, with 15% of the nitrogen as whey protein and 5% as non-protein compounds (Fox, 1992). Caseins are more heat stable than whey proteins. Caseins are stable at 140ºC but whey proteins denature at >70 ºC (Fox, 1992). The use of milk proteins as food ingredients depends on their physicochemical nature and their functional properties. Their amphiphilic nature causes them to concentrate at interfaces. Sodium caseinate is more effective at reducing interfacial tension than whey protein. It diffuses to an interface more rapidly and absorbs more quickly than other proteins. Generally, caseinates produce higher volume but less stable foams than whey protein concentrates. Protein concentration, the level of denaturation, ionic environment, preheat treatments and the presence of lipids are all factors affecting this. The effectiveness of whey protein as a surfactant is enhanced by partial heat denaturation (Fox, 1992). The main functionality of both whey protein concentrates in ice cream systems are gelation, viscosity, heat stability, acid stability, nutrition, emulsification, aeration and film formation. Individual proteins have intrinsic factors which are their principle functions. The principal whey proteins are β-lactoglobulin, α-lactalbumin, immunoglobulins and bovine serum albumins (BSA). Emulsification is the intrinsic factor for α-lactalbumin and bovine serum albumins (BSA). Useful concentrate ingredients will enhance and develop intrinsic factors making them ideal for food processors (Huffman, 1998). Using whey protein to replace milk proteins results in a decrease in the amount of de-emulsified fat. A softer and wetter product is made resulting in faster melting properties. Whey protein has stronger emulsifying properties than milk protein and so whey protein desorption from the interface by monoglyceride is less effective in comparison to milk protein. The increased emulsion stability by whey proteins may be counteracted by more effective de-emulsification which is achieved by increasing monoglyceride concentration (Whitehurst, 2004). Altering the pH of the whey has a large effect on emulsification as it changes the state of the protein aggregates and the size of the protein. A similar effect can be achieved by heat (Huffman, 1998). <heading>Emulsifiers</heading>During oil-in-water emulsification, new surface area is generated by the break down of fat globules into smaller droplets. New droplets can only be made permanent and stabilized against coalescence by the adsorption of emulsifier molecules at the oil-water interface. This is most efficient if the adsorption occurs rapidly. The type of emulsion depends on the type of emulsifier used (Whitehurst, 2004). Emulsifiers are amphiphilic systems and so contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts. They concentrate and orientate themselves between the fat globules and the aqueous phase reducing the interfacial tension in the immiscible system. Adsorption of emulsifiers is more energetically favourable than complete absorption in either the aqueous phase or fat globule. As the interfacial tension produced by the emulsifier decreases, the fat increasingly becomes destabilised (Marshall & Arbuckle, 1996). <heading>Lecithins:</heading>Egg yolk, which contains phospholipids as the emulsifier was the first emulsifying agent used in ice cream. However it is expensive and may produce off flavours (Hyde & Rothwell, 1973). Most commercial lecithins are now by-products of vegetable oil refining. Egg lecithin is extracted using ethanol and acetone. This combined extraction is expensive but lecithin is widely used for its emulsifying properties. Hydrolysed lecithins show a higher surface activity as hydrolysis of the phospholipids makes them more hydrophilic by losing a fatty acid and because the polar group gains more weight in the molecular structure (Whitehurst, 2004). <heading>Monoglycerides:</heading>The majority of the world's production of emulsifiers is mono- and diglycerides, originally produced as alternatives to lecithins. They are produced by interesterification of triglycerides with glycerol by a reaction at >200ºC under alkaline catalyst. The glyceryl portion is hydrophilic and the fatty portion is hydrophobic. They are insoluble in water but can form stable hydrated dispersions (Stauffer, 2005). Monoglycerides compete with proteins at the fat-water interface and at the air-water interface. Less saturated fatty acid monoglycerides are more active at the interface. The air-water interface is stabilized by denatured milk proteins, partially destabilized fat and agglomerated fat globules. Monoglycerides are mainly responsible for partial destabilization of the fat emulsion. They first decrease the oil-water interfacial tension, more so than milk proteins then promote desorption of milk protein from the interface. The interfacial layer has reduced strength or elasticity (Whitehurst, 2004). The fatty acid composition of monoglycerides reflects the make up of the triglyceride from which it came. Unsaturated monoglycerides consist of a mixture of oleic, linoleic and the trans form of these acids. Hydrogenated monoglycerides have a higher melting point than unsaturated. The phase diagrams for highly unsaturated and saturated monoglycerides are significantly different. Depending on temperature and water concentration, monoglycerides take on different forms in the mesophase. Behaviour in the mesophase governs monoglyceride functionality. When heated to their melting point, they produce a gel (Stauffer, 2005). Emulsifiers exhibit temperature dependent behaviour, which is demonstrated in aqueous solutions. Monoglycerides have similar phase behaviour to triglycerides in their bulk phase and exist as either an alpha structure or a beta structure, the difference being the arrangement of molecules in the crystal structure. When cooled from a molten state an alpha prime metastable crystalline structure is formed. Further cooling results in the formation of a stable beta state, which forms if the alpha prime state is stored at ambient temperatures. In an aqueous phase, the beta crystal interacts with water to form a lamellar liquid crystal which cools to form an alpha gel phase. When cooled from melt monoglycerides, similarly to triglycerides, often form an unstable alpha type crystal, then transform to the beta prime form before settling in the stable beta form (Euston, 1997). For some applications, the alpha form is most advantageous because of easier dispersibility, improved aeration properties and increased emulsification properties (Whitehurst, 2004). Distilled monoglycerides, which have been separated from the di- and triglycerides and glycerol, show better dispersibility in water than mono- and diglycerides due to having a former liquid crystalline mesomorphic phase, whereas monoglycerides (not distilled) form emulsions due to a relatively high content of triglycerides (Whitehurst, 2004). Monoglycerides also have the ability to influence fat crystallization. Glycerol monostearate initiates more fat crystallization than glycerol monooleate but does not displace as much protein. Monoglycerides such as these, act as nucleation points for surface crystallization of triglycerides (Euston, 1997). Other developments such as polyoxyethelene sorbitan monostearate or monooleate are very powerful and so only a small amount is needed, too much of these will cause the fat globules to churn (Hyde & Rothwell, 1973). <heading>Ice Cream Emulsion Stability</heading>The dispersion of fat globules in ice cream mix depends on forces which tend to pull fat globules apart - the homogenizer valve and repulsion between fat globules due to their electrical charges. Freezing can affect the stability of fat globules in ice cream. The globules agglomerate due to agitation and the concentration effect of freezing. The rate of this agglomeration may also be affected by protein stability, melting point of the fat, types of emulsifier, stabilizer and sugars and the salt content (Marshall & Arbuckle, 1996). Dryness is related to emulsion instability. This is due to agglomeration of milk fat globules which slows down the rate of melt down. Agglomeration may therefore be desirable. However, if agglomeration goes too far, it may cause churning. Negative charges of the fat globules, which cause them to repel each other, are lost or overcome by agitation. An ideal mix is one where all the fat is agglomerated but in which none visibly churns out. In this condition, ice cream possesses optimal textural properties, body, dryness and stiffness. Certain emulsifiers tend to destabilize the fat which can accelerate churning. Excessive destabilization results in a slow melt down but the ice cream retains its shape or structure (Marshall & Arbuckle, 1996). The use of whey protein as a replacement for other milk proteins is common but as the amount of whey protein increases, the amount of de-emulsified fat decreases which results in a softer and wetter ice cream. The desorption of whey protein by monoglycerides is less effective in comparison to caseins. The increased emulsion stability exhibited by whey proteins can be counteracted by either increasing the monoglyceride concentration or by applying more effective unsaturated monoglycerides (Whitehurst, 2004). <heading>Proposal for an investigation into the effect of less saturated fatty acid monoglycerides on emulsion stability. </heading>The proposed investigation will take the following form. Obtaining different monoglyceride emulsifiers, predominantly monostearate monooleate, and monolinoleate, based on their level of saturation. Preparation of ice cream mixes and products using each of the different types of emulsifiers. The ice cream will have a low pH. This will be achieved by the addition of fruit based ingredients, which are high in acidity. The ice cream mixes will be made using a standard method. The type of protein in the system will be controlled. Each emulsifier will be tested at a range of protein concentrations. The emulsions will be tested for their stability according to the monoglyceride used and the level of protein in the mix. The following tests will be carried out. Measurement of free fat by solvent extraction. This will provide a measurement of the amount of fat that has been de-emulsified by the emulsifier. Analysis of particle size of the fat globules in the mix using the Malvern Particle Size Analyzer. This will provide information on the different sizes and shapes of the de-emulsified fats in the ice cream samples. Measurement of the meltdown properties of the ice cream samples at immediately after freezing and after storage. This will involve observing changes in the shape, the rate at which the ice cream drips and the weight lost during melting over a period of time. Consistent volume, over run and dimensions of the sample will be important for this test. Measurement of firmness of the ice cream product using a penetrometer. The test will be performed at immediately after freezing and after the ice cream has been stored to test how its firmness changes over time. Assessment of organoleptic properties of the mixes through sensory analysis to evaluate the acceptability of the ice cream textures. This will complement other tests performed in the investigation. 