The Riesling grape is considered to be a 'noble' grape for wine making. The fruit is small, yellow in colour but not very juicy. Riesling is the main grape of the Rhine Valley in Alsace and the Moselle Valley in Germany. It accounts for about 20% of Germany's wine output. Although Riesling is traditional to Alsace and Germany, it is now cultivated in other wine regions including Austria, Switzerland, Northern Italy, Australia and New Zealand and South Africa. Riesling has been permitted to be considered for Grand Crus status. The Riesling grape has a preference for sunny, sheltered areas but however this is compensated by Riesling's adaptability to any soil type as long as it is well drained. Its preferred soil type is light, coarse grained sandy loam. Geologically, Alsace is within the Rhine Valley which is igneous rock based. Most terroirs of Alsace are on granites of the lower slopes of the Vosges#. In the Rhine valley, the west bank faces the east and so is warmed by the morning sun. The west banks receive the suns rays for the maximum period of time. The valley consists of flat alluvial fans which is a rain shadowed area. Water flows from the mountains. The soils here are coarse and sandy and have a high mineral content which yields Riesling well. However different soils within the same terroir can be often found on either side of the Rhine fault and so growers may harvest and vinify Riesling grapes from the different soils to produce wines different in character. In the Moselle Valley, 55% of the grapes grown are Rieslings. It has a similar cool climate to the Alsace region. The soil type of this area varies along its banks. Shell based limestone is the main soil types on the upper banks. The middle banks consist mainly of devon slate, which is ideal for Riesling. Along the lower banks, Wacke slate is the main soil type and milder wines are produced from grapes grown here. These slates dry quickly and warm up rapidly. High acidity of the Riesling grape in this area is compensated by the high amounts of potassium in the soils which eases the taste. Kastelberg on the Stiege schist at Andlau is a significant terroir of Riesling. Schist soils consist of metamorphic mixtures of rock. This is a Grand Crus area for Riesling. The idea that soil type can influence the taste of Riesling has been tested by Leonard Humbrecht. He tasted Rieslings from three different terroirs. The first was Herrenweg, from the sandy loamy soils of the alluvial fan of Fecht near Wintzenheim (Alsace, France). The wine was light and fruity but lacked body. The second Riesling was from the shallow sandy soils of the granite slopes of Brand, west of Turckheim. This wine had balance and a distinctive fruitiness. The third Riesling was Clos St-Urbain from Thann. Riesling grows on old volcanic material and fragments of granite material. This wine was full bodied and musky flavoured. The continental climate of the Alsace region is ideal for Riesling. The area experiences warm, sunny, dry summers and cold, dry winters. The cooler climate means that the Riesling grape takes longer to ripen compared to growth of the grape in warmer areas. In this climate, the grape 'sleeps' late in spring and ripens as cooler weather begins to set in. Autumns are usually dry and so many growers choose to harvest the grape late. These types of wines are labelled Vendages Tardives. Riesling has now also gone global and entered the New World. New cult areas include Australia, New Zealand's south island, Ontario, New York State's Finger Lake Region and South Africa. Australia is the flattest and driest continent in the world. Its vast flat lands count for dryness which is a result of high rate of evaporation from the lands. The continent also uses masses of water which contributes to lack of water. Australia is naturally salty and this is increasing which is having an affect on Riesling. The soil absorbs the sodium which is taken up by the vine. It loses vigour and photosynthetic activity. Rieslings easy adaptability to many types of soil, results in a salty tasting wine. Riesling wines produced have a golden yellow colour with green tinges. Riesling has a distinctive floral or rosy like aroma. The taste of the wine may range from being light and crisp to rich and sweet. The grape has a high tartaric acid content which provides a 'tart' taste. It also contains naringin which is a bitter flavanoid compound, also found in grapefruit. Some of the finest sweet wines of the world may be produced from Rieslings. They acquire their sweet taste as a result of noble rot. The mould Botrytis cinerea dehydrates the grape resulting in an increase in sugar concentration. This type of wine is common in the Rhine and Moselle Valleys. As Riesling ages it may develop a 'petrol' taste although its aroma may be replaced by a pleasing aged 'bouquet'. Rieslings from Alsace and Germany are different in character. In Alsace the wine is held longer in the barrel and grown on calcareous, clayey soils which generally produce a fuller bodied wine. German Rieslings are grown on more severe slate soils. Riesling grapes from the Moselle Valley are floral. Riesling wines have good cellar longetivity and are able to maintain their varietal identity. During maturation in traditional wineries in the Rhine Valley and Moselle Valley, old oak barrels are used as oak flavour in Riesling is unfavourable. A broad spectrum of Riesling wines are available on the market, although it is argued that those from Alsace or the Moselle Valley are the best and some of the world's most expensive fine wines are Rieslings. However, its name has been associated with lower quality varieties Grey Riesling or Italian Riesling. These are genetically unrelated to the original Riesling variety. However, it still remains a popular choice for white wine consumers across the world. 