<heading>Introduction</heading>UHT is Ultra Heat Treatment. It is used for many food products such as milk and fruit juices. The Food Milk and Dairy Hygiene Regulations (1995) state that in order for product undergoing ultra heat treatment, must be held at a temperature of at least 135ºC for 1 second, although many processes hold at 140ºC. Temperature and holding time guidelines are extremely important if the product is to be considered commercially sterile or free from the risk of pathogens. Clostridium botulinum is of particular concern although its presence in milk is quite rare. Another concern is the spores from Bacillus stearothermophilus which are very heat stable. A sufficient holding time and temperature is required to ensure these micro-organisms are not given the chance to become threats to the food or consumer. The product leaving the ultra heat treatment process is collected in a sterile environment with no exposure to the outside atmosphere; otherwise it would defeat the object. Aseptic packaging such as Tetra bricks are often used. The shelf life is usually 6 months. There are two ways in which ultra heat treatment can be categorised. The process is either direct or indirect. The indirect approach involves injecting steam into the product increasing its temperature gradually until it reaches 140ºC. Water is drawn out of the diluted product during the cooling process. The product is held at a high temperature for a shorter time so there is less damage to it. The direct approach involves the use of heat exchangers so there is no direct contact between the pressurised steam and the product. The heat exchangers used in this method may be in the form of shapes or tubular although plates offer a larger surface area for heat exchange to occur. The heating in this method is more uniform but it is diffiecult to inspect. The ultra heat treatment of which the milk undergoes, is much more extreme than High-Temperature-Short Time pasteurisation which is at 72ºC for 15 seconds. As well as pasteurisation and UHT, milk may be sterilised by the method of sterilisation. This is heat treating the product in the container in which it is packaged e.g. the bottle and so is done at higher temperatures. These variations in time and temperature mean that the milk experiences noticeable changes in terms of chemical composition. This causes properties such as sensory characteristics, nutritional value and turbidity to be affected. This will therefore affect the milk quality. There are several tests that can be done to assess and compare the quality of the milk including sensory analysis, turbidity tests, alcohol stability tests and composition analysis. <heading>Experimental</heading>UHT PROCESS - Raw milk was fed through a pump which pumped the milk through a rotameter which ensured the correct amount of milk was flowing for the correct residence time. This then went through a plate heat exchanger which was in two parts. On the opposite side to the milk was hot water at approximately 70ºC. it then passed through a homogeniser which broke down the fat globules so that they would not separate out during processing. The next step was to pass the milk through a second heat exchanger. This time using pressurised steam to heat the milk to 140ºC, or the desired temperature. This quickly passed into the holding tube where it was held at the specified temperature for approximately 1 - 1.5 seconds. The milk then entered a third heat exchanger, which used cold water to remove heat from the milk so that it could leave the system cool. This was operated at temperatures of 140ºC, 130ºC and 80ºC although these vary slightly. Milk samples were collected from each as they left the process so that the following analysis could be completed. ALCOHOL STABILITY TEST: 5ml of UHT milk was mixed for 1 minute with 5ml ethanol in a test tube. It was inspected visually for any flocculation which would indicate that would indicate the milk is not stable in alcohol. TURBIDITY TEST: 4g ammonium sulphate was added to a small conical flask with 20ml of the milk sample and shaken for 1 minute. It was then left to rest for 5 minutes before it was filtered into a test tube. Once enough filtrate had been obtained it was transferred to a beaker of boiling water for 5 minutes and then to a beaker of water until it had cooled. It was then visually inspected for its level of turbidity. COMPOSITION ANALYSIS: The Infra red milk analyser was used to establish the percentages of fat, protein, lactose and SNF SENSORY ANALYSIS: The milk samples were tested for differences in tase, appearance, texture and aroma without comparing the views of other group members. The three experimental samples were analysed in these tests as well commercial UHT milk and sterilised milk. The raw milk was analysed for composition so that changes could be observed. <heading>Results</heading>See attached spreadsheet for processing results e.g. steam consumption, Reynolds number, and heat transfer coefficient. <table/><table/><table/><table/><heading>Calculations </heading>From attached spreadsheet. The first sample has been used to show the calculations.  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Questions from Exercise</heading>Calculating F 0 values  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Discussion & Conclusions</heading>The various heat treatments caused a variety of changes and affects on the milk product. The objective of subjecting raw milk to ultra heat treatment has been met. It can be assumed that sufficient heating and sterilisation was achieved. This is suggested by the high holding temperature of 142.7ºC for 1.63s. The minimum requirement was met. As the holding temperature was increased, the need for more heat increased which is shown by the value of Q. a higher degree of heat transfer was needed to ensure the milk reached a temperature of 142.7ºC. this is also suggested by the higher steam pressure. More energy per second was needed to make this higher temperature possible. This means that more steam was needed per second also. Therefore in order to bring the milk down to an almost chilled outlet temperature similar to the other processes, more energy per second had to be removed. The heat was more readily available to leave the milk system once it had been heated due to the higher amount of energy within it. The cooling requirement for the milk which was subjected to 130ºC had a similar cooling requirement although it was slightly smaller. The pasteurised milk (80ºC) required the least amount of energy removal per second as it had not absorbed as much energy in the heating and holding processing. Therefore it required less steam to heat it. The F 0 values also increase as the holding temperatures increase. In the case of this experiment, the holding times are all very similar due to the milk flow rate remaining unchanged throughout; therefore the F 0 value here is dependent on temperature. During the alcohol stability test, it was found that the milk that was subjected to a holding temperature of 142.7ºC was stable at ethanol concentrations of 70% and 80%. However at a concentration of 100%, the milk was showing evidence of instability as it had precipitated around the edge of the test tube. This is the result that is desirable; there should be no flocculation at 80%. This means that at 80%, the proteins were able to withstand denaturation and so could be considered stable enough to endure high temperature processing. It is also possible that calcium phosphate may have also precipitated. This part of the experiment could have been extended by using other concentrations of alcohol to specifically determine the level at which the milk is unstable. UHT milk should also give a positive turbidity reading. This means that the proteins should have denatured. However sterilised milk would show even less turbidity. The experimental results showed that the order of turbidity from highest to lowest was sterilised milk, Asda UHT, 142.7ºC processing, 129.3ºC processing and pasteurisation (80.2ºC). Turbidity should decrease as the temperature increases. The degree of turbidity is due to the denaturation of whey proteins. Increasing the temperature increases the denaturation of whey proteins; these precipitate but react with the ammonium sulphate to cause transparency or low turbidity which was observed in the experiment. At pasteurisation temperatures, there is less denaturation due to the lower temperature and so the milk shows a lot of cloudiness or high turbidity. The proteins are denatured because of a slight increase in size and modification of the casein micelle structure. The composition of the milk varies depending on the degree of heat treatment that it has received. By comparing the milk that was held at 142.7ºC and the milk that was held at 80.2ºC it can be seen that there is evidence of nutritional loss. The milk at 142.7ºC has a lower proportion of protein, fat, lactose and non-fat solids than the milk processed at 80.2ºC suggesting there has been some damage. If the experimental UHT milk is compared to the raw milk, it can be seen that there has been a definite decrease in nutritional quality so it can be concluded that heat processing has caused this. If it is compared to the commercial UHT milk from Asda, it can be seen that the nutritional levels are very similar which indicates that the nutrients may have received the same degree of damage. However this will depend on the original milk processed, as milk composition is very variable e.g. seasonal variations. The loss in nutrients will be due to chemical changes that have taken place. During the sensory analysis several distinguishable organoleptic properties could be identified. The sensory characteristics will be affected also due to changes in chemical composition, just like nutritional value. As the holding temperature increased, the taste of the milk became more apparent in comparison to normal pasteurised milk. The tastes varied from the expected 'milky' taste of pasteurised milk to stronger ones such as sweetness. The smell also became more apparent and in the case of sterilised milk was also sweeter. Taste and aroma are related characteristics. The change in flavour may be described as 'cooked'. This is due to the production of hydrogen sulphide and methyl sulphide although this is not always the case. UHT milk may also more bitter than regular pasteurised milk especially if it has undergone long term storage. This may be due to the oxidation of fats, enzymes or light interactions. Heat stable lipases and proteases may alter the flavour over time The experimental UHT milk was noted as being whiter than the raw milk although in the experiment, the milk processed at 80.2ºC was deemed the whitest. This bright colour given off by the UHT milk is due to the decrease in the size of the fat globules and increase in the size of the casein micelle. The light scattering properties are altered. If the milk is stored for long periods of time, it may develop a brown colour due to the Maillard reaction. The texture or mouth-feel was very similar for all the milks tested although the milks processed at 142.7ºC and 129.3ºC had the creamiest texture. The ultra heat treatment of milk does not alter the viscosity of the product very much, but any changes are due to the separation of fat and also a sediment forming which contains fat, lactose and minerals. This may have caused the 'creamy' feel to the UHT milks. However, this is quite difficult to assess and describe especially as the testing panel in th experiment was not skilled at doing this. UHT processing is very widely used particularly in Europe where UHT milk consumption is high. It produces a higher quality product due to minimal heating and cooling times, it is also cheaper to package and can have a shelf life as long as 6 months. However, there are drawbacks. The complexity of the equipment needs skilled operators, it is also quite difficult to do with particulate materials as there is a risk of setting and after a prolonged period, it will deteriorate e.g. flavour or Maillard browning. HoH 