<heading>Background to research (previous issues, questions, theoretical and methodological approaches; previous research and achievements, limitations and opportunities for future research; justification of the project</heading>The study of Greek vases has been one of the main preoccupations of classical archaeology. The Oxford scholar J.D. Beazley (1885-1970), following Morellian principles, has ordered and dated a huge volume of Attic pottery by identifying individual vase painters' styles. Against this art historical legacy the work of the Ures stands out for considering the archaeological contexts of pottery and for paying attention to ceramics that were second rate artefacts (Ure and Ure, 1954). The Haimon Painter is representative of the latest Attic black-figured pottery (ca. 500 to 450 BC) at a time when the red-figure style was well established. Haimon's notoriously 'careless' and repetitive style (Haspels, 1936) has led to claims of cheap mass production for ritual or mortuary use by the poor in Athens or for commodity trade and export (Boardman, 1974: 146ff). It is precisely this 'non-aesthetic' quality of Haimon's work that provides an opportunity to leave aside an art historical approach and investigate how the find locations of the Haimon pottery can be informative of the 'social' value of this painter's products. Although Haimon painted on a variety of shapes (Beazley, 1956: 538-571), this research focuses on the 'chimney' lekythoi. This is because these vessels, which are thought to be small oil flasks, approximate one category of evidence. On the one hand, much of the literature associates these lekythoi with sepulchral contexts and with Mediterranean trade stretching from Spain to the Black Sea. On the other hand, the Haimon lekythoi have been linked to household use at the Athenian Agora (Sheer, 1993) and to production aimed for the 'home' market of mainland Greece (Sheer, 1993). It, therefore, becomes interesting to explore the find locations of the Haimon lekythoi and attempt to address their contexts of use, circulation and deposition. <heading> Aims and objectives of the dissertation</heading>The overarching aim of this dissertation is to complement current knowledge, which is mostly of an art-historical nature, with an appreciation of the archaeological contexts (and by inference of the social value) of the Haimon lekythoi. The specific objectives of the proposed research are: <list>1) To review and critique approaches to the study of Greek vases using the output of one painter as a case study.2) To explore the overall geographic distribution of the Haimon 'chimney' lekythoi and discuss issues of circulation and trade.3) To discuss the archaeological find locations of the Haimon 'chimney' lekythoi (graves, households(?), wells, votive deposits etc.).</list><heading>Feasibility and data availability</heading>A search on the online Beazley archive ( URL ) has yielded a list of 1143 Haimon lekythoi kept in various collections all over the world. An estimated one quarter of these 1143 vases have their provenance recorded and this body of data will form the starting point for addressing distribution, circulation and trade. In assessing the archaeological contexts of the Haimon lekythoi, it is considered pertinent to discuss in detail and, if possible compare, a small number (2 to 5) of find locations for which sufficient excavation data is available (e.g., Agora, Kerameikos and metro excavations in Athens and the Ritsona excavation in Boetia). A hands-on examination of some 20 to 30 Haimon lekythoi, which are accompanied with thorough descriptions in associated bibliography, could further highlight issues of how the vases have been studied so far, and how they were used and valued in antiquity. As it became apparent from close inspection of a few Haimon lekythoi at the Ure Museum at Reading, the vases show considerable wear marks which appear to be pre-depositional (i.e., the lekythoi were used extensively prior to inclusion in grave/ritual contexts). This aspect could be investigated further. Following two study permit applications to the relevant Greek authorities (ephorias), written permission has been granted to study (i.e., observe closely, sketch and photograph) 16 Haimon lekythoi kept in the National Archaeological Museum in Athens and a more general permission has been given to look at the material in the storerooms of the Agora excavations (subject to arrangements with the curators). Further to additional applications, it may also become possible to handle Haimon lekythoi from the recent metro excavations and from the Museums of Kerameikos and Thebes. It must be noted that the Greek authorities only allow the study of published material and there are considerable bureaucratic processes involved in gaining access to archaeological finds. (It helps that I can communicate in Greek and have already established a small network of relevant contacts). <heading>Methodology</heading>This dissertation will comprise the analysis of primary and secondary data. Specifically, the following methodological steps will be adhered to (not necessarily in this order): The information on Haimon lekythoi from the online Beazley archive will be tabulated into an Excel database. From this database a comprehensive list of find locations will be extracted and presented in table, map and graph format. The quality of this provenance data will be assessed. Other correlations from this database will be investigated as appropriate (e.g., the number of Haimon lekythoi per single find spot and whether the lekythoi were deposited in bulk). Fields could be added to this database particularly about the find locations studied in detail and the vases examined closely. Library research using the resources at the universities of Reading and Cambridge as well as those at "The British School at Athens", "The American School of Classical Studies at Athens" and the Athens Department of the "Deutsches Archäogisches Institut". Discussion with subject experts (academics and museum staff). A qualitative hands-on examination of 20 to 30 Haimon lekythoi kept in collections in Athens. <heading>Expected outcomes and new knowledge</heading>It is hoped that this dissertation will contribute to the emerging critiques on the 'traditional' treatments of Greek vases by juxtaposing an archaeological with an art-historical method of study. Consequently, the potential for a contextual approach will be explored and the limits of its applicability evaluated based on the nature of the available excavation evidence. Some new insights into a 'minor' painter of pottery in classical Athens will be offered. Why did Haimon paint in this 'mass production' manner? What 'market niche' was he targeting? What was the social value of the Haimon lekythoi? It may also become clear whether these lekythoi were used, traded and valued as artefacts of this specific painter or as mere oil flasks, although this dissertation, for reasons of space, can only partially include comparisons with other painters and with other ceramics found together with Haimon lekythoi. <heading>Outline what you expect the dissertation to deliver in terms of your personal and professional development</heading><list>A familiarisation with classical archaeology which I lack having only studied prehistoric archaeology before.Learning about Greek vases (typologies, issues and approaches) which could prove useful if I were to work in an excavation or museum setting.Establish contacts with academics and practicing archaeologists.Possibility for further research on the Haimon Painter.</list><heading>Please list academic and technical staff who you have consulted, and any outside organisations involved</heading>In addition to the two supervisors ( and ): <list>. Assistant Curator at the Ure Museum at Reading., Antiquities Keeper, The Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge., Director of the 9 th Ephorate of Prehistoric and Classical Antiquities and Curator of the Museum of Thebes, Greece., Archaeologist working in Greece., Department of Foreign Programmes, Ministry of Culture, Athens, Greece.National Archaeological Museum in Athens. Study permit received from Museum Director.Agora Museum in Athens (1st Ephorate of Prehistoric and Classical Antiquities).1st Ephorate of Prehistoric and Classical Antiquities to obtain an archaeologist's pass which allows me free access to museums in Greece.3rd Ephorate of Prehistoric and Classical Antiquities - study permits for Kerameikos Museum and metro excavation material.</list><heading>Proposed timetable for research</heading>The following project schedule has been adhered to and is planned for the coming months: <list>Nov. 2005: Two meetings with Dr Eckardt and Dr Smith. Definition of area of study.10 Dec. 2005- 10 Jan. 2006: Background work in Athens. Applications for study permit, establishment of contacts, general judgement of feasibility.15 Jan. - 15 Feb. 2006: Reading on classical archaeology and Greek vases, searches on the online Beazley archive, familiarisation with Haimon lekythoi at the Ure Museum, identification of dissertation question. Obtained study permit for two collections in Athens.16 Feb. - 20 March 2006: Review of main literature on Haimon Painter. Tabulation of excel database. Preparation of templates (i.e., sheets with existing information and bibliography) on vases to be studied at Athens.22 March - 05 June 2006: 'Fieldwork' in Athens: Hands-on examination of vases, visits to relevant museum collections, discussion with 'experts', research at foreign school libraries. Writing two data-collection chapters and submitting to supervisors by early June 2006. Holiday in second week of June. (Flight to the UK: 15 June).16 June - 30 June 2006: Supervisions on first two chapters. Writing of theory chapter.1-31 July 2006: Quantitative and qualitative analysis of Excel database, illustrations, submission of further chapters by end of July. Further supervision(s) during July.August 2006: Revisions of all chapters and conclusions. Finish by end of August.1-20 September 2006: Contingency time.</list><heading>Other comments</heading>The Haimon Painter has not been a historical figure. It has been a construct for a similar group of pots. The name denotes a Theban connection and for that reason some reference will be made to material from the Museum of Thebes. Often the literature uses the terms: "Haemonian", "in the manner of the Haimon Painter" and "The Haimon Group". In discussing the Haimon Painter, it may deem necessary to extend the dissertation focus and include these terms. 