<heading>Introduction</heading>Dealing with pure cultures, i.e. cultures derived from the growth of a single organism and therefore consisting one strain of organism only, is almost unavoidable in microbiological studies. It is essential to eliminate potential contamination of the cultures and to use aseptic technique to carry out inoculation and laboratory procedures. (Harrigan and McCance, 1976). Thus this experiment aims to introduce the principles of aseptic techniques and utilize aseptic techniques to inoculate pure cultures in three different media: nutrient agar slope, liquid nutrient broth and nutrient agar plate. Aseptic techniques are methods of handling materials used to reduce the chance of microbial contamination and protect the laboratory worker from contamination with microorganisms present in the sample. It is especially important if the microorganism is used for food preparation. The presence of a large number of contaminants may incur a potential health hazard. (Bell et al., 2005). A pure culture will be contaminated with other unwanted micro-organisms it aseptic techniques are not followed strictly. Contaminations lead to unreliable results which are of little value to the study. Aseptic inoculations can be achieved by following steps: The workbench has to be cleaned with disinfectant before and after each work session. Inoculating loops should be sterilised by passing through the flame before introducing them into the specimen container and right after use. Loops should not contain fluid or large particles that may splatter when placed in the flame. Caps and lids of the containers containing the specimen should be opened for the minimum period of time required. Caps and lids should not be left on the workbench and the lids should be hold with the interior side facing downwards. The mouths of the bottles should pass through the flame before and after use. Work close to the Bunsen flame. Work as quick as possible. <heading>Methods</heading>Pure culture of S. plmuthica was given in a small bottle Labeled the three containers with different nutrient media (agar slope, liquid nutrient broth and agar plate) used to inoculate the pure culture A wire loop was sterilised under Bunsen flame and used to pick out some bacterial growth from the culture in the bottle The bacterial growth was spread onto a nutrient agar slope within a small bottle The wire loop was sterilized again and used to transfer some bacterial growth from the culture into a small bottle of liquid nutrient broth Some bacterial growth from the culture was picked up again after the wire loop was sterilized The bacterial growth was streaked over an agar plate surface The cultures were incubated at 25 oC for 1 week The results were examined and recorded after a week <heading>Results</heading>(i) Table showing the appearance of cultures after a week of incubation <table/>(ii) The culture on the agar plate was pure as all the streak lines were identical. They all had very similar red colour. (iii)There was no growth or colonies in other areas of the agar plate besides the streak lines, so there was no aerial contamination. (iv) There were no well separated colonies present in the nutrient agar plate and so the streaking has to be repeated. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The red layer on the nutrient agar slope showed that there was bacterial growth. The nutrient broth turned turbid meant there was bacterial growth as well. There were red and identical streak lines on the nutrient agar plate. This showed that there was bacterial growth and a pure culture was obtained. However, there was no isolated colony present as the bacterial growth was not separated far away enough or the growth was too concentrated and there were still a large number of cells. There were a lot of bacterial growths in the three inoculating media. These showed that inoculating of pure cultures could be successfully achieved under aseptic conditions and by using aseptic techniques. If the streak lines were not identical or there was growth present not on the streak lines, the agar plate was contaminated and resulted in an impure culture. For microbiological investigations, it is essential to learn the skills of inoculating cultures onto culture media and subculturing from one medium to another. There may be errors in performing the experiment. The caps of the bottles containing the media may be closed too tightly. Thus air cannot go into the bottles and the cultures could not grow properly without sufficient air. There may not have isolated colonies obtained on the nutrient agar plat. This is due to removing too much bacterial growth from the original colony, not using a sterile loop for each streak stage or streaking a wet plate. In the repeated plate, the loop should be flame sterilised in each successive step as many cells remained on the loop. To prevent aerial contamination during streaking, the plate is held at an angle sufficient to perform the streaking process or the plate is left on the bench with the lid tilted wide enough for performing streaking. These provide some barriers to minimise aerial contamination. Aseptic technique is a procedure to guarantee sterility and to reduce contamination. This usually involves disinfection of working areas, minimisation of microbial access from the air to the exposed media and use of flame to kill bacteria which may enter bottles when they are opened. Aseptic technique is very important and needed to be applied when handling microorganisms. <heading>Questions</heading>It is necessary to dry the surface of agar plates before they are streaked because water contained many micro-organisms which will contaminate the plate. Then we cannot inoculate a pure culture. The moisture present will interfere with the production of discrete colonies. Also, water on the agar plate may dilute the culture and so we cannot get an accurate concentration or number. The agar plates of bacterial cultures are incubated inverted as to prevent the condensed moisture on the lid from dropping onto the bacterial growth. Moisture dropping down onto the agar will cause fluid to run across the agar medium and cause contamination. This is also used to reduce bacterial contamination as the bacteria need to go upside down to approach the agar, even they get into the plate through the gap in between the lip and the base. Also, this provides a path for gaseous exchange as the bacteria need air to grow well. The lines are streaked 2 times from the pool of bacterial growth (1) and 2 times not entering the pool (2). The steps are repeated 2-3 times as shown below. <figure/>By using this streaking method, individual microbial cells can be separated by spreading them over the surface of the agar. Thus they will have a chance to grow into individual colonies. This is to dilute the bacterial growth so that the numbers of cells are successively reduced. Isolated bacterial colonies on the surface of agar media typically circular in plan view because bacterial have different plan of division to grow. The cells will layer up to obtain more oxygen on the surface. A mould colony growing suspended in the middle of a bottle of a liquid medium should be in sphere shape as the filaments of the mould will grow in all direction. 