<heading>Introduction</heading>Flour and glycine contain proteins, and all proteins contain nitrogen. Thus by determining the nitrogen content, we can calculate the protein content in these samples. Actually there are two types of nitrogen present, protein nitrogen and non-protein nitrogen. Kjeldahl method is used to determine organic nitrogen compounds. From the experiment, sample is first digested by heating with concentrated sulfuric acid, catalyst and potassium sulfate (which raises the boiling point). In the presence of excess acid, nitrogenous matter is decomposed to carbon dioxide, water and ammonium sulfate (NH 4)2SO 4. Then the sample is distillated under reflex by adding an excess of concentrated (50%) sodium hydroxide (NaOH). Wear gloves when handling concentrated NaOH as it is corrosive. However, before we start the distillation process, we need to add anti-bumping granules to ensure even heating inside the distillation flask. Vaseline is used to grease the apparatus to avoid jamming. Water is also added to the stoppered funnel to avoid leakage. Make sure the delivery tube is dipped into boric acid so as to create a close system. Ammonium (NH 4) is converted to ammonia (NH 3), which has low boiling point, under alkaline condition and is collected under boric acid. NH 3 reacts with boric acid to form borate which can then titrate with standard sulfuric acid. Amount of acid used can be used to calculate the nitrogen and protein content. <heading>Method</heading>Alterations: sodium hydroxide was added after we lighted the Bunsen flame gloves were worn when handling concentrated NaOH water was added after we stoppered the funnel to ensure leak free <heading>Observations</heading>boric acid solution turned from colourless to blue when NH 3 formed the distillates from flour and glycine both turned form blue to colourless when the end point was reached <heading>Results</heading><table/> FORMULA  <table/> FORMULA  <heading>Calculation </heading>See attachments for calculation of % protein in flour and % N in glycine % N in glycine calculated using the molecular formula (CH 2NH 2COOH)  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Discussion</heading>Amino acids occur naturally in food proteins, but other amino acids may be found as a result of processing. The %N found experimentally is slightly higher than the one calculated from the molecular formula. But normally the yield of nitrogen obtained is a fraction less than that present in the protein. It is because complete digestion is hard to achieve. Some discrepancy between the calculated values and the actual values obtained is due to the physical differences in digestion. The temperature at which decomposition takes place will vary, depending upon the type of nitrogen linkage, i.e. whether amine, amide, nitro, heterocyclic and whether the compound is aliphatic or aromatic. The position of the nitrogen-containing group also possesses effect in the decomposition temperature. Thus the digestion temperature may not be high enough to decompose the sample. Some ammonium ions may be converted to volatile nitric acid. The rate of distillation is dependent upon the temperature. However, the greater portion of the ammonia will distill over during the first 5 or 10 minutes even with low heat. During the distillation process, the heat of reaction of sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide is great enough to cause loss of volatile ammonia. Distillation should be carried out under regulated conditions, for examples, to a specific volume or for a specified length of time. Observation errors of the colour change at the end points may increase or decrease the amount of sulfuric acid used. It is better for us to use a reference solution for comparison of the end point. Protein content is important for determining bread quality. There is a positive correlation between loaf specific volume and the percentage protein present. The prevalence of wheat flour for making aerated bread is due to the properties of its protein. Wheat with reasonably high protein content is called strong wheat. An elastic, cohesive and three-dimensional structured substance called gluten forms once the flour is mixed with water. Flour from strong wheat usually requires more water then flour from weak wheat (with lower protein content) and in turn flour with high water absorption capacity is preferred for breadmaking. So good breadmaking flour is characterized as having protein which is adequate in quantity and which yields gluten which is satisfactory in respect of elasticity, strength and stability when hydrated. Bread dough is a plastic mass that can be moulded and shaped. Gluten is important in creating an extensible framework, soluble protein in the dough may also contribute to gas retention. 