<heading>Introduction</heading>Single cells of microorganisms are too small to be seen with naked eyes. However, with the aid of microscope, some microorganisms can be observed easily. This experiment aims to introduce the use of microscope and learn how to prepare a 'wet mount' of culture for microscopic examination. Also to recognise the difference between bacteria, yeasts and moulds under microscope. Microorganisms are living organisms with a very small free-living structure. In ascending order of size, the major groups of microorganisms include the viruses, the bacteria, the fungi (yeast and the spores of moulds), and at last the protozoa and algae. The protozoa, algae, moulds and yeasts can be seen easily with a relatively low power of magnification (100-400×) under light microscope. Bacteria are smaller than fungi and can only be seen with the aid of a higher power light microscope (1000×). Viruses are even smaller which can only be seen under electron microscope with higher magnification (10,000 × or higher). (Bell et al., 2005) Special morphological details are required to characterise a bacterium, these are usually determined by means of light microscopy. Fungi are much larger than bacterial cells and can be distinguished microscopically from bacteria by their size. Yeast and moulds can be distinguished by their shape and reproductive structure. (Gerhardt et al., 1994) The 'wet mount' can be used to observe bacterial spores or to determine cell motility or as a confirmation method for the presence of yeast and moulds in colony counts. It is used in this experiment in order to observe any movements of bacteria. Bacteria, yeasts and moulds are mostly capable of growth in food. It is important to understand the nature of and identify different microbial species as well as the basic details of microbial structure and function. Some bacteria may cause food poisoning while some fungi may cause food spoilage and diseases to human (e.g. athlete's foot). Some are beneficial, e.g. yeasts are used in the brewing process and to make bread dough rise, production of antibiotic penicillin from a fungus and the use of fungi to manufacture cheese. (Gould and Keeton, 1996) <heading>Methods</heading><heading>Examination of Bacillus cereus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae:</heading>A grease pencil was used to make a mark on the centre of a slide A sterilise loop was used to pick up some Bacillus cereus in a bottle The loop of culture was being put over the grease pencil mark on the slide and covered by a coverslip The slide was observed under a light microscope with magnification of 100× and then 1000× Slide of Saccharomyces cerevisiae was prepared in the same way as Bacillus cereus but it was observed under magnification of 100× and then 400 × Drawings of the microorganisms were made <heading>Examination of Rhizopus stolonifera and Panicillium variabile:</heading>A drop of mounting fluid was put on a slide An adhesive tape was used to pick up some growth of Rhizopus stolonifera The area of tape with mould growth was positioned in the mounting fluid and the tape ends being sticked to the slide The slide was observed under a light microscope with magnification of 100 × Slide of Panicillium variabile was prepared in the same way but it was observed under magnification of 400× as well Drawings of the microorganisms were made <heading>Results</heading><heading>Drawings of different microorganisms when observed under microscope</heading><heading>Bacillus cereus (bacterium)</heading><figure/><heading>Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast)</heading><figure/><heading>Rhizopus stolonifera (bread mould)</heading><figure/><heading>Panicillium variabile </heading><figure/><heading>Conclusions</heading>Different magnifications were used to observe different microorganisms. Bacillus cereus (bacterium), could only be seen under magnification of 1000× whereas Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast), Rhizopus stolonifera (bread mould) and Panicillium variabile could be seen under magnification of 400× and 100×. This showed that bacteria are smaller than fungi. The nucleus of S. cerevisiae was clearly shown under microscope but not in B. cereus. This showed that yeasts are more complicated than bacteria. Bacteria are prokaryotes which possess simple chromosomes and no nuclear membrane. They are single-celled organisms and have simple structure. Fungi are eukaryotes which possess a true nucleus enclosed in a nuclear membrane that contains their genetic material within complex chromosomes. They are either unicellular such as yeasts or multicellular such as moulds. The drawings showed that S. cerevisiae cells were round in shape, B. cereus cells were filamentous which had a lot of hyphae and Panicillium variabile cells were hand-shaped. Yeasts usually do not form filaments. Also, B. cereus and Panicillium variabile have different reproductive structures. Those are some of the distinguish features of different fungi when observed under microscope. The reproductive structures are different between yeasts and moulds. As yeasts grow, their cells extend sections, called buds, which enlarge and eventually become detached and lead to a separate existence. Moulds bear hyphae which collectively known as mycelium. Spores are formed and bound in sporangia. Spores will be dispersed by wind and animals when sporangia split open and geminate on a suitable surface. Each spore can grow into a fungal plant. There were some points that we had to pay attention when performed the experiment. The diaphragm should be closed when we are focusing the objects and then opened when we examine the slide as to get maximum contrast. Also, the bottle with apple juice and yeast cells should be shaked as the big yeast cells were suspended at the bottom. The cover slip should be put above the specimen slowly to prevent air bubbles. The light microscope is available to and needed by all who study microorganisms. Under microscope, bacteria and fungi can be distinguished easily by their size and by the presence of internal cell structure such as nucleus. Moulds can be identified by their structural features, mainly asexual spore-bearing structures. <heading>Questions</heading>Why should you always examine a slide under low power before switching to the high power oil immersion objective? We should always examine a slide under low power before switching to the high power oil immersion see because we need to check whether the specimen is rewarding and to select an area for study or to detect motility first. Then use oil immersion objective for more definitive observation. How many cells of Bacillus cereus could theoretically be placed side by side in a straight line across the diameter of a coin (2.3 cm)? Make use of your own estimate of the size of the cell. From the drawing, the diameter of Bacillus cereus cell is about 3mm. As the magnification used was 1000×, the real diameter is estimated as 3/1000 = 0.003mm, which is 3µm. So the number of Bacillus cereus cell could theoretically be placed side by side in a straight line across the diameter of a coin (23000µm) = 23000/9 = 2555 cells. How many protein molecules of diameter 3 nm (the size of haemoglobin) could theoretically be placed side by side in a straight line across the width of a B. cereus cell? From the drawing, the diameter of Bacillus cereus cell is about 3mm. As the magnification used was 1000×, the real diameter is estimated as 3/1000 = 0.003mm, which is 3µm. So the number of protein molecules of diameter 3nm (0.003µm) could theoretically be placed side by side in a straight line across the width of a Bacillus cereus cell  FORMULA  How is asexual reproduction in S. cerevisiae similar to and different from that in B. cereus? S. cerevisiae reproduces asexually by budding. In the budding process, a new cell forms as a small outgrowth of the old cell. The bud gradually enlarges and then separates to form a new cell. B. cereus reproduces asexually by binary fission where cell elongates sufficiently to form two equal and independent daughter cells with characteristics like those of the parent cell. The two cell division methods are similar as two identical cells with the same genetic information are produced at the end. The difference is S. cerevisiae cells will only have one plain of division whereas  B. cereus will have different plains of division. Thus growth of bacteria is faster than yeasts. On the other hand, B. cereus sometimes formed endospores inside cells and wait for suitable condition to grow, but S. cerevisiae will not form endospores. What are the essential differences between asexual reproduction in Rhizopus stolonifera and Penicillium sp.? Both Rhizopus stolonifera and Penicillium sp. produce spores asexually. For Rhizopus stolonifera, sporangiophores grow upright from the surface and the tip swells to form sporangia. Each sporangium contains many spores. Bur for Penicillium sp., a conidiophore terminates in three to four branched phialides and each phialide tips off with conidia. The spore-bearing structures rise above feeding mycelium. The conidia bud off in chain from the top and external to hyphae. The conidia are not contained in one coating. 