To study the relationship between the marginal propensity to consume and the investment multiplier, we have to invest the flow of income and expensive first. To see the economy as a whole, income equals expenditure and also equals the value of output, we study the circular flow of income and expenditure. Firms sell and households buy consumer goods and services in the market. The aggregate payment that households make for those goods and services is consumption expenditure. On the other hand, households sell and firms buy the services of labour, capital and land in the factor markets. Firms pay income to households---wages for labour services, interest for the use of capital and rent for the use of land. We do not plan to spend all that we earn. A proportion is usually saved (a leakage). For example, assume that out of every pound we earn, we save 10p and spend 90p. Thus consumption (C) is equal to 0.9 times amount of disposable income (Y d), which is income earned minus taxes, i.e. C=0.9Y d. 0.9 referred to as the marginal propensity to consume (MPC). It is the fraction of each extra pound of disposable income that household wish to consume.1-0.9=0.1 referred to as the marginal propensity to save (MPS). Sometimes firms make investment by purchasing new plant, equipment and buildings. These are things added to stock (injection) and bought with money that will be earned in the future. Firms finance their investment by borrowing from households in financial markets. Households place their saving and firms do their borrowing in the financial markets. <figure/>When investment changes, firms will use this money to buy additional inputs from households. Households spend some of this extra money. Firms in receipt of this money buy more inputs from household. The cycle continues but diminishes with each turn. The rate at which it diminishes depends on the proportion of income that is saved at each turn. Aggregate expenditure (AE) is equal to consumption expenditure (C) plus investment (I) plus government purchases (G).  FORMULA  A change in disposable income leads to changes in consumption expenditure and saving. Increase in income will increase the consumption expenditure. Other factors like real interest rate, purchasing power of net assets (assets minus debts) and expected future income also affect. When the real interest rate falls or when the purchasing power of net assets or expected future income increases, consumption expenditure increases and saving decreases and vice versa. Investment can also change for many reasons. A fall in real interest rate might induce firms to increase their planned investment. Actual aggregate expenditure is always equal to real GDP but aggregate planned expenditure is not necessarily equal to actual aggregate expenditure and therefore is not necessarily equal to real GDP. AE changes when C or I or G changes. Equilibrium expenditure is the level of aggregate expenditure that occurs when aggregate planned expenditure equals real GDP. <figure/>Suppose that investment increases, the additional expenditure by businesses means that aggregate expenditure and real GDP increases. Disposable income also increases. With no income taxes, real GDP and disposable income increase by the same amount. The increase in disposable income brings an increase in consumption expenditure and the increased consumption expenditure adds even more to the aggregate expenditure. Real GDP and disposable income increase further and so does consumption expenditure. The initial increase in investment brings an even bigger increase in aggregate expenditure because it induces an increase in consumption expenditure. The magnitude of the increase in aggregate expenditure that results from an increase in autonomous expenditure is determined by the multiplier. Investment multiplier (k I) is the change in equilibrium AE that occurs when I changes by 1 unit. Assume government expenditure stayed constant,  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <figure/>Example 1) b = 0.8, For every extra pound of disposable income, consumers spend 80p  FORMULA  that means a £1 increase in investment gives a £5 increase in equilibrium AE Example 2) b = 0.6 For every extra pound of disposable income, consumers spend 60p  FORMULA  that means a £1 increase in investment gives a £2.5 increase in equilibrium AE From the examples, we can see that the larger the marginal propensity to consume, the larger is the multiplier. The change in C, I or G leads to an amplified change in equilibrium expenditure (equilibrium expenditure increases by more than the increase in C, I or G). This amplified change is the multiplier effect. When C, I or G increases, aggregate expenditure exceeds real GDP and so stock has to decreased. Firms then respond by increasing production so as to restore their stick to the target level. As production increases, so do real GDP. 