<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Anthocyanins are pigments present in a large number of plant tissues including flowers, and fruits which give them their red, violet, and blue colour (Macheix et al., 1990). They are widely distributed flavonoid found most abundant in fruits such as black currants (Slimestad & Solheim, 2002), grapes (Burns et al., 2002) and berries (Nyman & Kumpulainen, 2001). Although they are present in certain vegetables like aubergines, cabbage, red onions and red beans (Wu & Prior, 2005), little work has been done to investigate the anthocyanins in those foods. Also, it will be quite interesting if there are more researches on fruit juice and mixed fruits. Anthocyanins are considered of crucial nutritional importance in the prevention of chronic diseases, such as cancer, cardiovascular disease and degradative diseases due to their antioxidant properties (Wu & Prior, 2005). <figure/>More than 600 naturally occurring anthocyanins and six major anthocyanidins have been reported (Williams & Grayer, 2004). Anthocyanin contents which mainly found in the skin are generally proportional to color intensity and increase as the fruit ripens (Burns et al., 2002). They are consumed by humans as part of a normal diet. Dietary intake has been estimated at up to 200 mg/day (Kuhnau, 1976). <heading>STRUCTURES OF ANTHOCYANINS</heading><heading>Physical Structure</heading>Anthocyanins are water-soluble polyphenolic compounds (ie, several hydroxyl groups on aromatic rings) which belong to the flavonoid family. They are glycosides and acylglycosides of anthocyanidins (aglycons) (Macheix et al., 1990). Anthocyanidins (Figure 2.1.1) are characterized by having the flavylium (2-phenylbenzopyrylium) cation structure with different hydroxyl and methoxyl substitutions on the B-ring (Kahkonen & Heinonen, 2003; Wu & Prior, 2005). The six common anthocyanidins are pelargonidin, cyaniding, delphinidin, peonidin, petunidin and malvidin. <figure/>In plants, anthocyanidins occur as glycosylated forms, anthocyanins. The most common sugar moieties are glucose, rhamnose, xylose, galactose, arabinose, and fructose. Both mono- and diglycosides are common. The sugar moiety can be located on carbons 3, 5, 7, 3, and 5, the 3- and 5-positions being dominant. With different sugar types attached, the structural diversity greatly increases. Thus, the structural diversity of anthocyanins present in the diet is considerable. It will be useful to study thoroughly the actions of the glycosylated compounds as they are the native forms occurring in plants as well as in plant extracts and other products manufactured without hydrolysis. These sugars can also be acylated by acetic acid which make the anthocyanins more stable (Kahkonen & Heinonen, 2003). Anthocyanidins vary in the pattern of hydroxylation and methoxylation, and this variation greatly influences the spectra of individual anthocyanidins (Zhang et al., 2004). <heading>Chemical Structure</heading>Anthocyanins exist in different chemical forms according to pH (Figure 2.2.1). They are present as red flavylium cation at low pH (pH 1-3). In aqueous media and as the pH is raised to 4-5, hydration reactions generate the colorless carbinol pseudo-base which can further undergo ring opening to the light yellow chalcones. The flavylium cation can alternatively be transformed to quinonoidal bases through proton transfer reactions and at pH 6-7 be further converted to the blue-purple quinonoid anions (Kahkonen & Heinonen, 2003; Nielsen et al., 2003). <figure/>Anthocyanins are highly unstable in the aglycone form (anthocyanidins), unstable to light and are rapidly destroyed by alkali. More than 90% of each anthocyanin remained intact up to pH 3.3. At pH 3.8 a local minimum in stability was detected, and at pH >4.5 the stability rapidly decreased. Thus anthocyanins exhibit the highest stability as the red flavylium cation. Degradation is prevented by glycosylation, generally with a glucose at position 3, and esterification with various organic acids (citric and malic acids) and phenolic acids. In addition, anthocyanins are stabilized by the formation of complexes with other flavonoids (copigmentation) (Nielsen et al., 2003). <heading>HEALTH EFFECTS OF ANTHOCYANINS</heading>Dietary antioxidants have attracted considerable interest due to their free radicals scavenging property (Prior et al., 1998). The physiological function of dietary antioxidants is suggested to protect living organisms from oxidative damage, resulting in the prevention of diseases (Wang et al,. 1999). Diets rich in fruits and vegetables are associated with a reduced risk for these pathologies, and protection has often been attributed to antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin C, vitamin E, and β-carotene. However, other dietary components may also be important protective agents (Prior, 2003). In some fruits, anthocyanins make a major contribution to the total antioxidant capacity. Among all common fruits and vegetables in the diet, berries, especially blueberries, have the highest antioxidant capacities (Prior et al., 1998). During the past two decades, a growing number of studies have investigated the diverse health benefits and protective effects of anthocyanins present in various fruits and vegetables. However, those studies just looked at the benefits of each kind of food. As different food have different contents of anthocyanins with different structures and thus offer different protective mechanisms to different levels. It will be very interesting and useful to investigate the health benefits of diet with mixed food. Anthocyanins are found to involve in a wide range of biological activities including antioxidant (Prior et al., 1998; Chaovanalikit et al., 2004), anti-inflammatory (Wang et al., 1999), anti-carcinogenic activities (Lazzeal. 2004), cardioprotective (Marniemi et al., 2000) and neuroprotective actions. The health effects of anthocyanins depend on the amount consumed and on their bioavailability (Ichiyanagi et al., 2004). <heading>Free redicals and antioxidants</heading>Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as hydroxyl (OH·) and peroxyl radicals (ROO·) and the superoxide anion (O2·) are constantly produced as a result of metabolic reactions in living organisms. Living organisms are protected from oxidative damage by these reactive species by enzymes and antioxidant compounds. However, when free radical production exceeds the antioxidant capacity of the organism, it will lead to oxidative stress and these free radicals will attack lipids, proteins and DNA. Thus damaging structural integrity and function of cell membranes, enzymes, and genetic material. Various pathological conditions, including cardiovascular disease, arthritis, various cancers and Alzheimer's disease, are associated with the damaging effects of uncontrolled free-radical production (Wang et al., 1999; Chu et al., 2002; Sellappan et al., 2002). Many foods contain nonnutritive components such as anthocyanins and other phenolic compounds which provide protection against chronic diseases through multiple effects are as yet poorly understood. These compounds may act as antioxidants by reacting with free radicals and so interrupting the propagation of new free radical species or by chelating metal ions such as Fe2+, which catalyses lipid oxidation to alter their redox potentials. (Wang et al., 1999) <heading>Anthocyanins as antioxidants</heading>The beneficial effects of anthocyanins are believed to be associated with their antioxidant properties (Chaovanalikit et al., 2004). Anthocyanins can act as free radical scavengers, but other mechanisms, including metal chelation or protein binding are important in biological systems. The phenolic structure of anthocyanins (Figure 3.1.1) conveys marked antioxidant activity in model systems via donation of electrons or transfer of hydrogen atoms from hydroxyl moieties to free radicals and result in very stable radical products (Prior, 2003). <figure/>The difference in antioxidant capacity could be ascribed to individual molecular structure. It is suspected that the substitution pattern on the B-ring is the key factor in the antioxidative behavior of anthocyanins. Increase in hydroxyl groups (OH) will increase the antioxidant activity. That is why monophenols in the B ring, such as petunidin, malvidin, and peonidin, give lower antioxidant activity compared to those compounds with 3', 4'-OH substitution like cyanidin (Talavera et al., 2004). Therefore, the specific anthocyanidin content of foods and beverages is valuable information in the assessment of their nutritional value. Although many papers have been published on the radical scavenging activities of anthocyanins, they mainly focused on the aglycon forms. The antioxidant activity of both the aglycon and glycosidic should also be considered as they both appear in natural anthocyanins. Glycosylation of a flavonoid reduces radical scavenger activity compared with the aglycon, as it reduces the ability of the flavonoid radical to delocalize electrons. Cyanidin, has higher efficacy than its glycosides, suggesting that the antioxidant activity of anthocyanins is due to their aglycon moiety (Wang et al., 1999). The literatures on evaluation of antioxidant potency of anthocyanins are difficult to interpret because different testing systems and different methods are used to determine oxidation. Also, there is a lack of information on the mechanisms by which anthocyanins exert their antioxidant activity on biological systems. <heading>Anthocyanins absorption/metabolism</heading>Anthocyanins can be absorbed intact as glycosides in rats and humans after taking an anthocyanin-containing diet (6-12 mg berry extracts for rats and 300 mL berry extracts for humans) and excreted in the urine without modification or metabolism. Relatively small proportions are absorbed (McGhie et al., 2003). Maximum plasma levels of total anthocyanins were in the range of 1 - 120 nmol/L, with doses of 0.7 - 10.9 mg/kg in human studies. The clearance of anthocyanins from the circulation is sufficiently rapid that by 6h, very little is generally detected in the plasma (Cao et al., 2001). Several of these anthocyanins are relatively large and polar, particularly those conjugated with a di- or trisaccharide, and are unlikely to be passively absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Bioavailability of anthocyanins is modulated by both the nature of the sugar conjugate and the phenolic aglycon. It has been recently hypothesized that this apparent low bioavailability of anthocyanins in vivo may be due to their biotransformation into metabolites that are not detectable with current techniques or are rapidly degraded (McGhie et al., 2003). Future research is needed to investigate anthocyanin distribution to various tissues and evaluating the potent antioxidative activity of their metabolites. <heading>Anthocyanins as in vitro antioxidants</heading>Antioxidant capacity can be assessed by 3 different methods: oxygen radical absorbing capacity (ORAC) assay, trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity assay (TEAC) and ferric reducing ability of plasma (FRAP) assay. ORAC values are usually expressed as µmol Trolox equivalents (TE) per g of fresh-frozen fruit. Trolox is a water-soluble tocopherol analogue used as a reference compound for antioxidant capacity. FRAP values are expressed as µmol of ferric iron reduced per g of fresh-frozen fruit (Moyer et al., 2002). The total antioxidant capacity of different berries studied ranged from a low of 13.9 to 45.9 ímol Trolox equivalents (TE)/g of fresh berry. A berries study conducted by Prioral. (1998) showed a significant linear relationship between ORAC and the total anthocyanin (Figure 3.4.1). The correlation coefficient between ORAC and anthocyanins is 0.77. This meant antioxidant capacity is highly related to anthocyanins content. <figure/>Bilberry and the lowbush blueberries had the highest antioxidant capacity (44.6 ± 2.3 and 45.9 ± 2.2, respectively) as well as anthocyanin content (299.6 ± 12.9 mg/100g and 179.6 ± 3.4 mg/100g respectively) (Prior et al., 1998). The correlation between TEAC and total anthocyanins contents of different blueberry and blackberry samples were studies by Sellappanal. (2002). The average values of TEAC showed positive correlation with average values of total anthocyanins. A linear relationship was observed between TEAC and total anthocyanins. The correlation coefficient, r2 = 0.60 for total anthocyanins, indicated that the antioxidant capacity is related to total anthocyanins. In vitro assay conditions, anthocyanins clearly can function as antioxidants. However, in vitro measurement of antioxidant capacity may or may not reflect what happens in vivo because of the instabilities of anthocyanins in the neutral pH range, it is not clear whether anthocyanins remain intact in tissues long enough to act as antioxidants. Very little is known about the absorption and metabolism of anthocyanins and whether they are absorbed in sufficient quantities and in a form in which effects on in vivo measures of oxidative cellular damage. <heading>Anthocyanins as in vivo antioxidant</heading><heading>Animal study</heading>In rats fed a vitamin E - deficient diet for 12 wk and then repleted with a diet containing a highly purified anthocyanin rich extract (1 g/kg diet, this level in the diet provide 20 - 40 mg/d), a significant improvement (p < 0.01) in plasma antioxidant capacity and a decrease (p < 0.001) in the vitamin E deficiency-enhanced hydroperoxides concentrations in liver were observed. The anthocyanin extract consisted of a mixture of the 3-glucoside forms of delphinidin, cyanidin, petunidin, peonidin, and malvidin (Ramirez-Tortosa et al., 2001). <heading>Human clinical study</heading>A small but significant increase in plasma hydrophilic and lipophilic antioxidant capacity following the consumption of a single meal of 189 g blueberries was observed by Wu & Prior (2002). However, Mazzaal. (2002) demonstrated a more consistent increase in plasma antioxidant capacity after the consumption of a 100g freeze dried blueberry powder that containing 1.2g of total anthocyanins and 25 individual anthocyanins. Nineteen of the 25 anthocyanins present in the blueberries were detected in human blood serum. Furthermore, the appearance of total anthocyanins in the serum was directly correlated with an increase in serum antioxidant capacity (ORACacetone, p < 0.01). These results show that anthocyanins can be absorbed in their intact glycosylated and possibly acylated forms in human subjects and that consumption of blueberries, a food source with high in vitro antioxidant properties, is associated with a diet-induced increase in ex vivo serum antioxidant status. This instability of anthocyanins in tissue culture and in the body often tends to be overlooked as one does not know whether the effects observed are due to the anthocyanins or due to some breakdown product. Measurement of in vivo antioxidant effects of a single flavonoid compound appears to be difficult. Relatively high dietary levels of anthocyanins appear to be necessary to observe antioxidant effects in vivo. Also, further investigations are required to more fully understand the in vivo bioactivity of anthocyanins. <heading>Health benefits</heading><heading>Anti-cancer</heading>Lazzeal. (2004) analysed the effect of two aglycone anthocyanins, delphinidin and cyanidin, on cell cycle progression, induction of apoptosis in human cancer cells (uterine carcinoma and colon adenocarcinoma cells) and in normal human fibroblasts. Cells treated for 24 h with delphinidin or cyanidin with 100, 150 and 200 mM and resulted in apoptosis of 25.4 ± 4.7, 35.5 ± 5.2 and 40.6 ± 3.3% of cells. The results showed that in the concentration range of 100-200 mM, cyanidin has an antiproliferative effect only in normal fibroblasts while delphinidin affects the proliferation capacity of normal cells and has a pro-apoptotic effect in tumour cell lines. The maximum concentration of 200 mMDP adopted in the study corresponded to 6.8 mg/100 ml. Liual. (2002) demonstrated the antiproliferative activity of raspberry extracts to HepG2 human liver cancer cells. HepG2 cells were cultured with an extract equivalent to 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, or 50 mg/mL of raspberry fruit and HepG2 cell proliferation was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner after exposure to the raspberry extracts. From those studies, it is tempting to speculate that anthocyanins are promising substances for reducing cancer risk because of their antiproliferative potential and their apoptotic effects specifically in cancer cells. Obviously, additional pre-clinical studies using appropriate in vivo animal models as well as carefully designed pharmacokinetics studies are needed before clinical testing of anthocyanins as cancer preventive or therapeutic agents. <heading>Cardioprotection </heading>Lietti (1976) demonstrated significant vasoprotective properties in experimental animals given an extract from bilberry that contained 25% anthocyanins. In rabbits, the increase in skin capillary permeability reduced after oral administration (200 - 400 mg/kg) of anthocyanins. Anthocyanins from Vaccinium were effective both in a skin capillary permeability test and in a vascular resistance test in rats fed a diet devoid of rutin (quercetin rutinoside). Human low-density lipoproteins (LDL) is an early event in coronary disease. Marniemial. (2000) conducted a study to evaluate the long-term (8 week) effects of increased intake of 3 berries on antioxidant potential and lipid peroxidation. The berry treatment group members ate 100g portion of deep-frozen berries (bilberries, lingonberries, or black currants) in addition to their normal diet daily for 8 week while the control group without. Subjects in the berry group had a slightly lowered LDL diene conjugation and slightly increased serum total radical-trapping antioxidant parameter (TRAP). In in vitro study, LDL particles were isolated from healthy volunteers' blood and incubated with various concentrations of the anthocyanins (2.5, 5, 10, 20 uM) and the extent of oxidation was determined by measuring the formation of hexanal and conjugated dienes. The antioxidant activity of the anthocyanins tested generally increased with concentration. Inhibition of conjugated diene and hexanal followed the same trend (Satue-Gracia et al., 1997). Heinonenal. (1998) also proved that antioxidant activity for LDL was associated directly with anthocyanins. <heading>Neuroprotective </heading>Nitric oxide (NO ·) is known as one of the key chemical mediators participating in many physiological reactions in living organisms, such as signal transduction. NO· readily reacts with the superoxide anion to form a strong oxidant, peroxynitrite (ONOO-), which is highly reactive to biological molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. Since NO · radicals are generated constitutively in the brain under physiological conditions, ONOO- is implicated as a causative factor of cerebral disorders such as strokes and Alzheimer's disease (Ichiyanagi et al., 2004). Ichiyanagial. (2004) found that the anthocyanins from extract of bilberries could react with NO · and ONOO- thus scavenging those radicals. The study also revealed that the reactivities of anthocyanins towards NO· were markedly enhanced under aerobic conditions. This indicates that anthocyanins readily react with extended oxidation products of NO ·. More relevant to brain aging, research has shown that the CNS may show an enhanced vulnerability to oxidative stress, since it is deficient in free radical protection and uses 20% of the total body oxygen and this vulnerability may increase further in aging (Joseph et al., 1999). There are a number of neuronal and behavioural changes that take place as a function of aging, even in the absence of neurodegenerative diseases. These changes may include decrements in calcium homeostasis and in the sensitivity of several receptor systems. These decrements can be expressed as alterations in both motor and cognitive behaviours (Joseph et al., 1998). Although the major factors involved in these age-related declines remain to be specified, a great deal of research in recent years has suggested that one of the most important may be reduction of oxidative stress by antioxidants. This appears to be particularly evident in Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) (Joseph et al., 1998). Recently, the world is going towards aging population. Therefore, it is important to determine whether dietary supplementations are effective in aged organisms. Josephal. (1999) conducted a study to examine whether dietary supplementations would be effective in reversing age-related deficits in neuronal and behavioral function in aged rats. 1 group of 19-month-old Fischer 344 rats were given a control diet and 3 groups were given dietary supplements (strawberry, spinach, or blueberry at 14.8, 9.1, or 18.6 gm of dried aqueous extract per kilogram of diet, respectively) of fruit and vegetable extracts with high antioxidant activity for 8 weeks. Figure 3.6.1 presented the result from striatal slices obtained from the animals in the various diet groups, especially blueberry group, showed significantly greater oxotremorine-enhanced striatal dopamine release (OX-K+-ERDA) than that seen in those obtained from animals maintained on the control diet. <figure/>The study also showed the results of psychomotor testing (Figure 3.6.2) on rod walking (which measured psychomotor coordination and the integrity of the vestibular system) and accelerating rotarod tasks (which measures fine motor coordination, balance, and resistance to fatigue). The latency to fall on rod walking (Figure 3.6.2 A) and accelerating rotarod (Figure 3.6.2 B) was significantly longer in the blueberry group. Therefore, supplementation with the blueberry extract improved motor performance on two motor tests that rely on balance and coordination. <figure/>For cognitive testing in the study, positive effects of diet supplementation were observed in Morris water maze performance (Figure 3.6.3). Only the diet groups showed significant improvements between trial 1 and trial 2 for latency (Figure 3.6.3 A) and distance (Figure 3.6.3 B) to the platform. These showed the effects of improved working memory (trial 2) performance via diet supplementation. <figure/>All data from Joseph et al, 1999 indicated that the fruit and vegetable extracts, particularly blueberry, were effective in reversing age-related deficits in neuronal signaling, e.g., signal transduction such as oxotremorine-enhanced striatal dopamine release (OX-K+-ERDA), as well as cognitive function, e.g. Morris water maze performance. Also, polyphenolic compounds present in antioxidant-rich foods may be beneficial in forestalling functional age-related deficits. In 19-month-old rats fed with a control or 2% blueberry 8-10 weeks, several anthocyanins were found in the cerebellum, cortex, hippocampus or striatum of the blueberry supplementation rats, but not the controls. This finding suggests that polyphenolic compounds are able to cross the blood brain barrier and localize in various brain regions important for learning and memory and may deliver their antioxidant and signaling modifying capabilities centrally (Andres-Lacueva et al, 2005). The effects of the food matrix on the bioavailability of anthocyanins have not been examined in much detail. There may be some important differences exist between animals and humans and so clinical studies will be of great help in investigating the health effect of anthocyanins. Much more research can be carried out on structure-activity relationships of anthocyanins. <heading>ANALYSING METHODS OF ANTHOCYANINS</heading><heading>History of analyzing methods</heading>Anthocyanins were previously characterized by paper chromatography (PC). With the improvement of analytical technology, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with UV-visible (UV-vis) detection has been the standard method for the analysis of anthocyanins (Zhang et al., 2004). Recently, HPLC coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) has become an efficient tool for providing useful structural information regarding molecular weight and fragmentation (Wang et al., 2003). However, the most widespread technique for separation and qualification of anthocyanins is HPLC with UV detection at wavelengths around 520 nm as anthocyanins have a very specific absorption of UV and visible light in the red area (Nyman et al., 2001; Nielsen et al., 2003). Actually, either UV-vis or mass spectra alone is not sufficient enough. Both information should be used to distinguish anthocyanins with similar structures. <heading>Extration methods</heading>The method of extraction influenced the composition of fruit extracts. The highest anthocyanin was found in extracts obtained using a solvent of acidified aqueous methanol (Kahkonen et al., 2001). In many berries studies, frozen samples are freeze-dried and ground into powder. The samples are extracted with solvent (85% methanol/15 % water/ 0.5% acetic acid). After vortex and centrifuge, run the supernatant into the HPLC (Nielsen et al., 2003). <heading>Identification of anthocyanins</heading>Each of the berry fruit extracts contain a different composition of anthocyanins that produce a distinctive HPLC chromatogram based on the retention times of the individual anthocyanins and the relative amounts (Ichiyanagi et al., 2004). Anthocyanin identifications are made by using retention time data and UV-vis spectra and comparing them with standard compounds (Zhang et al., 2004). However, it is very difficult to obtain a complete profile as petunidin standard is not always available. Even though a large amount of published data is available, different investigators have used different experimental conditions, which can make comparison of anthocyanins in different foods more difficult. Due to the attached sugars and acids, the number of anthocyanins is 15-20 times greater than the number of aglycon forms. This results in a large number of peaks on the chromatogram and difficulties in identifying individual anthocyanins (Nyman et al., 2001). Acid hydrolysis greatly simplifies the anthocyanin profile by converting anthocyanins to six major anthocyanidins (Zhang et al., 2004). Most studies focus on the qualitative anthocyanin characterization of fruits and berries. Only a few reported the quantitation of aglycons, especially those in plant-based material is still lacking. More research can be done to quantify aglycons in fruits as to give a clear view of both the variety and amount of anthocyanins present. <heading>AIMS AND OBJECTIVES</heading><list><heading>Aims of this work are:</heading>To find out the best extraction method for anthocyanins.To identify the best food source for anthocyanins in the diet.To design a diet for humans as to obtain the most diverse and amount of anthocyanins.</list>Aims will be addressed by the following objectives: <list>By using different proportion of solvent/water and HPLC coupled with UV-visible detection and compare peaks obtained. Thus determine the best way for anthocyanins extraction.Perform an enzyme treatment for different types of foods. Then identify and compare the varieties of aglycons present to find out the best food source.Base on the aglycons content found in foods, to design a diet that can obtained more varieties of anthocyanins as to obtain optimal health benefits from whole food.</list>