<heading>Introduction</heading>Gas plays an important role in numerous foods and beverages. Aeration is a common process which helps formulators add gas to foods or beverages. Some well-known foods are produced by incorporating air into liquid and producing a foam. In such system, air is the dispersed phase and the liquid is the continuous phase. The foam is stabilized by surface-active agents which collect at the interface. Examples of foams are cake mixes, whipped creams and ice-cream. The inclusion of air will reduce the density of the product. (Lewis, 1996) Air, a complex mixture of gases, is not soluble in water. Air is free, making it a highly desirable ingredient to add to food formulas. However, the challenge is keeping air dispersed in a food system. Foams consist of tiny pockets of gas (air or carbon dioxide) surrounded by a thin film of water that has various substances dissolved in it. These dissolved substances are the key to foam. (Dickinson & Patino, 1999) Many refrigerated dairy foods can be aerated. The most common is cream, which can be whipped to make desserts or dessert toppings. Unlike egg whites (where a minute amount of fat reduces foaming), whipping creams (which start at about 20% fat can go as high as 40%) are readily foam when properly beaten. (Rothwell, 1989) When cream is whipped, it is transformed from a liquid into foam. Foam forms as a result of rapid diffusion of protein to the air-water interface, which reduces the surface tension, necessary for foam formation. Air bubbles incorporated into cream during whipping are stabilised by a thin layer of denatured milk protein and surrounded by clusters of fat globules. A certain amount of liquid fat is released from the fat globules during whipping, which helps them clump together around the air bubbles. In this way, a three-phase foam is produced comprising air, fat and water. (Rothwell, 1989) <heading>Method</heading>Refer to laboratory manual. <heading>Results</heading>The cream changed from liquid to semi-solid after whipped. When continuing whipping the warm whipping cream, the cream destablised in 49s. There was serum at the bottom of the mixing bowl with yellow lumps in it. Then 10g salt was added and a fine dispersion of aqueous phase appeared in 98s. Butter was the final product. <figure/><figure/><heading>Discussion</heading>Overrun is a measure of the increase in volume on whipping. The higher the % overrun, the more the air incorporated into the cream. From the result, we found that the % overrun decrease when milk and sugar were added. The % further decreased when alginate was added. But the whipping time decreased as more ingredients were being added. Compared to whipping cream, warm whipping cream showed a lower % overrun and lower whipping time. It is because temperature controls the amount of solid fat that is present at the time of whipping and this affects whipping properties. Temperature below 8°C favors the whipping of cream and so the equipments (bowls and beaters) should be cooled before whipping any cream. This is due to the presence of milk fat, which changes its state over a narrow range of temperatures. If the fat globules lining the bubble walls are too soft during whipping, the weight of the foam deforms them and the structure weakens. If a small amount of fat escapes as liquid from the globule, it will disrupt the ordered system, preventing foam from forming. Cream must not be frozen prior to whipping, as freezing causes water to form ice, and this segregation of phases makes it difficult to redisperse the fat globules evenly during whipping. When continuing whipping the warm whipping cream, the cream destablised and butter formed. When cream is whipped to an optimum point, a dry stable foam structure is formed. Further whipping brings about the collapse of the foam structure and the cream separates into yellow butter granules and liquid buttermilk eventually. This phenomenon is called 'breaking' of the emulsion and is brought by the fat globules within the clusters around the air bubbles moving against each other. This wears away the fat globule membranes and more liquid fat is released. Consequently the globules stick together permanently in large clumps and the air bubbles in the foam collapse to release the liquid phase. The optimum fat content for whipping is 38-42%. If the fat content is too low, there will not be enough fat to enclose the air bubbles and form the foam. Conversely, if the fat content is too high, the fat globules come into contact too easily, move against each other and form butter granules before the air can be incorporated to form the foam. In fact, it is difficult to whip cream containing less than 35% butterfat and it is almost impossible to whip cream below 30% butterfat. In general, homogenised cream will not whip. This is because the fat globules have been reduced in size and are stabilised by a membrane containing protein. This reduces the chances of fat globules forming and holding air bubbles in the cream. When milk is beaten, an extremely delicate foam forms. However, this foam collapses almost immediately after it is formed. Cream foams survive because of the concentration of fat globules, which has a noticeable effect on the viscosity of the liquid. That is why cream (38% fat) is thicker than milk (3.6% fat) and has a slower flow. From the results of both graphs, we can see that the % serum drainage increased with elapsed time from completion of whipping although being stored under different temperatures. But the % drainage of all types of whipping cream were higher at 25 oC than at 10 oC. This showed that temperature affects the cream stability. A suitable will lead to a correct balance of liquid and crystallised fat is formed which ensures the formation of a firm cream foam. In fact, in the case of cream, the large concentration of fat actually assists with stabilizing the foam. Cream's fat globules cluster more readily at low temperatures. The fat globules will cluster together in the bubble walls, where surface forces rupture some of their membranes. The exposed spheres of soft fat then stick to each other and form a rigid but delicate network that the milk proteins alone cannot provide. With lower fat content in milk, the fat globules are too few and far away to have such effect, but in cream, the number of fat globules present is adequate to support foam development. Lower temperature also makes the fluid more viscous and slower to drain from the foam. From the graphs, we found out the order of decreasing % serum drainage was: 35%cream+sugar>35%cream>35%cream+sugar+alginate>whipping cream warm whipping cream The addition of a small amount of sugar (up to 2%) may be introduced prior to whipping and is not harmful to the whipping quality of cream. However, large amouns of sugar can reduce the stiffness and stability of the cream by preventing the denaturation of the stabilising protein around the air bubbles. Thus sugar should not be added until the cream has been whipped. Large fat globules produce stiffer foams than small fat globules, which is why cream intended for whipping is never homogenized. Large fat globules will cluster together more easily to give more structured support to the air bubbles introduced during whipping. Whipping cream is often stabilised with carrageenan and emulsifiers to improve foaming properties by making the cream more viscous and helping stabilize bubble walls. The stabaliser we used in the practical was alginate. During aeration, high turbulence of the beater unites the gas with the aqueous phase and the dissolved stabilizers. the stabilized mixture resists collapsing. Emulsifiers reduce surface tension, while the stabilizers increase viscosity. The mixing head mechanically crushes large gas bubbles into very small ones, and the gel network formed by the emulsifiers and stabilizers provides homogeneous gas-bubble distribution at low whipping temperature. There are several factors affect the whipping of cream: <list>• The Fat Content of Cream• Homogenisation of Cream• Temperature of the Cream• The Size of the Fat Globules• The Addition of Sugar</list>In recent years, it also has become common to aerate fermented dairy foods, such as yogurt. Cream is typically aerated right before consumption; whipped yogurt, on the other hand, is aerated during manufacturing and requires stabilization to prevent the foam from collapsing during distribution and merchandising, especially at varying altitudes. 