<heading>Introduction</heading>Protein is the most abundant nitrogen-containing compound in the diet and in the body. Proteins work hard in cells and organs. The building blocks of protein are amino acids which are joined together according to a sequence directed by the base sequence of the DNA. They serve as the currency of protein nutrition and metabolism. There are numerous proteins in our bodies responsible for giving us particular characteristics and uniqueness. Proteins work hard in cells and organs and fulfill many functions in our bodies. (Michael et al., 2002) The most common quantity measured in a protein assay is absorbance of light. By preparing samples with known amounts of protein and comparing their absorbances with that of the unknown, the unknown quantity can be estimated. There has been an increase in the number of colorimetric assay techniques for the determination of protein concentration over the past 20 years. Estimation of protein concentration is necessary in protein purification, electrophoresis, immuno-analysis, cell biology, molecular biology, and other research applications. There is a wide variety of protein assays available including Coomassie Blue G-250 dye binding (the Bradford assay), the Lowry assay, and the Formol Titration assay. It is shown that each assay has advantages and disadvantages relative to sensitivity, ease of performance, acceptance in the literature, accuracy and reproducibility, so it is necessary to obtain more than one type of protein assays for research applications. <heading>Methods</heading>Refer to laboratory manual <heading>Results and Calculations</heading><heading>Lowry method </heading><table/><figure/>By using the equation y = 0.5057x + 0.0065,  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Formol Titration method</heading><table/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Bradford method</heading><table/><figure/>By using the equation y = 1.6851x + 0.2879,  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Discussion</heading>From the results, we found that the unknown sample contained the least amount of protein. The protein content of cow's milk was higher than that of soya milk in Formal Titration assay but lower in Lowry and Bradford assays. The protein contents found from Lowry assay were different from that of the Bradford assay although same samples were used. That's why we need triplicate and carry out various protein assays to obtain a fair result. Actually, cow's milk should contain higher protein content than soya milk because many proteins were lost or denatured during process and treatment of soya milk. In Lowry assay, folin-phenol reagent binds to the protein and bound reagent is slowly reduced and changes color from yellow to blue. The reactions result in a strong blue color, which depends partly on the tyrosine and tryptophan content. The method is sensitive down to about 0.01 mg of protein/ml and is best used on solutions with concentrations in the range 0.01-1.0 mg/ml of protein. Advantages: The incubation period is not critical and can vary from 10 min to several hours without affecting the final absorbance. Modifications to this basic assay can increase the sensitivity of the reaction. If the Folin reagent is added in two portions, vortexing between each addition, a 20% increase in sensitivity is achieved. Constraints of Lowry method: The reaction is very pH-dependent, and it is therefore important to maintain the pH between 10 and 10.5. The Vortex step is critical for obtaining reproducible results. The Folin reagent is only reactive for a short time under these alkaline conditions, being unstable in alkali, and great care should therefore be taken to ensure thorough mixing. The assay is not linear at higher concentrations. A range of substances interfere with this assay, including buffers, drugs, nucleic acids, and sugars. In many cases, the effects of these agents can be minimized by diluting them out. Using BSA (or any other protein for that matter) as a standard only gives an approximate measure of the protein concentration. Bradford Assay is a rapid and accurate method and uses about the same amount of protein as the Lowry assay. It is commonly used to determine the total protein concentration of a sample. This method is sensitive to about 20 to 200mg of protein/ml. The assay is based on the observation that the absorbance maximum for an acidic solution of Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 shifts from 465 nm to 595 nm when binding to protein occurs. Both hydrophobic and ionic interactions stabilize the anionic form of the dye, causing a visible color change. The more protein presents, the more Coomassie binds. The colour intensity is proportional to the protein concentration. Advantages: It is not susceptible to interference by a wide variety of chemicals present in samples. Fairly accurate and samples that are out of range can be retested within minutes. Constraint: Can lead to variation in the response of the assay to different proteins. Formol Titration assay is simple and fast. It uses less reagents and is suitable for laboratory use. For all methods used, it is advisable to choose a protein standard that is likely to give absorbance values close to those for the protein samples of interest. The relative proportions in the diet of food proteins of animal and plant origin differ according to geographical region and other socioeconomic and cultural factors. Michael et al., 2002 stated that animal protein foods account for 60-70% of the total protein intake in the developed regions. In contrast, plant proteins make up about 60-80% of the total protein intake in developing regions, with cereal being the dominant source. The protein requirement of an individual is defined as the lowest level of dietary protein intake that will balance the losses from the body in persons maintaining energy balance at modest levels of physical activity. In children and pregnant or lactating women, protein requirement is taken to also include the needs associated with the deposited of tissues or the secretion of milk at rates consistent with good health. (Michael et al., 2002) The recommended RNI is 55.5g/day for male adults and 45g/day for female adults. It is important to meet the recommended values to maintain a good health. 