<heading>Introduction</heading>Water, of adequate quantity and quality, is essential for healthy life. The associations between sanitation, water and health are well known. Many diseases are associated with contaminated water and water shortages. Many water-borne pathogens such as Escherichia coli are present in large numbers in human or animal excreta. They can infections if ingested in small numbers. Without adequate water, people can neither wash themselves properly and food cannot be prepared hygienically. These restrictions on cleanliness result in various infectious and diarrhoeal diseases. The microbiological safety of potable water depends upon the exclusion of pathogenic microorganisms that cause infections via the gastro-intestinal tract. In the nineteenth century, cholera and typhoid fever were recognised that could be spread by the ingestion of water contaminated with excrement. After that, the design and operation of treatment processes and piped distribution must always ensure that potable water cannot transmit such infections (Public Health Statistic, 1994) Bacteriological examination is particularly important because it remains the most sensitive method of detecting faecal pollution and therefore providing a hygienic assessment of water quality. It is important to examine a drinking water source frequently by a simple test rather than infrequently by a more complicated test or series of tests. The routine bacteriological examination of drinking water includes the determination of the number of coliform bacteria and E. coli present. Two methods have been developed for the detection of indicator bacteria in water: multiple tube method and membrane filtration. Coliform bacteria and E. coli are intestinal bacteria which always present in the faeces and so the presence of such faecal indicator bacteria denotes the water supply is potentially dangerous to health. Coliforms are Gram negative, nonspore forming anaerobic rods. They ferment lactose with the production of acid and gas at 37 oC within 48 hours. E. coli, also known as fecal coliforms, is a coliform bacterium which is capable of fermenting lactose with the production of acid and gas at 44 oC within 48 hours. Both bacteria occur in the intestines of human and animals. (Hoadley and Dutka, 1977) <heading>Methods</heading><heading>Count of coliform bacteria by multiple tube dilution method </heading>Labeled all the 15 dilution tubes 10 ml unchlorinated water sample was inoculated into each of the five 10 ml double strength Lauryl tryptose lactose broth. 1 ml unchlorinated water sample was inoculated into each of the five 5 ml single strength. 0.1 ml unchlorinated water sample was inoculated into each of the five 5 ml single strength. All tubes were incubated at 37 oC for 24 h. Examined for tubidity and gas production. MPN of coliform bacteria / 100 ml sample was determined. <heading>Count of coliform bacteria by membrane filtration</heading>A filter paper was saturated with MF-Endo broth in a Petri dish (nutrient pad). Poured away the excess broth. 100 ml water sample was filtered through a membrane under vacuum. The membrane was transferred to the nutrient pad. Labeled the lid of Petri dish and incubated at 37 oC for 24 h. Counted pink to dark red colonies having golden-green metallic sheen. <heading>Count of E. coli bacteria by membrane filtration</heading>A filter paper was saturated with Membrane lauryl sulphate medium in a Petri dish (nutrient pad). Poured away the excess medium. 100 ml water sample was filtered through a membrane under vacuum. The membrane was transferred to the nutrient pad. Labeled the lid of Petri dish and incubated at 30 oC for 4 h then 44.5 oC for 14 h. Counted bright yellow colonies. <heading>General viable count of bacteria</heading>Prepared water sample of dilution 10 -1 (1 ml original sample + 9 ml diluent). Prepared water sample of dilution 10 -2 (1 ml 10 -1 + 9 ml diluent). 1 ml of original sample and of each dilution was pipetted into duplicates Petri dishes. Poured plates with yeast extract agar. One set was incubated at 37 oC for 24 h and the other set at 22 oC for 3 d. Counted colonies. <heading>Results</heading><heading>Multiple dilution tube method</heading><table/><heading>Membrane filtration (coliform bacteria)</heading>5 dark red colonies formed. <heading>Membrane filtration (E. coli)</heading>7 bright yellow colonies formed. <heading>General viable count of bacteria</heading><table/><table/><heading>Conclusions</heading>For unchlorinated water entering a distribution system to be considered satisfactory no E. coli should be detected in 100 ml. If E. coli is absent, the occasional presence of up to 3 coliform bacteria/100 ml may be tolerated. In the multiple tube method, it is assumed that the organisms are distributed randomly throughout the sample and there must be at least one cell for growth to occur. Some tubes turned turbid which showed that there were at least one cell grew in those tubes. The most probable number (MPN) of coliform bacteria/100 ml original sample is 12. That meant the water is considered unsatisfactory. From the membrane filtration, 5 colonies/100 ml water sample of E. coli were found. This indicated the presence of faecal contamination. Actually, there is no absolute correlation between the number of indicator organisms and the actual presence or numbers of enteric pathogens, nor between the risk of illness occurring and the numbers of organisms present in a given sample. The finding of coliforms bacteria and E. coli indicates and thus a potentially dangerous situation. 7 colonies /100 ml water sample of coliform bacteria are found in the sample from the membrane filtration. The presence of coliform bacteria indicated faecal pollution of water. As the number of colonies were greater than 3/100 ml, the water supply is considered unsatisfactory. The plates for the general viable count incubated at 37 oC for 24 h were used to examine the presence of bacteria and were presumed animal derived. The number of colonies found in both original and 10 -2 dilution were the same. Thus the colonies counted for 10 -2 dilution was probably due to contamination. The plates for the general viable count incubated at 22 oC for 3 d were used to examine the presence of the micro-flora in the whole nature and so the number of colony presence would be larger. The number of colony was 380 cfu/ml which appeared quite high. There may be errors in this experiment. It was hard to judge the turbidity by naked eyes. False positive reactions may occur in the multiple tube dilutions due to the growth of aerobic and anaerobic organisms. The MPN technique is generally regarded as being inaccurate because it employs a statistical basis for calculating the numbers of organisms present in an examined sample. However, it is more sensitive than the colony count in agar plate method when only low numbers of organisms are present. Membrane filtration was the best method among the three to examine bacteria in water in this experiment. Results can be obtained as direct counts within a short time. In industry, a fast result enables a quicker response to be made with respect to the remedial action that may be required. There was considerable saving in the amount of media and glassware required compared to other methods. However, there are still limitations associated. Membranes are unsuitable for water sample of high turbidity as the membrane will be blocked and the accumulated deposit on the membrane may inhibit the growth of indicator organisms. Water is essential for life. Frequent examination of water is crucial to maintain the quality and hence to reduce risk of infections diseases. <heading>Questions</heading>Liquid samples especially water and samples which contain low numbers of microorganisms or low concentration of bacteria are suitable for multiple tube dilution method. Pour plate is the most suitable method to examine sample with high concentration of bacteria. Instructions: <figure/>Enterobacteriaceae from faeces may contaminate hands plus S. aureus in hands may transfer to raw products. Raw products are easily contaminated with those bacteria and so the expected bacteria presence is higher. Enterobacteriaceae and S. aureus are not heat resistant. After the food is fully cooked, most vegetative bacteria are killed but not bacterial spores, so the expected count will be lower. However, the cooked products may be put at warm temperature overnight without covered properly. There may be aerial contamination or the bacterial spores which survive cooking germinate. Cream used to make the cream cake is pasteurised. All vegetative microbes should be killed but spores survive. Cakes are always kept in the fridge so the spore growth is inhibited and expected no count. However if the cake is left out overnight and exposed to air, aerial contamination may happen. 