<heading>1. Context</heading><heading>1.1 Participants</heading>The one-minute sample analysed (appendix 1) is taken from a longer piece of spoken discourse between three adult native English speakers, 1 male and 2 female. Professional colleagues, their place of work is the same department in a university. The male participant is the head of that department (speaker A in the transcript), the first female speaker (speaker B) is a secretary in the department and finally C, the second female, is a department director. Working together means that these people know each other well and therefore have a certain degree of what I would call "professional intimacy". <heading>1.2 Topic, Tone and Setting</heading>The three speakers are discussing the topic of the current English education system and its failings (see Appendix 4). They refer to their own experiences and draw on their shared knowledge of local schools. This is not a debate or a heated discussion and generally, the speakers are in agreement with each other. The language used is not formal, as they know each other well. However, the participants are professional colleagues, so neither is it informal. The tone falls in the middle, based on the speakers' relationship to each other, the nature of the topic, and the setting, which is after all their place of work and so dictates the tone somewhat. <heading>2. Chosen approach to the analysis</heading>I have elected to analyse the sample using the sociological approach of Conversation Analysis (CA). Principally this is because the sample is a piece of unplanned discourse; there is no pre-structured conversation plan that the speakers are following. While CA does not solely apply to what we might term conversations, but also to, for example, spoken discourse in professional environments, political speeches or communication associated with the media (Cameron 2001), it is a particularly effective approach when analysing natural speech by ordinary people. As Heritage states, CA holds its roots with the ethnomethodologists, who were interested in the common sense knowledge of a community and so we look here at 'the study of common sense reasoning skills and abilities through which the ordinary members of a culture produce and recognise intelligible courses of action' (Heritage 1985: 1). Above all therefore, CA examines what actually happens in speech and this in turn reveals the patterning and the structure underlying the data. Each utterance is examined in the context of the previous utterance and every detail can be relevant to the understanding of the discourse (Heritage 1985). I am thus still able to produce a detailed analysis, despite only concentrating on a small sample of data. Consequently, in order to make a detailed analysis taking into account the structure and negotiations involved in natural everyday spoken discourse, CA primarily examines the turn taking mechanisms of conversation. That is to say the turn construction units, turn allocation and turn transitions. I will be examining these features of discourse in order to analyse the workings of everyday conversation (appendix 2). CA looks at the rules that underlie conversation and aims to answer questions such as, what stops us from talking all at once? How do conversations flow? (Cameron 2001). These basic goals of CA led me to choose this method as the focus for my analysis. <heading>3. Analysis of the sample</heading><heading>3.1 Turn Transition</heading><heading>3.1.1 Turn Distribution</heading>The first thing I examined when considering turn transition was the distribution of turns in the sample. Appendix 3 shows in detail what I observed. On the face of it, turns appear to be evenly distributed throughout the sample between speakers A, B and C. However, upon dividing the sample into its two halves, based on line numbers (without splitting a turn) it becomes apparent that A makes more contributions in the second half than in the first whilst B and C make more turns in the first half than they do in the second. This increase in contributions from speaker A coincides with the shift to a new subtopic, which A has introduced. I shall examine in more detail below, the reasons as to why A holds the floor in the second half. <heading>3.1.2 Speaker Shift</heading>Speaker shift in the passage is smooth. The three participants respect when another speaker holds the floor and do not compete. Consequently, overlaps or interruptions are infrequent. Overlaps occur mainly through backchannelling (lines 3, 7, 12, 14, 27), where the listener is supporting what is being said and confirming that the speaker still has a right to their turn. Other overlaps occur when there appears to be a breakdown in turns. For instance, line 4, B mumbles the end of her utterance and we must assume that she has not yet organised her point. C self-selects, timing her utterance so as to take the floor at the first opportunity (line 5) and completes line 4 on B's behalf. Speaker B then times her turn in line 6 to finish C's turn from line 5 (although it could be argued that she was finishing her own trail of thought from line 4 and just needed C's help in formulating it) and there is an overlap of speaker A and B's utterances. In both cases, this is collaborative completion rather than competition for the floor. A similar occurrence of such an overlap is during A's turn beginning line 31. Speaker A pauses for 0.3 seconds (line 32) and B misjudges this as a TRP (Transition Relevance Place) and attempts to finish A's turn for him much as speaker C did at line 5. However, A has not finished his turn and continues, so B's utterance (line 33) overlaps. Again, this overlap is not seen as hostile. Shortly before the mid-point of the sample, there is a breakdown in turns and turn shift is less well organised. At line 11, B makes a closing kind of statement. It is not very meaningful to the discussion and B is therefore indicating that she has nothing further to add. Speakers A and C both respond with a backchannel, and even though C's is quite long, (line 13), neither take the floor. There is obligation on B to take up the floor but she backchannels (line 14) having nothing more to add and speaker C fills the silence with another long backchannel (line 15) but still passes the turn. <heading>3.1.3 Pauses (see Appendix 5)</heading>There are very few long pauses, during or between turns. To avoid silence and a breakdown in communication, the speakers make meaningless contributions, such as at line 15. At the end of line 15 C pauses and as still no one takes the floor speaker A uses this TRP and the breakdown in turns to self-select and introduce a new subtopic (line 16). There are three pauses in the first half of this line. However, the other two speakers do not see these pauses as TRPs. Speaker A is still formulating what he wishes to say so he also uses "fillers" such as 'yes' and 'um' (line 16) to break up the silences and therefore reduces the risk of B or C interpreting the silences as TRPs. Exactly the same thing happens in line 18 and again neither B nor C misinterpret the pauses as TRPs because of these filled pauses. There then follows a brief interlude where B and C back channel to support A's turn (lines 20 - 24) before he continues his point at line 31. Speaker B misinterprets A's pause in line 32 as a TRP and there is an overlap (discussed previously) so A must talk over B and C's contributions in order to regain the floor and complete his point (line 35). <heading>3.2 Turn Composition</heading><heading>3.2.1 Turn length</heading>Turns are not that long in the sample chosen and this is usual in natural, unplanned spoken discourse. In the first half, B and C share the floor in order to end the point. There then follows a series of brief turns and backchannels until line 16 where no one takes the floor and turns are used to fill silence and to avoid a breakdown in conversation. At line 16, A makes his longest turn (and indeed the longest turn in the chosen sample). Speaker A is introducing a new subtopic, marked by the boundary marker 'well' (line 16), and therefore B and C are waiting to see where speaker A is going and do not contribute until they know what he is going to say. After the boundary marker 'well' A produces pauses and fillers in order to hold his turn while he formulates what he wishes to say. Once he is ready, he uses another boundary marker 'the question of the...' (line 16) in order to maintain the floor. After his point about the length of Maiden Erlegh's school day (line 18-19) speaker C backchannels to support the topic and to indicate to speaker A to continue (line 20). A does this at line 25 after more backchannels or short turns from B and C. Speaker A's next turns are shorter than his opening turn of the second half, because B and C know what the topic is and interject with backchannels or short turns. <heading>3.2.2 Backchannels and false starts</heading>Backchannels are used to show agreement (lines 3, 9, 22) or to indicate that the speaker should continue (lines 11, 30) and give the speaker the right to a longer turn. Sometimes it can be both. For example, at line 7 is speaker A showing agreement or indicating that the speaker should continue? Backchannels can be more than just 'mmm' but can be longer (line 9, 'mmm precisely'), but this is still backchannelling to indicate agreement. Backchannels can also indicate that the speaker does not want to take the floor as we saw at lines 12 - 15. At the end of the chosen sample B and C laugh (lines 33 and 34). It is controlled, as no one was intentionally funny and I have counted them as backchannels because they hold no meaning. C's laughter is a response to what has been said and B's laughter follows speaker C's, so is in turn another response; a kind of adjacency pair. False starts occur at numerous points in the sample (lines 1 (twice), 11). They do not deter from the meaning of what is being said though and indicate that the speaker is still formulating what they wish to say. Therefore, they can also be seen as a kind of filled silence in order to avoid a TRP. This is particularly the case with speaker A, who wishes to hold the floor as he introduces a new subtopic (lines 16-18, 25, 31). <heading>3.3 Topic Development</heading>The overall topic is education. In the sample, aspects of the topic are discussed and they can therefore be seen as subtopics of a bigger topic. The first subtopic here is a discussion about extra-curricular activities. Speaker C relates this subtopic back to a previous topic with the marker 'so again' (line 8). Topic shift occurs after a breakdown in turns. It can be assumed that the speakers do not have anything to add to the topic of extra-curricular activities by the use of markers such as 'you know' (line 15). In addition, the adjacency pair (B, line 11 and C, line 13) indicates the speakers' closing of the subtopic. Therefore, a new topic, the length of the school day, is introduced (line 16) by speaker A and this change in topic coincides with a shift in speaker. Speaker C makes the point coherent for all (line 22) by clarifying the length of the school day of the school in question. A then elaborates his point and the topic evolves to a discussion about the role that school plays in children's lives (lines 25-35). <heading>4. Evaluation</heading>During my analysis, I raised a number of ambiguities. Firstly, it can be difficult to distinguish whether a contribution is a backchannel or a turn. An example of this is in line 22. This is a vague area in CA and the literature is not very helpful in providing a solution. Duncan and Niederehe (1974 in Coulthard 1985) highlight the ambiguity and conclude that intuition must be the deciding factor. Grice's cooperative approach might afford a better analysis because Grice assumed that in communication, speakers are cooperating. There would therefore be no need to distinguish between a backchannel or a turn as interest would lie in how speakers do not let communication breakdown. It is the meaning that is important, the '...speakers' abilities to convey more than the stable semantic core of their words' (Schiffrin 1990). The rules (or Maxims) that allow effective communication would be at the heart of the analysis (Thomas, 1995). Similarly, I raised the difficulty of differentiating between backchannels to support and backchannels to indicate for the speaker to continue. Here the speaker's intentions could help and Austin's Speech Act theory could provide an approach to this problem. Austin's performative hypothesis defined 'words as actions' (Thomas 1995: 29), the idea being that we say things in order to do things. However, as Cameron points out, the same form does not always mean the same thing and the same meaning can take different linguistic forms (Cameron 2001). Similarly, the use of non-specific vocabulary such as, 'and do it extra do it outside school' (line 5) and, '...it's just' (line 15) can prove ambiguous. What does 'it' refer to? To interpret all of these utterances an awareness of the speaker's intention in that particular context is necessary (Underwood 1989). Again, intuition would have to decide the illocutionary force. However, the perlocutionary act can shed some light. If the other speaker continues, the backchannel has been interpreted as an invitation to continue, even if it is unclear if the speaker performing the backchannel was also showing agreement. The focus should not be on the illocutionary act in these instances because '...interaction proceeds according to the listener's interpretation of the force of the utterance' (Coulthard 1985: 20). The Sinclair and Coulthard linguistic approach might also give a different interpretation as 'discourse is interested in what the speaker is using an item for' (Sinclair and Coulthard 1992: 8). Utterances can be understood by taking into account the situation and the tactics, that is to say 'the way in which items precede, follow and are related to each other' (Sinclair and Coulthard 1992: 9). However, the IRF structure may have proved too rigid for the analysis of conversation, being more suited to a classroom context. In natural conversation, utterances are not always marked with a frame and followed by a focus of what will be addressed. Finally, details of paralinguistic features such as gaze and gesticulation might have changed my interpretation and produced a more detailed analysis. For example, gaze influences turn allocation (Coulthard 1985) and having details about speaker gaze may have highlighted instances of other-select turn allocation. Gesticulation also gives extra details about when a speaker is reaching the end of a turn (Coulthard 1985), or on their agreement with a point. Similarly, at the end of the sample B and C laugh. I cannot hear A laugh, so I have to assume that he has not interpreted what is said in the same way as B and C, but perhaps this is unjust. Perhaps speaker A smiles and this would allow for an alternative interpretation. 