The needs of reptiles vary greatly as they have evolved to fit into very different niches; some come from desert areas so need hot dry environments in captivity as it is in the wild. Others may come from tropical rainforest areas so need humid warm environments to live in. As these animals are ectothermic, their thermoregulation is done through their behaviour. In order to do this they not only need warm terrariums, but also need a thermal gradient throughout so that they may cool down or warm up as they need. Reptiles also have varied and often specific diets, and finding their natural foods in captivity may prove difficult. These complex needs must be met in captivity or health problems will arise. It is said that 90% of problems in captive reptiles are caused by incorrect care (S. Nash, 2004), this may be largely due to owners assuming that all reptiles need the same living conditions. In fact they come from all around the world with the exception of very cold areas such as the arctic circle, this means that they occupy dry areas, aquatic areas, tree tops, rocky ground areas, and sometimes are adapted to all of those conditions in different seasons. There are also many types of reptiles - Snakes, Lizards, crocodilians, turtles and tortoises are just a few. If these reptiles are not provided with a suitable environment for their natural behaviour they may get stressed, this can lead to a refusal to eat and a lowered immune system making them prone to bacterial infections or parasites. Loud noises or vibrations, prolonged inappropriate temperatures, excessive handling, or having incompatible cage mates that they cannot get away from can cause stress. Some wild caught pets find it difficult to adapt to caged living and may get stressed even in ideal living conditions, Cowan 1968 referred to this as 'maladaptation syndrome'. It is better to get a captive-bred reptile if possible. The owner must thoroughly research their new pet before buying it and be prepared to invest the money needed to house it properly and then maintain it correctly so that it lives a healthy life. <heading>Desert Reptiles</heading>Deserts are regions that are very hot and dry during the day, throughout the year, then get much cooler during the night. They are bare sand or rocky areas that provide little shelter from the strong sun other than burrowing underground. Reptiles found include: <list>Leopard gecko (Eublaris macularis) found in Western AsiaBearded dragon (Pogona vitliceps) found in AustraliaRough scaled sand boa (Eryx conicus) found in India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka</list>They need to be able to burrow to cool down, and must be provided with a strong light with a full spectrum wavelengths during their daytime photoperiod. Light is very important for reptiles: -Ultra-Violet A wavelengths stimulate the reptiles appetite. -Ultra-Violet B wavelengths stimulate Vitamin D 3 production in the skin that is essential for calcium absorption in the gut. Calcium is important for the proper growth of bones and teeth, normal blood coagulation, and muscle and nerve function. It is required more in young growing reptiles and pregnant reptiles. Without appropriate light the animal can easily become deficient in Vit D 3 and therefore calcium leading to 'Metabolic bone disease'. The animals will seem to have painful joints, retarded growth, anorexia (it will not want to eat), the loosening and maybe loss of teeth, bone deformities or easily occurring fractures, also it may drag its hind limbs. This problem is very common in reptiles especially in young reptiles that develop deformities, which are then discovered by the owner too late to be rectified. The deformities are carried around for the rest of the animal's life. Calcium deficiencies may also be seen in animals that are fed too much spinach. It contains large amounts of oxalic acid that can interfere with the absorption of calcium in the gut. -Infra Red wavelengths provide heat that can be absorbed by the reptile directly, especially darker areas of the skin, or can be absorbed by their surroundings which in turn passes the heat onto the reptiles when they come onto contact with each other. Care must be taken with lights so that they are not too bright or too hot, also if they can be climbed to, as with geckos, or touched any way by the reptile they must be covered so that burns are not caused. The reptile will not know that it is too hot until it is too late. The best way to use the heat from tank light is to have them at only one end of the tank providing a warm basking area and a cooler area at the other end. A temperature gradient is essential for natural thermoregulatory behaviour to occur. The end without the bulb must still be warm enough to be at the temperature range for the natural environment of the reptile. This may be done safely with a general tank heater. For desert reptiles the temperature must be turned down at night, as the temperature should range from 40c during the day to 14c in the night. The substrate used in the tank of a desert reptile may be sand however for other reptiles it can cause problems. Some substrates such as sand, small aquatic gravel, and ground corncob, can easily be ingested and may then sit in the gastro-intestinal system causing blockages, constipation or vomiting. The chitin exoskeleton of mealworms or the fur of mammals may also cause blockages if too much is ingested. The substrates can also cause cloacitis, when it is being defecated, as it irritates the cloacae. These blockages can ultimately lead to death through starvation and other side effects or infections. Sand can also get trapped under the scales of the reptile causing skin or eye infections. <heading>Savannah Reptiles</heading>Savannah regions are fairly hot areas that have long dry seasons then a rainy season. The landscape has more cover than the desert regions and it is more humid. For this reason tanks of reptiles in captivity must be sprayed with a mist of water at least twice a week. Reptiles here include: <list>Rosy Boa (lichanura trivirgata) found from North America to MexicoBlue tongued Skink (tiliqua scincoides) found in New Guinea and AustraliaCommon wall lizard (Podacis muralis) found in south and central Europe.</list>If the humidity in a tank is too high problems can arise with Necrotizing dermatitis or 'scale rot' this is seen as lesions on the animals body, there may be retained sheds, and in severe cases there may be scale erosion or ulceration. This can also be caused by poor hygiene, malnutrition or the temperature being too low in the terrarium. <heading>Temperate Woodland Reptiles</heading>Woodland areas are leafy with subdued lighting and lots of hiding places. There need to be damp areas in captivity as there would be in the wild such as mossy areas. In winter the temperature drops and this is known to be a reproductive trigger in some reptiles. <list>Jackson's chameleon (Chameleo jacksoni) found at high altitudes in East Africa.Slow worm (Anguis fragilis) found in Europe, Asia and North Africa.</list>The humidity is also an important factor for these reptiles as it provides them with a source of drinking water in the form of condensed droplets. Unlike snakes, iguanas and chelonians that sip or suck water most lizards, such as chameleons and geckos, lap and lick their water. It is very important for the reptiles not to become dehydrated, as with all animals, as it affects their ability to metabolise and digest properly, and also affects their thermoregulation. Hibernation may occur in winter when the temperatures in the environment go below that in which reasonable metabolism can occur. In some reptiles it has evolved to be a necessary part of their life cycles especially when regarding reproduction. In some reptiles hibernation stimulates vittelogenesis which is the development of the yolk part of an egg (Gavaud 1983). Some tortoises recently out of hibernation may have problems if their owners did not make sure that they were in good condition before the winter. This may result in dehydration, also mouth rot. Mouth rot, or ulcerative stomatitis is a disease of the oral mucosa, the animal would have an unpleasant odour from its mouth, which has cheesy growths in it. This can also be seen in snakes and other reptiles due to improper hygiene, malnutrition or exposure to the wrong temperatures. If hibernation is not allowed some reptiles may refuse to eat and will ultimately die of starvation, again the owner must have researched the animal's natural behaviour or problems may arise. <heading>Tropical Woodland Reptiles</heading>These reptiles are often arboreal meaning that they can climb well and often live in the trees. The humidity in the wild is high so cages must be regularly sprayed with water, however they also need to be well ventilated to prevent mould from thriving. Some examples of reptiles are: <list>Green iguana (Iguana iguana) a large lizard found in Central and South America.Asian water dragon (Physiganathus cocincinus) found in India and South East Asia.Emerald tree boa (Corallus caninus) found in South AmericaRed legged tortoise (chelonoidis carbonaria)</list>Tropical woodland reptiles are used to a more constant environment with less fluctuating temperatures so can tolerate less variation in captivity. They therefore may not display heat avoidance behaviour so could overheat or get too cold. When reptiles are kept in an environment that is too cold they often develop respiratory problems. As they cannot cough they may be seen gasping and may have mucous around their nostrils. Turtles with respiratory diseases are prone to swimming with their bodies tilted and at an abnormal angle through the water, a discharge may also be seen from the eyes and nose. Iguanas, as with many reptiles, are very territorial, even when put with a female, a male can cause a lot of damage and stress to the other. During the mating season a male will bite onto a female's neck so that he may mount her without her walking away, however when the animals are in an enclosed terrarium, the female may be cornered and wont be able to escape from the male. The damage can then be worse than it would be in the wild. King snakes may even eat other snakes kept with them so they should also be kept alone. Bites and scratches can easily become infected and may turn in to abscesses so must be properly cleaned and monitored to prevents further problems arising. <heading>Semi-aquatic</heading>These are reptiles such as turtles that spend part of their time in the water and part of it on land. They need to breathe air to get their oxygen. In captivity they need easy entry and exit to and from the water such as secure a slope. <list>Southern alligator lizard (Gerrhonotus muticarinatus) found on the West coast of North AmericaWestern ribbon snake (Thamnophis proximus) found from the USA to Costa RicaSpiny turtle (Herosemys spinosa) found in South East Asia</list>Semi-aquatic snakes are often kept in terrariums with large water bowls and allowed to bathe for as long as they wish. However excessive soaking can lead to blister disease so access should be restricted only to times when they are feeding. With many reptiles placing them in water stimulates them to defecate, this can be useful if the animal is constipated, also it helps to keep the cage clean if it is done in the water instead. All excretions must be cleaned away properly so that pathogens can not develop. All reptiles must shed their skin on a regular basis so that they can grow. In captivity shedding may not always go smoothly and dysecdysis may occur, this is when some of the old skin is retained. It can be caused by improper conditions in the terrariums such as the temperature being too high, or the humidity too low, also a shedding implement must be provided. Other causes are stress and old skin problems such as burns or dermatitis. <heading>Totally aquatic reptiles</heading><list>Florida soft shell turtle (Trionyx ferox)Mata-mata (Chelus fimbriatus)</list>Both semi-aquatic and totally aquatic species of reptile must be provided with properly mixed salt water to swim in if that is how they would live in the wild. For fresh water turtles the pH of the water should be 6.0, if not shell rot may occur (Ross and Marzec 1984). <heading>Nutritional problems in captivity</heading>In the wild reptiles can be herbivorous, carnivorous or omnivorous, so they need to be provided with the correct balanced diet. Most problems occurring with pet reptiles can be related to malnutrition. Also with carnivorous reptiles such as snakes their prey should be fed to them dead otherwise it may attack in defence and harm the snake. With such food it is also a good idea to freeze them before feeding so that any pathogens can be killed and so are not passed on to the animal. One of the most common deficiencies, calcium deficiency, has already been discussed, a supplement should be provided if any such problems arise. Vitamin A deficiencies often occur when the animals are deprived of eating the whole prey also crickets are very low in Vitamin A. The affected reptile may show signs of lethargy and excessive hiding. Also palpebral adema which is when the eyes swell up leaving the reptile blind and they then cannot eat. Abnormal skeletal development and respiratory problems are also seen. Again a supplement and a balanced diet is all that is needed to keep the reptile in good health. Monotypic unvaried diets are not healthy for reptiles. Many vegetables, such as cabbage, broccoli, and lettuce, are poor in iodine. Iodine deficiencies cause goiter, which is the swelling of the thyroid gland, and hypothyroidism (Wallach 1969). Ground Kelp tablets are a good supplement for iodine. Monotypic diets of fish can lead to thiamine deficiencies (vitamin B-1), this is mostly seen in snakes and turtles. Reptiles show inco-ordination, paralysis, or anorexia. It is better to feed them on whole mammals, such as rodents, which provide most vitamins and minerals needed. Even when a reptiles diet is correctly researched, if a monotypic diet is fed problems can arise. Reptiles fed only on raw egg may develop a biotin deficiency, this results from a molecule known as avidin that is found in the egg white. Avidin binds to biotin making it unavailable for absorption in the gastro-intestinal tract. Wild eggs are not sterile like shop bought chicken eggs, so have an embryo. The embryo contains biotin, which cancels out the effect of the avidin. Cooked eggs, whole mammals or birds should create a balanced diet if added. If a reptile has an infection it may need to be given antibiotics however these have an unwanted side effect of killing useful microflora in the gut (Jackson and Cooper 1981). The microflora helps make vitamin C and vitamin K available for absorption. A deficiency of Vitamin C leads to weight loss, mouth rot, diarrhoea, and bleeding gums that may be due to reduced collagen production or tissue strength. When cleaning the reptile's enclosure the owner must ensure that all detergents and other chemicals are thoroughly rinsed off, if not they can cause respiratory disease and skin irritation. It is also important that there is not a build up of urine, especially in large lizards and snakes that can urinate large amounts. It is best to have a collecting tray so that it can drain away. Again a build up can cause skin problems. These many problems described may all be prevented and by proper understanding of the specific needs of the particular reptile. Therefore I do believe that the vast majority of problems seen in pet reptiles are caused by improper husbandry techniques on behalf of the owner. I also believe that there should be more regulation and licensing so that shops can be sure that owners know how to look after the reptile before it is bought. 