<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus) has often been found to express the symptoms of 'insular syndrome'. This is not a disease but a phenomena that occurs within island populations of a variety of vertebrates, and is expressed in the evolution of a different body size, and occasionally altered behavioural patterns. Preliminary investigations of small mammals on the Isle of Cumbrae, Scotland, produced a wood mouse of large proportions and lead us to investigate further into the possibility of the occurrence of insular syndrome in the island population. The results were inconclusive as only two mice were caught overall and one of them gave birth after it was caught, however unusual population densities of Wood mice and Common Shrews (Sorex aranaeus) were found which may need further investigation. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading><heading>Insular syndrome</heading>Island populations differ from most on the mainland in that they are isolated to varying extents from other populations. When a species first populates an island it may find itself in a very different environment from the niche it has evolved to fit on the mainland. The isolation of the species from the mainland gene pool along with new environmental pressures on its survival may lead to the evolution of new characteristics. Islands may be of varying sizes and of varying distances from the mainland. There may also be differences in the ecology of the island due to which other species have successfully immigrated and become established, these may be competitors or predators of the newly arrived species and may occupy only a few of the available niches on the island. Also known as 'The Island Rule', insular syndrome describes the trend for animals on islands to evolve into either larger or smaller versions of their mainland species. Generally animals over 100g are thought to evolve into dwarf forms while smaller animals below 100g such as rodents evolve into giant forms( Van Valen, 1973, Lomolino, 1985). The first biologist to try and explain this phenomenon was J. Bristol Foster in 1964; studying island mammals, he reasoned that smaller animals grew large due to reduced pressures from predators and competitors on the islands. He also concluded that large animals became smaller due to the lack of enough food that could sustain a larger sized population. In 1978, soon after 'The Theory of Island Biogeography' was published by Robert MacArthur and Edward O. Wilson (1967) which lead to increased scientific interest on the subject, T. J. Case published, 'A general explanation for insular body size trends in terrestrial vertebrates' that expanded on Fosters work greatly. He noted that the explanations given by Foster were far too simple and that many exceptions existed. He also included reptiles in his study, and included much more data in his work. One example presented by Case of an exception to Fosters explanation was the case of two rattlesnake species that cohabit on the island Angel de la Guarda in the Gulf of California. On the island, Crotalus mitchelli is about two times the size of C. ruber, however on the mainland of Mexico this is the other way round. Case's explanation is that C. mitchelli arrived first on the island and evolved to become larger in order that all available prey could be utilised, then when C. ruber arrived only the 'smaller rattlesnake niche' was available so it evolved to fit that instead. This shows that size change in a species can depend greatly on the other life already established on an island. Other differences to island populations of rodents exhibiting insular syndrome, include higher, more stable densities, reduced aggressiveness, reproductive output, dispersal and better survival (Adler and Levins 1994). Insular syndrome has often been seen in rodents and many studies have been done on Apodemus spp. around the world (Cranbrook, 1957, Delany & Healy 1964, Berry, Evans, & Sennitt 1967, Delany 1970, Kahmann & Niethammer 1971, Berry 1973, 1975, Gliwicz 1980, Angerbjorn 1986, Granjon & Cheylan 1988, Adler & Levins 1994, Sara & Casamento 1995, Michaux, Liboix & Fons 1996a, Michaux, Sara, Libois & Matagne 1998b). Gigantism has been the general pattern and various explanations have been suggested. Angerbjorn (1986) sums these up with a series of six 'predictions': Prediction 1 Animals on Islands at higher latitudes and at long distances from mainland should exhibit larger body sizes due to cooler (Bergmann, 1847, Foster 1965) or less variable climate (Case 1978). Prediction 2 The body size of small mammals would decrease with decreasing island size due to food limitations or likelihood of extinction (Heaney 1978, Wasserzugal. 1979) Small mammal body size should increase with decreasing island area due to differences in age specific survivorship (Melton 1982) Prediction 3 Increasing distance from the mainland restricts dispersal and so leads to increased population density, this leads to an increase in body size (Melton 1982) or a decrease in body size (Wasserzugal. 1979) Prediction 4 Species Diversity tends to decrease with island area (Macarthur and Wilson 1967) and so smaller numbers of predators and competitors may be present on smaller islands. A small species of mouse is subsequently expected to be larger on an island lacking a larger competitor species and a large mouse should be smaller on an island lacking a smaller competitor species. Thereby the species would adapt to use the greatest possible niche and its resources (Angerbjorn 1986). Prediction 5 When certain predators are absent animals should evolve to be larger as they would be at an advantages compared with smaller conspecifics (Angerbjorn 1986) Prediction 6 'Body size trends on islands should be random in direction' (Angerbjorn 1986). This prediction relates to the genetic isolation that occurs in island populations and how 'the founder principle' (Mayr 1942) may affect their size. Although Angerbjorn sides with predictions 5 and 6 it is important to consider all of the aspects as each may have varying effects on different islands. Our aim is to look at these variables and see whether the Wood Mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus) on the Isle of Cumbrae is affected by insular syndrome. <heading>The Isle of Cumbrae</heading>The Isle of Cumbrae (Fig 1) is the area that will be investigated. It covers over 500 acres and lies in the Firth of Clyde 1.5 miles from the mainland. The highest point lies at 127m above water. On the south side of the island lies the small seaside town of Millport; this is where the University Marine Biological Station is situated. Most of the remaining part of the island is farmed. A regular ferry crosses from Millport to Largs on the mainland, which along with other boats provides a possible method of dispersal for non-aquatic animals such as mice. <figure/><heading>Preliminary experiment</heading>Preliminary trapping was carried out over three nights, 12 th-14 th July 2005, combining to 70 Trap Nights (TN) <list>1 st night 25 traps2 nd night 25 traps3 rd night 20 traps</list>All of the traps were laid close to the University Marine Biological Station, Millport on the Isle of Cumbrae off the coast of south-west Scotland. These areas were all within 100m of human habitation. Over the trapping period 11 animals were caught, 9 Common shrews and 2 A.sylvaticus. One of the A.sylvaticus caught shown in table 1 was measured and the results were unusual. <table/>It was concluded that although the measurements of the mouse fit into the range for the yellow-necked mouse (A. flavicollis), it was in fact a wood mouse (A.sylvaticus) as no yellow band of fur was present around the neck of the mouse. Also the known range of the yellow-necked mouse does not extend as far north as the Isle of Cumbrae. However the weight and the tail length of the mouse were unusually large compared with the mainland size ranges. <heading>Ecology of Cumbrae</heading>When considering the various species established on an island and their affects upon each other, it is important to include rough estimates of how long the species may have been present. This is important as a species that established long ago may have evolved to fit a niche that has changed since the immigration of another competitor or predator species. This may now mean that the first species is disadvantaged by newer characteristics that it has evolved such as a larger body size. The list is based on species previously found on the Isle of Cumbrae by Gibson, J. A. and Shillaker, R. O. (1974). It includes the land based mammals of Cumbrae and the competitor or predator species of the wood mouse. Wood mouse Apodemus sylvaticus (Linnaeus, 1758) A.sylvaticus is commonly present in woodland and frequently found in hedgerows and gardens. They are nocturnal and eat mainly seeds such as acorns, hazel nuts and beech mast, but also eat some insects. Predators of A.sylvaticus present on the island currently include polecats, birds of prey and domestic cats. Competitors are harder to list as they include and animal that lives in the same area and eats similar foods. Densities vary between 0.25-100/ha (The Handbook of British Mammals, 2 nd Ed, 1977). Wood mice are mainly nocturnal. In the years preceding the First World War an extensive study of island populations of small mammals was done by a group from the British museum of natural history, their aim was to identify and describe local races. From this research Apodemus sylvaticus Cumbrae (Hinton 1914) was identified along with other island races of small mammals. The identification of A.sylvaticus Cumbrae has been heavily criticised by many since due to the division of the species being based on intricate cranial measurements, and now is no longer even included in The Handbook of British Mammals. The following quote from Gibson (1954) concludes, <quote> ''Despite the careful descriptions given by Hinton in his 1914 paper let no one imagine for one moment that these races of mice can be separated in the field. I have kept live mice form Arran, Bute and Cumbrae in cages at the same time and neither I nor any other zoologist who saw them could detect the slightest difference. In this respect it is worth noting that when Barrat-Hamilton and Hinton first examined these Clyde island mice they came to the conclusion, in their 1913 paper, that they were ''unable to distinguish the specimens from the islands from A.sylvaticus sylvaticus of the mainland''. It was only in the later 1914 paper, after pages of intricate cranial measurements, that separation was made. I have not seen this fact of earlier 'lumping' referred to previously, but to me it seems significant, and it is also interesting to note that Harrison Matthews in his recent book on British Mammals (1952) entirely omits these Clyde Island races from his systematic list''.</quote>Western Hedgehog Erinaceus europaeus Linnaeus, 1758 A Hedgehog was seen walking across the grass in front of the research station during our stay. They may be considered as competitors of the Wood Mouse and the Common Shrew due to their diet of insects, worms, fruit and fungi. It is thought that the hedgehog was introduced to the island in the early 1920s (Gibson and Shillaker 1974). Pygmy Shrew Sorex minutes Linnaeus, 1766 No pygmy shrews were caught during the trapping period on Cumbrae. Like the common shrew they are insectivores and carnivores however fit a different niche and they are commonly found in the same habitats. They are therefore only in slight competition. Water shrew Neomys fodiens (Pennant, 1771) Reported to be very rare on Cumbrae in the 1974 survey, we found none. Common shrew Sorex aranaeus Linnaeus, 1758 Many shrews were caught during our trapping period on Cumbrae, they seemed to be the most common small mammals. All shrews are protected under Schedule 6 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981). Our trapping was aimed at catching wood mice but precautions were taken in case shrews were also trapped, extra food was added to prevent the death of shrews that need to eat very often due to their high metabolism. This also means that shrews need to be active both day and night. Density in British woodland is estimated at 49/ha (Crowcroft 1957) Western polecat Mustela putorius Linnaeus, 1758 Polecats were reported in 1974 to be absent from Cumbrae, however in more recent years they have been seen by locals to the island including the director of the research station in Millport. They are and important part of the ecosystem as they would be the only present ground dwelling and mammalian predator. They could be considered predators to any of the small birds and mammals on Cumbrae. As none have been caught and identified however, the recent sightings could have in fact been the dark form of the Ferret (Mustela putorius furo Linnaeus, 1758), escaped from poachers. It was said that in1974 there were 'a few escaped Ferrets, but no evidence of breeding.' Rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus (Linnaeus, 1758) Rabbits are plentiful on Cumbrae and can be seen all over the island at any time of the day or night. They are not in competition with Wood mice or Shrews for food but may disturb their habitat due to the large population. The rabbit was introduced to the island and was established by 1612 (Patterson 1866) House mouse Mus musculus Linnaeus, 1758 House mice are closely associated with man and often live in or around buildings. They eat mainly grain but will eat almost anything. None were seen or trapped during the research period. Brown rat Rattus norvegicus (Berkenhout, 1769) Rats were introduced to the island by humans and have bred very successfully. Considered a pest species by humans they eat mainly grain and seeds but will eat almost anything including eggs, invertebrates and small mammals. They are implicated in the spread of many diseases. A rat was seen at the research station. According to Alston (1880) and Watt (1905) it arrived in the West of Scotland in the early 19 th century. Field vole Microtus agrestis (Linnaeus, 1761) No field voles were caught during the trapping period. They live in grassy vegetation which they also eat. They pose no real competition to Wood mice or shrews as they inhabit a different niche. Birds of prey Birds can easily fly backwards and forwards from the mainland so must be included when considering the ecology of Cumbrae with relation to its small mammals as they are important predators. They include: Buzzards (Buteo buteo), Sparrow Hawks (Accipiter nisus), Tawny owls (Strix aluco) and Barn owls (Tyto alba). <heading>Experiment</heading>There were 64 Longworth live-capture traps (Fig 2) available for use. Hay was added as bedding and bird seed was added as food for the A.sylvaticus. In case of the unintended capture of shrews, cat food was also added to minimise deaths. The traps were checked once in the morning and once in the evening. Trap night (TN) in this case therefore refers to a 12 hour period during the day or the night. <figure/>15th-16th July 05 Traps were laid at sights 1, 2 and 3 (Table 2); these sights were chosen as they were thought to be good wood mouse habitat, away from human habitation in well established vegetation. 16th-18th July 05 The trap success was found to be very poor at the first three sights so the traps were moved to sights more similar to those in the preliminary experimentation. These were on the south side of the island and were closer to human habitation. <heading>Results</heading>Trap success was found to be much higher at the sites near human habitation (Table 3). Many S.aranaeus were caught but only 2 A.sylvaticus (Table 4) The mouse caught during the preliminary experiment was kept as an example of a large sized island A.sylvaticus. A few days into the experimental period it gave birth to 2 pups. The female was reweighed a few weeks after giving birth and she weighed 8.3g less. The pups were weighed at the end of September but they were still below the adult weight range so had not matured enough to be included in the research. The S. aranaeus caught were also measured and all sizes were found to be within the mainland parameters except for one tail length that was over a third of the body size by 1.36mm. At the end of the survey period only 2 A.sylvaticus had been caught and measured including the mouse from the preliminary experiments. Both mice were females and had tails that were longer than the mainland range. The average length of the two island tail measurements (99.5mm) was 17.5 mm longer than the mainland average of 82mm and was 6.5mm longer than the top of the range (93mm) (Table 5) <heading>Discussion</heading>The results gained from the trapping period for wood mice were not enough to form any solid conclusions on the island A.sylvaticus sizes, compared with mainland A.sylvaticus sizes. Also the S. aranaeus data gathered showed them to be the same size as mainland populations as the measurements were all within the mammal society range (The mammal society 2005). The results gained from the S. aranaeus show that they are not significantly different from the British mainland populations in the parameters that were looked at. Some island populations of S. aranaeus have been found to differ in the frequent lack of 5 th unicuspid teeth and having very grey flanks (The Handbook of British Mammals 2 nd Ed, 1977). These characteristics were not investigated in this survey. Why were so few mice caught and so many shrews? If the results are to be considered a representation of the small mammal populations of Cumbrae then it seems that S. aranaeus are unusually abundant and A.sylvaticus are found in much smaller numbers. Also many other species thought to be present on Cumbrae were not caught such as pigmy shrews and voles, these species are usually caught on the mainland and may indicate a lack of competitor species on the island. The two species should be equally as 'trappable' on Cumbrae as on the British mainland, however population density cannot be compared directly to mainland results for similar environments due to the incompatibility of the random trap layout used in this experiment with the transect layout of the British Mammal Societies survey traps. However estimates and experiences (Colin Prescott) of mainland trapping, suggest that there should be a higher density of A.sylvaticus (0.25-100/ha (The Handbook of British Mammals, 2 nd Ed, 1977)) than S. aranaeus (49/ha (Crowcroft 1957)) present but this did not seem to be the case. This may have been due to the availability of suitable foods or habitat; also it could have been due to predation. S. aranaeus are insectivores and live on a diet of invertebrates whereas A.sylvaticus eats mainly seeds and fruits but also arthropods, therefore they avoid direct competition for food. The main predators of  S. aranaeus are owls, in particular barn owls which are known to be present on Cumbrae but may not be evenly distributed as it is suggested that they are more commonly viewed on the north of the island and so may consume more S. aranaeus there than on the south side where most of the S. aranaeus were caught. Other predators of S. aranaeus include tawny owls, kestrels, polecats, possibly rats and domestic cats, however they are often killed but not eaten by cats due to a foul tasting liquid that is produced from glands on the skin. A.sylvaticus predators present on the island include domestic cats, kestrels, tawny owl, buzzards, brown rats and the polecat. The area around the marine station may have been a sanctuary from many of these predators due to the presence and activities of humans. From the results of the trapping it appears that there are only these two small mammals present on Cumbrae therefore there may be an uneven occurrence of predation between the species, A.sylvaticus may be disadvantaged due to their larger size but S. aranaeus may be disadvantaged due to their need to be active all of the time and may therefore be more likely to be seen by predators. Advantages of A.sylvaticus characteristics increasing its survival chances may be its more general diet but the  S. aranaeus ability to produce foul tasting liquid from its skin may decrease its chances of being eaten and therefore be an advantage to them. The trapping period was not extensive enough to answer the questions posed on the differences between British mainland and Island populations of A.sylvaticus, nor were the observations made substantial enough to answer questions about differences in the S. aranaeus populations. Another important observation that was not made was whether the animals were in their adult stage of life as this would be important in order that the sizes could be comparable with current records (Lomolino 1985). Further research into the unexpected densities of S. aranaeus and A.sylvaticus could be done by firstly doing a survey comparable to that on the mainland to identify population densities, and secondly investigating the diet of predators on the island. For example owl pellets could be examined to identify the bones contained within them and to which species they belong. It must be noted however that permission would need to be gained to specifically intend to trap shrews.  FORMULA 