<heading>Introduction</heading>In recent years British Agriculture has become a World leader at producing foods to the highest specification and standards. In many ways this has been the result of repeated agricultural crises during the last ten years such as mad cow disease and foot and mouth disease, but other standards have been improved to meet EU legislation about animal welfare and pollution. Various assurance schemes have existed within the industry for many years but have never been as important to producers of food as now. As the EU is forced to reform CAP policy by pressure groups such as the WTO and has de-coupled subsidy from production levels (Defra 2005) farmers are finding their produce has to compete in global and local market place. This means more farmers than ever are joining nationally recognised assurance schemes in order to differentiate their produce from the competition so it easier to market and demand higher prices. <heading>Assurance Schemes</heading>In UK agriculture food produced can be split into two areas, arable crops such as cereals, pulses and sugar and livestock products of meat and milk. Arable crops are assured by two recognised schemes, the assured combinable crops scheme (ACCS) which covers all cereal and pulse products and assured sugar crop scheme (ASCS) covering sugar beet. Farmers who have entered the schemes are inspected by one of three independent certification bodies, Checkmate International, EFSIS Ltd or National Britannia (ACCS 2006) who aim to inspect farms once every crop cycle with a maximum of 18 months been allowed between inspections. The schemes set various standards for safe storage and haulage of grains to reduce risk of contamination and standards in the use and safe storage of crop sprays and fertilizers to eliminate pollution in crop production. Producers must also hold relevant literature, licenses and inventories to prove they are following schemes. The ACCS scheme has over 20,000 registered users and 80% of UK grain produced is to the assured standard (FWI 2005). Livestock is assured via different organisations and standards depending on type of stock held. For example dairy farmers have to meet slightly different standards to what poultry producers must meet and are inspected by different bodies. All the schemes ensure food is fully traceable, free from disease and the five freedoms are observed during the animal's lifetime (Red Tractor 2006). In the year 2000 the Assured Food Standards scheme was launched by various farming unions (mainly the NFU) to unite various assurance schemes under one body and create a logo assured food can carry (the red tractor) so that consumers can recognise it and buy with confidence (Redtractor2006). The AFS not only inspects the producer of the food but also the processor to guarantee confidence through the entire food chain to consumers. <heading>Value of Assured Schemes to Farmers</heading>The schemes in recent years have become increasingly used by farmers but many question the value of the schemes, claiming it adds unneeded cost and effort on UK produce whilst others claim it allows them to market their produce. It is certainly true to say the schemes cost producers large amounts of money and time. It is estimated it costs UK arable farmers an additional £1 million to produce to the assured standards (FWI 2005). These costs tend to be larger for small scale producers. Take for example a small scale farmer producing a premium milling wheat. There are huge diseconomy of scales to be incurred if they are to bring there storage up to standards for assurance. Many farmers have joined assurance schemes as most food processors will only take assured standard produce. This is certainly true that in the dairy industry where 98% of milk processors demand milk comes from assured sources (NDFAS 2005) leaving non assured farmers with a tiny outlet for their produce. The result is almost all dairy farms have joined assured schemes. Some farmers argue that producing assured produce allows a premium price to be demanded, and in some cases it has been known that a £8 a ton difference in cereal prices between assured and non-assured grain (FWI 2005) can be achieved however a typical premium of £1 is the most producers are able to achieve. Many argue as so much grain is now assured (80%) there no real premium has been achieved and the scheme has forced farmers to produce to higher standard but achieve no better price. This has been proven in the dairy industry where so many farmers have been forced to join the scheme by milk processors all milk is made to assured standard meaning it is no longer a defecated premium product that can demand a higher price. Also liquid milk is difficult to export efficiently so there is no export market potential either. The dairy industry has actually scene repeated price cuts since the arrival of assurance schemes. However it is true to say assurance has improved marketing of exportable products like grain. No other country has a nationally recognised assurance scheme like the UK's ACCS (FWI 2005) which makes gives potential buyers of grain a good guarantee of quality but it is unlikely they ever pay a premium over World grain prices for the privilege as non assured grain is still as safe product to use. In summary farmers opinions of assurance schemes are likely to be formed by what they produce and on what scale. It is certain to say that most dairy farmer's point of view assurance schemes are a costly nuisance that has given farmers no extra power to demand a higher price and it only the milk processors who are the real winners as are buying higher quality milk at an even lower price. Producers of meats and grain are more likely to hold positive opinions of assurance schemes as may see financial benefits from joining assurance schemes if they can benefit from economies of scale in meeting standards. Therefore large producers will favour scheme but smaller mixed producers may debate if the benefits outweigh the costs. I think all farmers support that the assurance schemes are positive initiative from the agricultural industry to improve the public's perception of British farming following the aftermath of the BSE crisis. But for many assurance is a mostly useless tool in marketing produce compared to producing organic goods etc. Many of the requirements for assurance schemes are exactly the same as those required by law by farms and many farmers argue such schemes offer little extra to consumers when the law already dictates many standards. <heading>Consumer Opinions of Assurance Schemes</heading>Following the PR crisis UK agriculture faced following BSE outbreaks demands of British food are that it is safe and traceable, particularly in meat products. Also animal welfare and pollution are issues of concern for many. Buying assured foods displaying the red tractor is a guarantee that such issues have been addressed to exacting standards and has been produced entirely in the UK. However, though consumers want this from food, many are not prepared to pay for it! There is a small proportion of the public who are prepared to only buy British food that meets such standards, however most will not care where their food is sourced and make the majority of buying decisions based on price and aesthetics. Consumers also know that laws set by government dictate food must be to a safe standard if it is to be sold. There is little evidence to show that since the introduction of the red tractor has led to increased demand for British produce. There is however significant demand for food produced under more specific assurance standards such as RSPCA freedom foods or organic produce as consumers can identify with the direct benefits of such goods. The trouble is the red tractor logo means very little to consumers when compared to other selling features and few consumers are likely to understand what extra they are getting from assured food. Also in order for food to carry the red tractor it must be made from 100% British assured produce. This means products containing ingredients not indigenous to the UK cannot carry the logo, for example pies containing assured meat may not and bread made from a blend UK milling wheat and imported high protein wheat. This limits the products able to carry the logo to mainly meats and milk products. <heading>Conclusions</heading>Although farm assurance will do little influence consumer decisions they will have a wider impact for PR issues facing UK agriculture. As the majority of farms are now forced to meet standards in order to market produce, animal wellfayre, control of pollution and food safety in Britain is now the best in the World, farmers can market produce with pride even if the consumer fails to fully appreciate it. Benefits of the schemes may not be immediately obvious to consumers but British farmers can look to the future confident that their produce should be protected from PR crises that have occurred in the past and this may pay dividends if consumer understanding of the British countryside is improved. This is what farmers must now focus on and they must attempt to take more control over the marketing of their food so they can demonstrate their food is better than imported competition. 