<heading>Introduction</heading>The reduction of nitrate leaching is now an issue of increasing importance within intensive UK grassland farming and this is a trend likely to continue. Following a period of high energy costs forcing up the price of nitrogen (N) to £156 a ton (Nix 2006), recent introduction of increased Nitrate Venerable Zones (NVZs) in December 2002 and CAP policy in the UK now encouraging farming that accounts for nitrate use and more sustainable sources of N, farmers are becoming evermore aware of their use of N and how efficiently they use it. Increased reduction of leaching and responsible use of N will not only help farmers to save money on inputs but help convince the British public they are responsible managers of the countryside and aware of the damage nitrate leaching does to biodiversity in streams and the costs it adds to drinking water cleansing. Leaching is the removal of soluble substances (including nitrates) from soil by the movement of water and most commonly occurs during the winter period when soils become waterlogged. This report examines a number of realistic and simple approaches that can be adopted to reduce nitrate leaching beyond current levels. It virtually impossible to accurately predict precipitation and circumstances accurately enough to eliminate all nitrates leaching however there is certainly scope to reduce nitrate leaching of grassland beyond current standards. <heading>Establishment of Swards & Leys</heading>Short term grass lays (2-4 years) are often included within intensive cattle farmers cropping rotations as an aid to break disease and weed cycles from previous arable crops. However use of rotational lays does not make very efficient use of N within soils when following cereal crops. Firstly the traditional use of ploughs to create a fine, trash free seed bed means much of the N that has build up in soil is lost to the atmosphere or leached if cultivated soil is exposed for a considerable period of time or rain. This is an even bigger issue at the end of the grass lays lifetime when only ploughing can be used to remove established grasses, as the uncultivated grassland has built up large reserves of N within the soil and roots is then exposed by inversion ploughing to leaching and gas losses which can typically be between 280-380 Kg/N lost in years to come. If minimum tillage has been used in previous cropping this should be used for grass establishment too as the stratified nutrient rich structure that has been developed over time is undisturbed and light cultivations will reduce gas N losses and risk of leaching in rain and reduced tillage techniques may help to a lesser extent in this reduction too. The lost quantities of N are usually replaced using higher quantities of artificial N to maintain maximum productivity within the lays first year. There is an increased likely hood of this N being lost through leaching too as the newly established crop of grass have shallow root systems and less dense growth than an established sward so are less able to utilise N as well. So farmers should firstly consider a review of their rotation crop system. Do the benefits of rotational short term lay yields really justify the inefficient use of N within them? Could existing swards life time be extended beyond current lifetime? Use of slot seed drills to seed over existing lays and use of selective herbicides work well to increase long and short term leys output without the expense or nitrate leaching consequences of ploughing and reseeding. <heading>Stored Manures & Organic Wastes</heading>Since the introduction of NVZ regulations in 1991 and their increase of their area in December 2002 nitrate leaching from organic manures and slurries should be greatly reduced in grassland. It is no longer acceptable to spread manures onto frozen or waterlogged ground in the autumn or mid-winter when leaching is most likely to occur as grass is not growing and is unable to take up N. In addition to measures set out RB209 fertilizer recommendations and limits set by NVZ legislation there are additional measures farmers can use to reduce leaching. Firstly compaction and creation of ruts with spreading machinery should be avoided especially on slopes as this will create impermeable channels that nitrate contaminated surface runoff can quickly travel down to reach water courses (Defra 2000). Flotation tyres and use of umbilical slurry applicators are great aids to achieving this. For slurries it is also advisable to use shallow injection systems as this places the nutrients where they are more utilisable for uptake by the grass root and is likely to leach as is retained more by the soil. Other benefits include no contamination of grass for grazing livestock and reduced loss of N by ammonia. Manure midens should be made away from any watercourse or channels and again ruts caused by machinery should be avoided when making or spreading the manure heaps. A limited but costly range of Nitrogen inhibitors are available for manures and are mostly used by organic farmers (AFBI 2005). These allow slow controlled release of N from organic manures which will reduce leaching, however guaranteeing there effectiveness when incorporated into large stores of manure makes it hard to guarantee their effectiveness. For this reason and their additional costs they unlikely to ever prove very popular with farmers. <heading>Use of Legumes</heading>Legumes are the most important source of N within organic systems and are their potential is again been realised by conventional farmers looking to reduce inputs of costly artificial N. Typically in grassland white clover and grass mix lays are used to provide N with to grass and clover encourages animal DM intakes. These grass mixtures require careful management as the grass and clover are co-existing in competition with one another and the only reason clover is able to survive is its competitive advantage it is able to generate its own N by fixing atmospheric N at its roots via rhzobial bacteria. It becomes available to neighbouring grassland plants as dying roots N in the soil. As the N is deposited exactly where grass roots most need to take it up and it is in a root structure less nitrate leaching tends to occur within organic systems. However due to the nature of this co-existing relationship grasslands are difficult to manage especially in grazed grassland where random concentration of urine from random excrement can destroy clovers competitive advantage and kill it from areas of the sward. It is therefore difficult to manage and budget for N in these systems and some N is still able to leach from these systems especially during the autumn grazing season where N is still produced by clover but is unlikely to be unutilised by the grass in the sward that season meaning it is likely to leach during the winter months. A possible solution to help prevent this could be the use of buffer strips of deep rooted plants such as willow trees or the legume alfa alfa which is able to absorb more water containing N than N it fixes into soils. This should slow the leaching of contaminated water through surface runoff if placed in strategic locations near watercourse and slopes to prevent runoff (Corrall 1999). This is a long term strategy that would be best adopted by organic grassland farmers who are depending on naturally fixed N more than a conventional farmer looking to reduce his artificial N costs as some production may be lost by use of buffer strips. <heading>Application of Artificial Fertilizers</heading>As with the use of manures and organic wastes, the law now requires farmer's to account for applications of artificial N in areas where leaching likely to occur (within NVZs) and only use quantities a crop will need as recommended in RB209. This also requires applications are made only when conditions are appropriate and not made during the autumn and winter months when water logging will cause nitrate to leach. Applications must also be made well away from watercourses and water sources where source pollution could occur. This will have seen a significant reduction of N leaching from grassland but there further methods farmers investigate using to reduce leaching of N. There is continued work and development taking place by fertilizer companies who are developing inhibitors which slows the release of nitrogen from artificial fertilizers so leaching does not occur in times of extreme rainfall over land. Research has shown these do significantly reduce the leaching N from systems but cannot be relied upon to eliminate N leaching and should be used in combination with management plans to reduce leaching (AFBI 2005). However such products are considerable more expensive to buy and at time when N prices are already very high are likely to prove unpopular with farmers. <heading>Animal Grazing Densities</heading>Grazing animal's excrement contains large concentrations of N, especially their urine. This can make long term management of grazing pasture difficult as N hotspots create grazing "clumps" and considerable amounts of N are lost from fields compared to silage preservation of the grass. A large proportion of N is leached through urine (typically around 160 units/ha with beef grazing [Holmes 1989]) as it is easily mobile especially in the autumn towards the end of the grazing season. Nitrogen leaching can be considerably reduced (down to just 23units/ha) is clover is included in the sward oppose to a pure ryegrass sward as N intake is less in first place but yields of DM can be sustained having no effect on productivity. Other possible solutions could include reducing stocking densities and not grazing animals next to watercourses or using streams as water sources for animals. Preventing exposure of soils by creating field layouts that reduce poaching around tracks and troughs will help reduce N leaching to an extent too. 