<heading>Introduction</heading>Hen eggs have been eaten for hundreds of years by humans and remain an important nutritional foodstuff. The purpose of this report is to examine, compare and contrast the different systems and techniques used to produce eggs. Then conclude and recommend which system is most appropriate for use in the UK after considering the demands of consumers, economic constraints, environmental and welfare issues that consumers are becoming more and more concerned about. The number of laying hens farmed in the UK is declining due a fall in demand for eggs and an increasing number of eggs being imported from other countries in the free market. Salmonella and cholesterol have been two major factors in reducing demand for eggs as well as improving breeding making hens more efficient reducing number of hens needed. It is predicted that within ten years hens will be able to lay an extra 20 eggs in a cycle reducing UK hen numbers by a further 12.5% (RJ Soffee 2004 p558). <heading>Background</heading>Domestic chickens originate from jungle dwellings in South East Asia and have been bred for centuries by man. Hens retain their natural shy jungle behaviour. They enjoy perching and roosting like they would in trees and scrub in the wild, prefer to stay in the shade during the day but roam open spaces at dawn and dusk and like to dust bath (NFU 2004). Chickens first became popular during Victorian times where households kept small numbers of chickens were kept for their own meat and egg consumption. Small scale commercial flocks of specific laying hens appeared in the 1930s and provided small incomes for farmers. Eggs were rationed by the government until 1953 as a result of Second World War. After this there was great focus on intensive production systems to meet the demands from a growing consumer population. Systems became increasingly intensive until in the 1990's a change in consumer demands has seen three distinct systems develop for egg production. These are the battery cages, barn housing and free range systems. Regulations concerning poultry production are governed by the European Union in the UK. <heading>The Different Systems</heading><heading>Battery cages-(seefig1.1) </heading>Battery cages are by far the most efficient system of egg production known, with the average battery hen laying 310 eggs a year compared to barn and free range system hens only laying an average of 295 a year (British Egg Industry Council March 2004). High performance selectively breed pullets are used such as the Hisex Brown and Lohman Brown. No matter the production system used most farms prefer to use selectively breed hens because their ability to lay more eggs in a cycle will increase profit for little initial extra cost. Brown hen egg specific breeds are popular as market research shows consumer prefer to buy the brown eggs they lay (Britegg 1999). Birds in battery's are kept inside with no natural lighting to provide shelter and create the optimum environmental conditions for high production. Day length, temperature, ventilation and movement are all controlled to optimise production. Birds are placed in small galvanised cages at a stocking density as low 450cm 2 per bird (that's the size of a sheet of A4 paper!) and even less in countries such as America. Restricting the hen's movement reduces energy loss focusing more on egg production. The cage has an opening at the front where birds have access to feed and water ad-lib, a feature common to all three systems of production here. This is because if a hen does not have a protein rich diet and free access to water she will not be able to lay eggs at all. A sloping mesh floor allows droppings to pass out of the cage and onto a belt which is cleaned regularly, and eggs are caught and roll from underneath the hen and await collection on a shelf. Cages are arranged in long rows and can be tiered up to 8 cages high to maximise use of shed space. European law has now banned the installation of such systems and all existing conventional cage systems will be banned by January 2012 in the EU with the aim of improving animal welfare (BBC news 2003). The poultry industry saws this law was unfair for farmers as they are not free to compete with producers importing from outside the EU. Following lobbying, the EU compromised allowing use of "enriched" cages (see fig1.2). These are similar to battery cages but are larger (750cm 2 per bird) contain a nesting area of least 20cm in height and a cage height of 45cm or more as well as 15cm of perching space per bird. Changes in the legislation were prompted by concerns that conventional cages caused welfare issues such as loss feathers from constant rubbing with cage mesh, lame broken feet due to twisting of claws around cage mesh and birds unable to shorten their own claws plus violent behaviour against fellow chickens caused by boredom. Beak and foot trimming are common practice in the UK to reduce these problems. These welfare issues arise less in barn or free range systems as animals are less bored but they are often still have beak tips removed as a preventative measure. Around 64% of the UK's 30 million laying hens are kept in battery systems and this system dominated egg production in the 1970s and 80s (Brittegg 2004). Despite welfare issues the system remains popular as is the cheapest way to produce eggs and routine tasks such as egg collection, mucking out, feeding and watering can be automated by mechanisation making keeping large numbers of hens easy with little labour easy. <heading>Barn Housing-</heading>In barn systems hens are still housed so farmer still has a degree of control over the hen's environment but with the differences that movement is not restricted and light is usually from natural sources. Birds are kept in less dense stocking rates than battery systems (maximum of 9 birds per m 2 of floor space) and allowed to roam the shed floor which is bedded with straw or a similar material. Perches are provided with a minimum of 15 cm per bird to roost and defecate is these areas. Birds can express more of their natural behaviour than battery hens as can move about, dust bath and roost and birds do not become lame like battery birds. As mentioned above feed and water is available ad-lib through feeding hoppers in the shed. These can be filled automatically or manually depending on farm labour availability and farm setup. Apart from feeding free range and barn systems do lend well to automation and require more labour input of routine dull tasks. Nesting boxes are also common to free range and barn systems so eggs laid are kept clean and protected from other birds. Mucking out barn sheds can be tricky process on a large scale as somewhere big is needed to displace birds to prevent health and health problems. This is a much more labour intensive system than battery farming and less productive. It is the least popular production system in the UK with only 6% laying hens reared this way. One reason I think it is unpopular is because most farmers who are prepared to use less intensive techniques would prefer to take advantage of the premium price that can be obtained for free range or organic eggs. If outputs of free range and barn systems are the same so they go just a little further and maximise income. <heading>Free Range-(see fig 1.3)</heading>In this system birds are free to roam during the daylight outside on pasture and scrub land but a tall or electrified fence stops birds wandering too far away and into the reaches of predators such as a fox. The maximum stocking rate is 2,500 birds a hectre. They have free access to shelter at night or when they need to nest. Again brown hybrid productive breeds mostly used but organic farmers or those looking for an additional selling point look for less productive hardier breeds such as Light Sussex, Marran or Blackrock of hen. These breeds would never be used in barn or battery systems. Feeding and water systems are exactly the same as those used in barn farming. This system is least energy efficient of the three systems and requires the highest labour input and building capital investment yet 27% hens in the UK are reared this way and this is increasing. <heading>What is best system? </heading><heading>Welfare</heading>An ideal level of animal welfare is achieved when the five freedoms are met by a stockpersons. FAWC (Farm Animal Welfare Council) developed the five freedoms the ideal points to excellent welfare. They are much higher than actual welfare laws. They are: <list>Freedom from hunger & thirst-access to fresh water and diet to maintain health and vigourFreedom from discomfort-provide appropriate environment including shelter and rest areaFreedom from pain, injury & disease-prevention or rapid diagnosis and treatmentFreedom to express normal behaviour-provide sufficient space, facilities & company of animal's own kindFreedom from fear & disease-ensure conditions and treatment to avoid mental suffering</list>Using these as ideal welfare standards I conclude battery hen systems provide poor welfare only meeting the first freedom properly. However battery hen systems do offer superior disease over other systems control and the lives of commercial birds is slightly longer than in the other systems as the birds have longer laying cycle productivity. These cannot be counted as any of the five freedoms but can be considered good welfare factors. Barn and free range systems offer the best welfare fulfilling all five of the freedoms. Surprisingly barn systems can be considered slightly more welfare friendly than fee range systems as protect hens from the fear of predators better and are not subject to distressing attacks from foxes and birds of prey that is real problem that is growing following ban on fox hunting for free range farmers. <heading>Economic & Consumers Demands</heading>Consumers in the UK are becoming more and more aware of the welfare issues of battery hen farming and showing strong demand for welfare friendly farmed eggs especially preferring free range eggs. An RSPCA survey revealed 86% of people are opposed to cruel farm systems and research by Reading University has shown consumers are willing to pay an additional 41pence a dozen for eggs farmed with higher welfare standards (The Battery Hen Welfare Trust 2004). This is leading to a growing number of producers using free range systems. So why do battery systems still dominate UK farming when most consumers want welfare friendly eggs and are prepared to pay for them? The answer is that most consumers only consider welfare issues when buying actual raw eggs but not to care when buying products containing eggs. In modern society fast food, ready meals and eating are popular consumers appear unaware and unconcerned where the eggs in such foods are sourced from. Caterers, food processors and restaurants prefer to buy cheaper battery farmed eggs to remain competitive and profitable as do industrial egg users that are used to make products like shampoo. This is why demand for cheap battery farmed eggs remains high and is likely to stay this way. For example when buying mayonnaise few customers demand to know what production systems are used to produce the eggs and information is not printed on the jars. Consumers are more interested in special offers and the price of the mayonnaise and fail to link it to animal welfare issues to the product. A small number of consumers are aware of this and some retailers have reacted including McDonalds and M&S who only make their own foods with free range eggs. Weather this trend will continue to spread to other food retailers is yet to be seen. Interestingly the price changes of eggs in supermarkets is only slight between eggs from different production systems with organic eggs varying significantly in price. A dozen battery farmed eggs in ASDA cost £1.62, barn system eggs cost £1.60 and free range cost £1.78 <heading>Conclusion </heading>I believe barn and free range systems should be encouraged in the UK and are the only way profitable way forward for producers. I do agree with the banning of conventional battery systems as anyone would struggle to argue that battery systems are not cruel as they do cause hens pain and distress. Enriched cages offer nearly no additional welfare benefits and I think will cause similar pain to birds than conventional cages. However banning caged systems in the UK I believe, might not solve the welfare problems of conventional caged birds. If a ban was to occur I believe as many current battery producers would move to free range systems for as much as the market would support and the remainder will stop producing eggs. Egg buyers who need cheap eggs to compete in food industry will source cheaper imported eggs that are likely to have been kept in worse battery conditions than in the UK. The WTO is pressuring Europe already to reduce trade tariffs on Europe for eggs to allow more imports. The result would be increased numbers of battery hens in other countries. A survey by the NFU revealed 60% of egg producers in the UK plan not to produce after 2012. It seems the change in EU law will see the end of battery systems altogether in UK. After 2012 UK farmers will have to produce eggs that can be differentiated from cheap imported eggs by being farmed in welfare friendly ways. They must raise consumer awareness about the welfare issues so they ensure they cheek all egg products are made from welfare friendly systems. The best and only profitable way forward for British farmers to win consumer popularity is free range systems. 