<heading>Introduction </heading>The Yorkshire Dales is an area of beautiful mountainous natural scenery in the North East of England (See fig1.1). Mountainous landforms were created by glacial weathering of limestone and millstone grit 300 million years ago, the area now has a plagioclimax of mostly heather moorland covering the high altitude landscape. There are two main grazing activities that are maintaining this landscape, dairy and mixed-stock farming at lower altitudes and higher fells are grazed by Swaledale sheep and heather moorland burnt for grouse breeding(Yorksnet -1999). <heading>History</heading>Throughout history different settlers have left their mark on the Dales landscape through clearing of woodland to survive on produce grown. The remains of Roman roads can be found such as the Richmond to Lancashire Turnpike, built 1751. The Angles and Danes presence is evident through the traditional names of settlements for example "ton" in Worton. The Normans have had the biggest effect on modern setting building castles, creating hunting woodland and leaving Monks from Abbey's to farm the great estates of land. They were the first to develop the hardy Swaledale sheep (Fig1.2) breed adapted to graze this harsh environment and produce the famous Wensleydale cheese in the and store this in Buttertubs area canyons. Gradually dry stone walls and field barns developed as landowners enclosed the fells for sheep farming. Land based industries now account for 32% of employment in the area. (Yorksnet-1999) <heading>Landscape</heading>Hay meadows, lime grassland, woodland and rough moorland all make up the patchwork of the Yorkshire Dales landscape. Soil is shallow, infertile and acidic covering a base of limestone. Moorland (above 300m above sea level) is typically bog land with peat soil. Flat valley bottoms contain traditionally managed hay meadows and that are rich in biodiversity (some hay meadows over 80spiecies within them). These make hay and forage for feeding sheep during winter months. Steep hill sides covered with a variety of lime loving herbs and grasses provide good grazing for sheep most of the year. Highest ground is covered rough grassland and heather bogs. This provides some grazing for sheep but is mainly used for Grouse breeding for sport shooting. Much of the remaining steep sided valleys or gills are covered with woodland. Only 1% of natural broad leaved woodland remains whilst big areas of coniferous forest have recently been planted. Lowland better quality grazing is divided into small fields by traditional dry stone walls with interspaces dry stone barns all built from locally sourced river stone. Barns are used to store hay and shelter animals during harsh winter months. Dry stone walls provide shelter for stock from weather conditions and are a long term solution to dividing land. Field area becomes bigger on rougher moorland where sheep are left uncontrolled to graze poor quality grasses but land boundaries are still divided by traditional dry stone walls and cattle grids at roads. Dry stone walls take a lot of effort and skill to construct, using around 1 tonne of stone to create 1m of dry stone wall but are a long lasting solution suited to division sheep grazing of land in hard to access areas. Some modern fencing materials are used but long term dry stone walls are the preferred option. Much of the land has been modified by the effects of Gripping. Gripping is a method for draining moorland that was in popular use in the 1960s through to the mid 1980's. The process is the creation of a closely spaced network of open trenches which rapidly drain upland bogs into watercourses. This activity was popular in the described time period as governments grants were given for such activity with the aim of improving productivity of hill farms. However the idea proved hugely damaging to biodiversity of the area and led to increased flooding of lowland areas. Grants were stopped and many grips blocked with straw of peat to try and in effort to return land to previous state and stop flooding. Some areas of land have been irreversibly edited and now cannot be converted back to previous conditions. <heading>Land use</heading>The main land use is grazing of the local breed of Swaledale sheep which maintains the stunning surroundings of the area. The Swaledale breed has been used for years to graze the area as is ideally suited to cope with the tough environment. In winter sheep are moved to better lowland grazing or barns during winter months. The breed is very distinct with a white nose and black upper face, with low set rounded horns, a medium length of body and long deep fleece. The breed is very alert and good at rearing lambs in challenging environments (Swaledale breed society-2003). The breed can make good use of rough grasses and herbage in hard to access places. By grazing the natural pastures and moorland the biodiversity of these areas is maintained in balance with economic farming land. Another land use in the Yorkshire dales is Grouse breeding. Game keepers maintain heather moorland by burning it in approximately 5 year cycles. The controlled burning of heather clears the land, generates nutrients that stimulates growth of new grasses and heather needed grouse breeding or sheep grazing and stop succession of other species on heather land (Scotland's Mooreland forum-2003). Grouse then have the ideal habitat to breed on the moors and are shoot for sport. Grouse shooting brings massive amounts of money in to the local economy and is vital way to maintain local livelihoods. This land use is becoming increasingly popular in the Yorkshire Dales as poor wool and meat prices mean more and more sheep farmers get into debt and poverty. Many environmentalists believe moorland burning is damaging to the biodiversity of an area and should not continue. Finally the landscape is being edited by barn conversions for housing. As mentioned earlier farmers struggling to make a living from just sheep grazing are looking at alternative incomes. Now a massive number of dry stone barns used for sheep housing are being converted into houses for commuters who want to live in the beautiful surroundings. Strict planning regulations maintain the look of the buildings but the use of barns for stock is declining as theses buildings get sold for conversion to housing. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Sheep farmers are now facing tough market conditions. People no longer demand the meat produced nor the wool resulting in very poor prices paid for livestock produce. Despite efforts to improve productivity farmers are going into poverty in the Yorkshire Dales by continuing to farm and maintain the environment in this sustainable way. Barn conversions for housing, grouse shooting and tourism are being increasingly used as the answer to farmer's economic problems. This will see changes in the outstanding scenery and biodiversity and a traditional way of farming for years to come. 