<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>The trip involved a visit to an integrated farm. Sustainability of the whole system was the main aim of the farm as in the organic farm but in a different approach. The farm is characterized as sustainable as it employs techniques that increase biodiversity and at the same time minimize the environmental impact. <heading>DESCRIPTION OF THE FARM</heading>The farm is integrated having the same aims as the organic farm. It splits over two sides, with the main crops being cultivated, cauliflower; coriander; sweet-williams, Swedes, kohl rabi, spinach and onions. The farm is on reclaimed gravel mining. All the land has been gone from a gravel peat to this since 1978. The cultivation method in this farm is based on bed systems, being prepared in the late autumn. They are stale seedbeds allowing weeds to germinate and destroy them before the crop is planted. What is really innovative in this farm is the use of G.P.S. The whole farm has been marked on 25m 2 using G.P.S. and soil analysis on this 25m 2. The fertilization as well as spraying take place separately on this 25m 2 making the application precise. The tractors are linked up to this satellite system making the whole system intelligent and innovative at the same time. With respect to nature, in the farm there is a pond 20 years old being a wildlife habitat. Apart from the pond at the end of the field there are ditches for accumulation of drainage water. The fact is that they are kept as clear as possible by spraying. In addition, the water that is being accumulated in the ditches goes back to the pond. Finally, hedges surround the field margins. They consist of native deciduous species, such as elm or blackthorn acting as wildlife corridor and windbreak simultaneously. In the field there are marked nests to avoid being sprayed and also to increase biodiversity. The turnover is about 8,000-9,000£ per year. Finally the integrated farm is based on advice from English nature and other conservations bodies. <heading>SUSTAINABILITY OF THE FARM</heading><heading>Weed control</heading>There is no doubt that weeds are a huge problem that any farmer has to deal with. In this farm weed control is achieved in an effective way taking into account nature and promoting sustainability. The use of stale seedbeds allowing weeds to germinate and destroying them before the crop is planted is a successful technique. Weeds are destroyed using chemicals, such as Roundup, rather than mechanical destruction, applying them at the right amount and at the right quantity. The fact is that this technique eliminates the use of pesticides to a minimum and at the same time promotes sustainability reducing the environmental impact. <heading>Fertilization and sprays</heading>Fertilization is one of the most vital factors leading to a successful production. Comparing to the organic farm, in the integrated farm the whole system of fertilization is by far stricter. Marking the field on 25m 2 using G.P.S. and soil analysis the grower are aware of the fertility variation among blocks within the field. In consequence, fertilizers are applied separately on this 25m 2, making the whole system as precise as possible. In addition, they are applied in accordance to what each block requires, eliminating leaching of nutrients and environmental impact. Not only fertilizers are applied on 25m 2 land but also pesticides contributing to the whole increase system accuracy by eliminating the negative impact of excessive application to beneficial insects. <heading>Hedges</heading>Management of the hedges is an essential part of a sustainable system. In the integrated farm the hedges are trimmed every year into A shape and not into V shape. This strategy allows light to reach the bottom of the hedge comparing to V shaped hedges where light is trapped, having negative impact on close to them vegetation. In reality there are wildlife corridors, attracting birds searching for mates or shelter/ protection and insects, contributing significantly to the enhancement of biodiversity. Furthermore, hedges help to control or reduce erosion as their roots bind soil particles together. Finally, hedges around field margins reduce air velocity and the effect on crops by acting as windbreaks. <heading>Water management</heading>The water after irrigation in the integrated farm is accumulated into ditches being at the around field margins. In these ditches insects, predators and amphibians are gathered making them a wildlife corridor close to fields. They are approximately six wet months of the year providing a wet habitat for amphibians and other animals requiring water to survive, increasing biodiversity. The ditches are kept clear by spraying, with the banks being used as beetle-bank. The existence of pond in the farm contributes to the biodiversity as it is also a wildlife habitat. In addition, the banks of the pond are kept clear so as parasitic wasps to nest. To sum up, the whole management of the drainage water in the farm contributes to the increase of biodiversity making the whole system sustainable and environmental friendly. <heading>Crop management</heading>The appropriate management of the crops can lead to biodiversity as can water and hedges management. The strategy to leave kohl rabi to rot down is characterized as successful as overwintering pests are attracted. This means that this crop act as a feed source for predators, parasites, pests and also attracts birds to come down to feed on the insects. In consequence, biodiversity is being promoted in an effective way. In addition, sweet william also acts as a feed source, attracting birds and insects and helping maintain the essential balance of the farm. To sum up, both of the crops contribute to the general environmental sustainability of the system. <heading>Economic sustainability</heading>In terms of economic sustainability the farm has an annual income of 8,000 to 9,000£. In addition, the whole production system is not stable as it is based on continuous looking for new markets and crops. Taking into account what it can be grown according to the available staff and equipment, without making any changes, the system is in compliance with what the market and consumer require making it more flexible. <heading>CONCLUSIONS</heading>The farm is characterized by economic and environmental sustainability as it promotes biodiversity with respect to nature. Hedges, water and crop management make the whole system sustainable. The use of intelligent fertilization and spray application makes the farm not only innovative but also environmental friendly reducing the negative impact on nature. Compared to the organic farm the integrated farm is less sustainable in terms of social sustainability as it does not bring people and nature together (open days). To sum up, sustainability of the system has been achieved as in the organic farm. 