<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>The trip involved a visit to an organic farm, where 75 different crops are cultivated. The farm promoted sustainability in terms of social, economic and environmental issues by minimizing the inputs to the system and at the same time by enhancing biodiversity. . <heading>SUSTAINABLE</heading>A system is sustainable when it takes seriously into account the nature, avoiding any depletion of natural resources. In addition, a sustainable system is highly productive and stable avoiding any undesirable long-term effects such as soil erosion or negative impact on the balance of pest predator - populations. <heading>DESCRIPTION OF THE ORGANIC FARM</heading>In the organic farm 75 different crops are cultivated all year round and the whole system is divided into 3 separate rotations; field, garden and polytunnels. The whole system is based on green manures and in general on under sowing techniques, without any animal input. <heading>The field rotation</heading>The field rotation is based on 7 year rotation; 2 years cultivated with red clover and 5 years with other crops. Potatoes are cultivated during the third year after two years of red clover cultivation. During the winter of third year, manure is incorporated to improve soil fertility and then another one when potatoes are cleared. In year 4 vegetables are cultivated so as to cover the field during winter, while in year 5 onion and leeks. The onions are cultivated in polyethylene strips mulch intercropped with clover between them. In year 6 and 7, carrots or parsnip and sweet corn or squash are cultivated respectively. <heading>Hedges</heading>In the field rotation, there are hedges planted across field margins by double row of trees. In addition, between each block margins there is a mixture of herbs, clover and grasses to act as a connection between hedges. <heading>The garden rotation</heading>The garden is based on a 9-year rotation, 3 of which are by clover. The garden has its own microclimate and according to the owner it is a challenging part of the organic farm because it produces early crops and also is characterized by having good fertility. It consists of 9 plots each one cultivated by one family group. As in the field rotation, it is also based on under sowing techniques. Although it accounts for only 7% of the whole organic farm it is the most labour intensive (70% of the labour). <heading>Polytunnels rotation</heading>The use of polytunnel rotation is extremely important for the organic farm, because apart from extending the growing season they also bring early crops supplementing the income. In polytunnels overwintering crops are cultivated with half of them being brassicas and half non-brassicas. Moreover, carrots and spinach are also cultivated in this part of the farm. What is really intriguing is the existence of special nesting places, with straw and leaves, for hedgehogs. <heading>SUSTAINABILITY OF THE ORGANIC FARM</heading>The soil fertility of the organic farm is based predominantly on green manures and not any other input such as animal materials or fertilizers. The main strategy of the farm is the combination of crop rotation and green manures, incorporating them within the growing crop. The main fertility building period of the 7-year rotation is in the first 2 years with red clover or lucerne to be cultivated. Lucerne is one of the best crops used to raise nitrogen levels and also to improve soil drainage as the roots go down at least 2m. Taking into account that nitrogen levels are increased the first 2 years, the cultivation of potatoes the following year is successful as they require nitrogen so as good productivity to be achieved. The use of vetches as winter and spring crops is beneficial as the soil is covered during winter. In consequence, not only the organic content is increased but also soil damage is prevented as soil erosion and leaching of the nutrients are being eliminated. Apart from covering well the soil, vetches also encourage range of insects to come, increasing biodiversity. The cultivation of onions on polyethylene mulch is successful as the soil is too stony and also allowed drying to take place in the field and not indoors reducing the cost of production. The cultivation of red clover between the polyethylene strips is of great importance as fertility and soil structure is being increased, enhancing also organic content. The use of carrots or leeks as part of the end of the rotation is also successful as fertility levels started to decline and these crops are able to grow under low fertility levels. Finally, the cultivation of sweet corn or squash in year 7 is beneficial in terms of rebuilding soil structure before the following crop. In a similar way with field rotation, in garden rotation (9 years) 3 years red cover is cultivated to provide the appropriate fertility in the soil. Green manures are also used, being incorporated during the growing crop to optimize soil fertility. This strategy is successful as well as in the field rotation. The cultivation of winter salads is of vital importance for the farm, as they offer an income during winter. According to the owner they produce 1400 bags of winter salads per month. The existence of nesting places for hedgehogs contributes to increasing the biodiversity and as a result to sustainability of the whole system. <heading>Dealing with weeds</heading>They way they manage the weeds is of great importance as both chemical inputs and increasing costs of hand-weeding are being eliminated. The strategy of dealing with weeds is characterized as successful as they are destroyed by burning them off as they emerge (pre-thermal-weeding) before the crop emerges. <heading>Hedges management</heading>The use of hedges on field margins contributes to general sustainability of the farm. They consist of double row of trees, trimmed once (one-side) every 4 years so as not to destroy nests. Hedges increase biodiversity in the farm in terms of flora and fauna and also encourage birds' life. They also act as windbreaks, reducing the impact of heavy winds on crops. Biodiversity also increases as insects move from crop to hedges and then the following season back to the crop. <heading>CONCLUSIONS ABOUT ORGANIC FARM</heading>The organic farm is characterized as sustainable since crop rotation and green manures contribute to great extent to it, eliminating fertilizer inputs. In addition, the use of hedges across field margins increases biodiversity allowing predators to move to them during winter and to return to the crops the following season. They also attract insect-eating birds, whereas at the same time act as windbreaks. Economic sustainability is achieved in the organic farm as wide range of crops is cultivated. Apart from offering a successful income to the farm, the 75 different crops make the whole system flexible as if one crop fails it accounts for a small part. In terms of social sustainability, the farm gives great opportunities for many people to work. Moreover, the use of open days brings people together and also allows consumers to visit the farm having a better view of how the crops are cultivated and how environmental friendly is the way of production. <heading>SUGGESTIONS</heading>Although green manures are beneficial, contributing to sustainability of the whole system, it could have been better also animal manures to be included so as to optimize soil fertility. In addition, taking into account that there are horses in the farm, their manure can be used in successful production of organic mushrooms, offering another essential income to the farm and contributing to economic sustainability. 