<heading>INTRODUCTION </heading>Dietary survey is an assessment of current intake and is an essential tool in assessing the relationship between diet and disease. It is also used on clinical medicine and assists in policy making. Weighed food intake, in theory, is considered the 'Gold standard' as there is no error in portion size. It takes account of weighed and estimated dietary intakes. Another advantage is that it is a prospective method hence des not rely on the memory of the subject. However, Garrow (1974) was correct in stating "The measurement of habitual food intake of an individual must be amongst the most difficult tasks a physiologist can undertake" Errors are likely to be introduced by food composition tables, as well as coding errors (where exact matches cannot be found) and it is often difficult to assess food that is not prepared by the individual. This method is consequently not ideal for subjects who frequently eat away from home. Individuals are also likely to change their diets under scrutiny as well. It is however more precise than estimated intakes or past intake methods. The use of the CompEat foodbase program database has also made what was in the past a very laborious task very practical. <heading>METHOD</heading>Please see method detailed in practical booklet. All food and drinks consumed over a 6 day period were weighed and recorded <heading>RESULTS</heading>Please see attached dietary survey forms and Foodbase diary analysis results <heading>DISCUSSION</heading>Some definitions The dietary reference values (DRV) are calculated on the basis of requirements to: <list>prevent deficiency of protein m vitamins and mineralsMaintain balance of energy On the basis of levels of intake associated with low rates of chronic disease for example Coronary heart disease.</list>Generally the distribution of requirements for a given nutrient within a population is assumed to be normal or Gaussian and it covers EAR Estimated Average Requirement of a group of people for energy or protein or vitamin, about half will usually need more than the EAR and half less LRNI Lower Reference Nutrient intake for protein vitamin or mineral. An amount of the nutrient that is enough for only the few people in the group who have low needs RNI Reference Nutrient Intake of a protein, Vitamin or mineral. An amount of the nutrient that is enough or more than enough, or more than enough for about 97% of people in a group. If the average intake of a group is at RNI, then the risk of deficiency is very small <heading>INTERPRETATION </heading>Estimated Average Requirements for energy In general the foodbase analysis showed that I (the subject) consumed less than the Dietary reference values of energy per day; 1720 kcals compared with recommended 1940kcals. From observing the dietary survey form it appears that too little energy was taken in on some days and hardly any on other days. Also as a lot of food consumed was pre-prepared e.g. sandwiches and soups it was difficult to estimate the amount of oil used so it was left out completely. This may be responsible for the low values. It also showed that very much higher than desirable levels of protein; 76.9 compared with 45.0 this is 31.9g were consumed on average. <quote> Implications: There is some evidence that excessive intakes of protein may contribute to the demineralisation of bone, although the relationship is not a simple one and increases in dietary phosphorous which usually accompany increased dietary protein may minimise any such effect. (Department of Health 1991)</quote>Another negative point was t oo little dietary fibre was shown to be consumed only 37% of the RNI. This result was surprising considering the regularly large amounts of wholegrain cereals consumed. These are rich sources of insoluble non starch polysaccharides (NSP). NSP-rich foods are generally less energy dense, more bulky and may induce greater satiety than NSP-free foods; their laxative effect has been well documented (Department of Health, UK 1991) As concerns vitamins and minerals The following minerals were consumed at levels higher than the DRV showing most 'excessively' consumed first <table/>Taking into account the definition of DRV's only those values vastly different from the DRV were considered causes for concern .For example: The intake of sodium was almost double the dietary reference value. Sodium is the principal cation in extracellular fluid where it exists in ionised state. High sodium intakes are associated with higher blood pressure and have also been identified as contributors o other diseases. Calcium is suspected to be mainly obtained from high protein sources such as skimmed milk, this illustrates the difficulty of establishing a 'balanced diet' as consuming one item may be beneficial in one sense but be provide another nutrient in excess amounts Consuming too many water soluble vitamins Niacin, B6 and B12 does not present a problem because they are simply excreted Too little of the following vitamins were consumed (Most severe case first) <table/>Potassium was the most markedly deficient mineral. Potassium deficiency alters the electricophysiological characteristics of cell membranes causing weakness of skeletal muscles (DOH 1991). Very much lower levels of retinol were consumed .This vitamin has functions in growth, the maintenance of skin and mucous membranes and the visual process and intake should be increased to at least the DRV . Folate, the water soluble essential nutrient was also consumed in lower than desirable levels. This has serious implications as folic acid is a precursor of several important enzyme co factors required for the synthesis of nucleic acids and the metabolism of some amino acids (Gaby et. al 1991). Iron is a component of haemoglobin, myoglobin and many enzymes and is stored in reticulo-endothelial system as ferritin. Deficiency has adverse effects on work capacity , intellectual performance and behaviour and ultimately defective erythropoeisis leading to hypochromic anaemia . Iodine forms part of the hormones thyroxin and triiodothyronine which are necessary for the maintenance of the metabolic rate , cellular metabolism and integrity of connective tissue . There are no Dietary reference values for the intakes of fat and carbohydrates , However , a set of dietary goal does exist . It is defined as a  broad agreement among all national and international Authorities as to those changes in the average diet that are desirable to minimize risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer. (Bender 1997) The table below gives a summary and comparison of percentage of energy derived from carbohydrates, fats and alcohol with desirable levels of each the major food groups. The values (not already provided) were calculated using Atwater factors as follows: Starch  FORMULA  (A column showing male intakes has been added for comparison purposes) <table/>It is recommended that more energy is provided by carbohydrates because it is expected that this way less energy will be obtained from fats. <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>The values concur for the most part with data collected using food frequency questionnaires a few months previously which was then analysed using DIETQ package. The information was obtained by analysing the diets of 29 University of Reading students aged between 19 and 40 years It showed that students have been shown to derive much higher than desirable levels of energy from Saturated fats and sugar. This may place them at risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer later in life. This similar trend may be attributed to the 'student culture' , which normally finds students living in private accommodation resorting to the increasingly wide array of snack foods, ready meals and take away food available. These are normally high in Sodium, sugar and may contain hidden fat. <heading>Accuracy </heading>Advantages & Disadvantages of the method The weighed dietary survey has definite benefits over methods such as diary record because sample sizes are actually weighed and not estimated (although in this case some of the weights were estimated as the scales were not used from the on start) does rely on the memory and honesty of the subjects like food frequency questionnaire. It is however quite an inconvenience to carry around and not ideal when you do not prepare the food yourself. For example Impossible to weigh exact weights e.g. of ingredients of store bought foods e.g. Chicken sandwich with salad and not sure what oils have been used in that as well. For mixed salads and estimation of how much of each vegetable was consumed had to be made using pictures to estimate portion sizes. Some of the foods cannot be found in the database program Alternatives had to be chosen even for common things e.g. chicken Pasties, Alpen cereal. The computer programme utilizes information from the McCance and Widdowson's The composition of foods. This may introduce errors but is normally taken to be accurate. The programme does not take into account Physical activity levels or intake of nutrients from other sources. I engaged in at least 30 minutes of walking everyday which is a significant amount of physical activity and also ingested multivitamin supplements which contain over 100%(US RDA) of all nutrients . The study also assumed that this was my typical diet which as aforementioned is rare with students e.g. from the survey form it can be seen that the food and energy intakes were very high on some days and very low on others. The survey was however very useful in obtaining detailed information on my diet which is useful for planning and maintaining a healthy diet. 