<heading>Introduction</heading>The agricultural sector begins the twenty century facing the challenge of "building synergy between technological change and the socio-economic, cultural and political dimensions of agricultural innovation" (Gonsalves et. al. , 2005). Complex issues such as pro-poor targeting, trade globalization and supply chains, local governance and decentralization, multi-stakeholder participation, equity for women, organizational learning, and many others, emerged as a challenge for the transfer-of-technology paradigm carried out since the green revolution. The complexity of the agricultural innovation dimension includes the debate on farmers' experimentation, indigenous knowledge, and participatory research, which leads to the importance of understanding the entire farming system which includes "climate and soils, and the social, institutional and economic environment", where the farmer is part of the decision making process (Gonsalves et. al. , 2005). In this context, the present study aims to critically discuss the statement "we should expect little synergistic benefit in bringing farmers' experimentation and formal experimentation into closer contact". <heading>Farmers' and Formal Experimentation</heading>Farmers have been experimenting since the early ages of domestic agriculture. Anthropologists have found that 'inventors of agriculture' started with the Sumerians in 5,500 BC but it was not until a recent "explosion of interest in participatory research that farmers' experiments began to enter the limelight" as indicated by Sumberg & Okali (1997:4). The story line of participation research starts with the formal agricultural research and extension, which after a series of changes on approaches, were still not able to contribute to resource-poor farmers, as the top-down and transfer-of-technologies approach undermined the farmers' research traditions, nevertheless, during this process, valuable and detailed farmers' knowledge on their environments were identified and farmers were brought into the centre of the technology by the research organizations to strength its relationship (Sumberg & Okali, 1997:5). The literature argues that the main reason why participatory research has been largely discussed post-Green Revolution is because the transfer-of-technology (TOT) model did not target the resource-poor-farmers, who do not benefit from formal research and extension, and who are responsible for approximately 60% of global agriculture, and produce 15-20% of the world food (Francis, 1986). Chambers and Ghildyal (1985) suggests that the "criterion of excellence" is not on developing a research in a station or in a laboratory, or even targeting rich farmers, the real challenge is on spreading new practices among the resource-poor farmers .In this context, Altieri and Nicholls (2004) indicate that <quote>despite many agricultural development projects throughout Latin America, most resource-poor farmers of the region have gained very little from modern agricultural science and the processes of technology transfer known as the Green Revolution. The problem is that new technologies, including bioengineered crops, are not scale-neutral. The usual story is that farmers with the larger and better-endowed lands gain the most, whereas farmers with fewer resources often lose. Not only are new technologies inappropriate for poor farmers, but peasants are excluded from access to credit, information, technical support and other services that would help them use and adapt new technologies if they so desired. </quote>Participatory research is associated with the idea that farmers have a well-established tradition of local experimentation. In order to understand better farmers' experimentation, Leeuwis (2004) indicates that "farmers' knowledge and beliefs can originate from various sources, for example, from local and /or own experiences and experimentation, or from formal agricultural research. Farmers are likely to engage already in 'experimental' activities, even if this may not be clear and visible to outsiders". This is because farmers may not relate to their activities as 'experiments' or 'trials'. As indicated by Leeuwis (2004), farmers' experimentation can take many forms, usually different from the way scientists think about experiments. Below is a summary of the ways farmers experiment, presented by Leeuwis (2004:233). Different horizons in comparing treatments: Farmers differ from scientists when comparing 'treatments' and consequently experimentation. Instead of comparing simultaneous treatments, farmers compare 'treatments' over the years and with other farmers. Ex-post reconstruction: farmers' experiments are not necessarily designed deliberately and in retrospect (Richards, 1994 cited by Leeuwis, 2004). By comparing one's own practices and results with those of others or from previous periods, for example, one can come to think about observed differences as the outcome of an 'experiment'. The role of improvisation: while farmers usually experiment because they are interested in doing so, they also sometimes engage in 'experiments' when they have no other alternative, such as non-availability of inputs used normally. Multiple 'independent' variables: farmers' trials do not usually take place under controlled conditions but rather in the context of wider farming activity. Holistic evaluation and measurement: Even if scientists usually consider several dependent variables when evaluating an experiment, farmers are likely to take into account an even wider range of variables. Farmers may use less tangible modes of evaluation, such as impressions, intuitions and feelings. The study of Leeuwis indicates that the main goal of farmers' experimentation is to develop appropriate agricultural technology to meet their production needs. They actively participate in the identification of problems, needs, opportunities and priorities, in the design and implementation of experiments, and in the evaluation of results to ensure that the research will focus on their needs. As the research is conducted where the production occurs, the farmers develop technologies in 'real conditions'. Reflecting the objectives and criteria of farmers based on their access to resources and inputs, agronomic constraints, and marketing possibilities. <fnote>Source :  URL  </fnote>Richards (1994) agues that experimentation is an important aspect of local knowledge, and thus makes a claim that local knowledge is scientific. According to him, <quote>local knowledge is knowledge that is in conformity with general scientific principles, but which, because it embodies place-specific experience, allows better assessment of risk factors in production decision. This kind of knowledge arises where local people undertake their own experimentation, or where they are able to draw inferences from experience and natural experiments. </quote>The literature shows that indigenous technical knowledge "is an indispensable part of the introduction of new agricultural technology" as addressed by Samanta & Prasad (1995). Before any new technology is developed and disseminated, the farmers' knowledge must be taken into consideration. Farmers have a wealth of knowledge related to their own environment and they have developed specific skills designed to make the best use of that environment, added to their own research traditions through which they have introduced changes into their farming practice. However the literature suggests that formal experimentation is necessary and valuable to improve farmers' livelihood, the work of Ceccarelli et al. (1996:1) suggests that farmers in "stressful environments benefit little from the spectacular yield increases obtained by formal (or institutional) breeding programs based in environments which are naturally favorable or can be profitably made favorable by using inputs". As an illustration, Ceccarelli et al. (1996) concludes that the main reason of the failure on providing a better crop for small and resource-poor farmers was due to non interaction of genotype and environment. For avoiding failure, the authors encourage farmers' participation in selecting germplans and the use of indigenous and specialized knowledge of the crop and the environment. However the literature emphasis the benefits of farmers' experimentation, has its implications regarding time (being dependent on seasons), climate, information, culture and resources available. Farmers alone have limited source of resources and information to run experiments which can be utilized by other groups of farmers in a different location. Overall, the success in bringing formal and informal research together is direct related to understanding the characteristics and processes of farmers' experimentation and its flexibility to adapt to other circumstances. Sumberg & Okali (1997:27-8) conclude that there are two justifications for the high interest in farmers' experiments. The first is related to the potential for "direct empowerment of rural people by increasing their self-reliance and by bolstering their position vis-à-vis the bureaucratic organs of the state, such as formal agricultural research institutions". The second justification is related to the impact of the integration of farmers' experimentation into formal agricultural research, in formal and informal research activities, "resulting in better or more appropriate technologies", and eventually contributing to improve livelihoods. Those two justifications reflect the paradigm between technology and social development, and increase the debate on integrating farmers' experiments. <heading>Synergistic benefit </heading>According to Oxford English Dictionary (1989), synergy is understood as "joint working, co-operation". Sumberg & Okali (1997) suggests that through synergy, combining farmers' experiments and formal experiments, will maximize the effects, instead of each other working alone. The idea that the whole is better than the sum of the parts is considered the "synergy hypothesis" by Sumberg & Okali (1997:28), which is supported by the concept that farmers have an intimate knowledge of their environment, problems, conditions, priorities and are constantly experimenting in their farm routine. The figure 1, extracted from Rogers and Shoemaker (1971) cited by Sumberg and Okali (1997:30), illustrates the levels of potential synergy between farmers' experiments and formal experiments. The authors define "homophily" and "heterophily" as the degree to each pairs of individuals are similar or different in certain aspects. The figure shows that highest the heterophily is, the more difficult becomes the communication and understanding among individuals. The authors also suggest that "collegial relationship will be more difficult to establish when farmers' experiments and formal experiments have few characteristics in common." At one side there are farmers with knowledge of their environment, conditions, priorities and problems, and on the other side there is research being done which are often not accessible or suitable for resource-poor farmers. Having a collegial relationship between farmers and researchers will bring significant benefits for both, which could not be achieved without involving farmers' experiments (Sumberg and Okali, 1997:28). <fnote>Rogers and Shoemaker (1971:14) cited by Mackrell (n.d.) argues that "heterophilous individuals who have high empathy are, in a psychologist sense, really homophilous" </fnote><fnote>Biggs (1989) cited by Sumberg & Okali (1997:28) describes collegial relationship as researchers actively encouraging the informal R&D system in rural areas. </fnote><figure/>The theory of synergy is much more complex that it seems, as it involves deep change in the relationship between farmers and researchers. The new approach of participatory research programs focus on "doing research and development work with people instead of doing research and development work for people" (Gonsalves et. al, 2005). It involves labour division, and farmers as decision makers. Gonsalves et. al (2005) argues that "to really do research with farmers, it is not enough to learn and apply a few 'participatory methods' in the field or to ask farmers for their opinions about a new technology", it is a much deeper understanding of roles and responsibilities, implying in conceptual consequences, structural adjustments and organizational changes. When bringing together processes which are similar, with the same characteristics, it will add to the research itself, in this case integration is seen not as synergy, but as complementary. But when different processes are brought together creating a new dynamic, the effect of adding and multiplying is considered in fact synergy (Sumberg and Okali, 1997:29). The literature has indicated that farmers' experiments have much in common with formal experiments, as both are experimental and interactive, combining experience, observation, intuition, persistence, skill and luck (Sumberg and Okali, 1997:149). There are differences in the way experimentation is conducted, as indicated by Leeuwis (2004), but the process of experimentation, rather than the tools, are seen as similar. Based on the definition of synergy and complementarity, Sumberg and Okali (1997:155), concludes that the "degree of synergy is related to the degree of difference among the process to be brought together" and in this context, little synergistic benefit in bringing farmers' experimentation and formal experimentation into closer contact is expected. Experimentation by farmers cannot entirely replace conventional scientific research and conventional scientific research cannot replace farmers' on-farm research. There is a need for an approach that favours a 'symbiotic relationship' between the two. The result is the incorporation of the most important and valuable aspects of each into a new system which will both benefit the small resource-poor farmer and contribute to the scientific knowledge base (Selener, 1997). Even though little synergy benefit is expected, farmers' experimentation is still essential for leading to the "development of productive and sustainable farming systems well suited to their needs, environment, and resources" (Gonsalves et. al, 2005). 