<list></list><heading>Introduction</heading><heading>Objectives of this study</heading>The present study aims to (a) describe and critically analyse the extension approaches of a regional government institution called CATI in Sao Paulo State (Brazil), (b) explain the factors which led to the development of the identified extension approaches, and (c) suggest how the extension approach at CATI is likely to change over the next five years. <heading>What is CATI? </heading>A governmental office called Coordenadoria de Assistência Técnica Integral (CATI) was established in 1968 to provide technical assistance and rural extension in Sao Paulo State, as part of a decentralized approach. At the moment, CATI coordinates 40 sub-regional offices which are responsible to assist 485 'agricultural houses' where extension workers provide services at local level, supported by the municipalities. The figure 1 illustrates the geographical distribution of the sub-regional offices, supervised by CATI (Lima, 2001:14). <figure/><heading>Rural extension approaches undertaken by CATI</heading>According to FAO studies, presented by Axinn (1988), there are several approaches to extension, which are (a) general extension; (b) commodity specialized; (c) training and visit; (d) agricultural extension participatory; (e) project approach; (f) farming systems development; (g) cost-sharing approach; and (h) educational institution approach. <fnote>Source:  URL  </fnote>Through its four departments (including a library), CATI provides (a) technical support for autonomous extension workers through training in several topics; (b) production and distribution of seeds and young plants, young fruit plants, including native fruit plants; (c) production of sunflower seeds, maize and green fertilizers; (d) capacity strengthening for in-house staff, other institutions, producers, and farmers; (e) design and sale of publications, technical CD-ROMs and videos; and (f) database on soil, climate, culture, livestock, agricultural trade, and agro-industry . <fnote>Source:  URL  </fnote>Based on the services provided by CATI, almost all approaches indicated by Axinn are utilized, in one or other way, depending on the needs of extension workers and farmers; except for the T&V and cost-sharing approaches. An example of the commodity specialized approach is the production of wheat in Sao Paulo State. Some extensionists from CATI are specialized in wheat production and offer all services related to this specific commodity, from information on seeds, soil conservation to market orientation. CATI also provides support on increasing production and improving livelihood, in a participatory way. A good example of this practice is the National Programme to Strengthen Family Farming (PRONAF), which works with small holders on a series of different projects, from fisheries to dairy products. The Farming systems development approach of CATI is based on promoting a rural and urban development program at the local level (farmers, associations, communities, and schools), in partnership with municipalities, promote sustainable rural development through competitive agro-business, generate employment and income, and preserve the environment. <fnote>See  URL  </fnote>Regarding the cost-sharing approach, based on personal communication with professionals from CATI and agronomists, it was found that other regional governmental organizations for extension services in Brazil do not provide advices free of charge (e.g. in the Centre-Western region of Brazil) and were considered by the users as better service providers than CATI. Informal interviews and the literature show that when extensionists and farmers pay for a specific service, it forces the provider to maintain a high quality standard for its service. But would the cost-sharing approach exclude the resource poor-farmers? A study by Dinar and Keynan (2000) produced for the World Bank shows that paid extension is "feasible and has a positive impact, even in a relatively poor country such as Nicaragua". The study concludes that "even poor farmers are willing to pay for a service that improves their economic efficiency and ability to earn a living. Nicaragua's producer clients understood that without cost sharing, the system would not endure." <fnote>Source:  URL  </fnote>The analysis above brings to the conclusion that an organization may not adopt one exclusive extension approach, but can adopt a combination of several approaches that suits better its purpose. The literature suggests that an integration of several approaches would be more appropriate to a large diversity of clients. CATI provides a considerable number of services, from collective services (to group of professionals/farmers) to individuals searching for advices on a specific topic. CATI also adopts from technology transfer or increasing production oriented approaches to a more participatory and problem solving intervention. However, it does not necessarily mean that the services provided by CATI are efficient, effective, sustainable and at low costs. More on those issues will be addressed in the coming sections of this study. <heading>What has led to the development of CATI approaches? </heading>Rural extension in Brazil originated from an American model, called the "classical model for rural extension" according to which technological progress was the only way to promote development and modernization (adapted from Figueiredo, 1984). After a series of reforms, in 2002, the Brazilian government launched a new policy for Technical Assistance and Rural Extension (ATER), which aims to promote sustainable agriculture, and generate income and employment. The ATER policy has a more holistic approach, of equity and social inclusion, instead of diffusion of "technological packages" as adopted previously. After a series of internal reforms, CATI revised its philosophy and priorities in 1981 and adopted a more participatory and decentralized approach, deviating from the national approach (Pinto, 1998 cited by Lima, 2001). During a further reform in 1997, when several directors of regional and sub-regional offices met to define the new goals of CATI, a new mission was agreed upon, which was to promote sustainable rural development through participative actions involving communities, partners and all stakeholders. Rodrigues (1997:122) summarizes the evolution of rural extension in Brazil, since 1948, as presented in table 1. <fnote>Translated from the original </fnote><table/>The table 1 presented above is an example of the changes which occurred over several decades in Brazil. The function of extensionists shifted from inducing behaviour change to a facilitator of social processes. Later new techniques of learning and teaching were introduced, with more focus on dialogue and solving problems. It is commonly understood that the success of the new service extension of CATI depends not only on designing a new policy, new approaches or improving the capabilities of its staff, it also depends on the capabilities of individual farmers, farmers institutions and rural communities to absorb the new approach. Sustainability is directly related to the capacity of an individual or society to compete in a globalized market and being economically sustainable, preserving the social and environmental system, as Pinheiro et al (1997) indicate. <heading>Will the extension approach of CATI change over the next five years? </heading>According to Rivera (1990) the public sector extension <quote>has been, and still is, under attack from a wide spectrum of politicians and economists over its cost and financing. Public sector extension worldwide has been criticized for not doing enough, not doing it well, and for not being relevant. Extension is criticized for insufficient impact, ineffectiveness, inefficiency, and, sometimes, for not pursuing programs that foster equity. </quote>Rivera wrote those observations in 1990 and 15 years later extension approaches are still under attack. To respond the question above, yes, extension approaches will have to change over the next few years in order to fulfil the needs of its clients/beneficiaries, and also in order to be economically efficient and achieve its goals. The study concludes that the services provided by CATI are generally ineffective, if compared to other services provided by similar public organizations in Brazil. The same group, interviewed by email, pointed to a lack of political willingness to replace professionals not well suited to the job and the resistance of professionals to accept the new holistic and participatory extension approach. In theory, the approaches designed by CATI are in line with the holistic idea of extension services and its intervention, demanded by the National policy and recommended by the literature. But in reality, CATI does not apply a mechanism to evaluate its performance and cost effectiveness, in order to have a systematic way for improving its services. Over the years, extensionists from governmental organizations lost credibility among farmers and the society itself. In order to rescue its credibility and dismiss the stigma, agricultural professionals and their leaders will have to work on changing attitudes and behaviour towards the needs of farmers. Lockeretz & Anderson (1993), cited by Drost et. al (1998) argue that "to be successful, sustainable farming systems must be adapted to the conditions of each site, because success depends on the farmer's observation and implementation within the constraints of each farm and its environment". The future challenge for CATI will be on adopting an intensive participatory approach, improve the quality of its service (upgrading knowledge of extension workers, publications, and training services), reducing the costs of agricultural extension (adopting a cost-sharing approach) and utilizing all possible tools (such as telephony, internet, and radio) to bring the best service to rural areas. But the extension reform alone will not be enough to improve the livelihood of rural communities in Sao Paulo State. There is a need for bringing different actors (from different sectors and disciplines) on board, on a holistic and participatory way to achieve a common purpose. 