<heading>Background and Objective</heading>Antioxidant enzymes and dietary antioxidants play an important role in the body by neutralising free radicals that damage cells. Free radicals are also involved in some chronic conditions including cancer and heart disease. This study determined the antioxidant capacity of a range of fruit juices and teas and coffee using the ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assay. Dietary antioxidant found in fruit and vegetables include vitamin C, carotenoids, Vitamin E, flavonoids and polyphenols. (Geissler and Powers, 2005) <heading>Results</heading>An important reaction took place in order to determine the antioxidant potential of the samples. The ferric-tripyridyltriazine complex (Fe 3+ -TPTZ) was reduced by the ferrous (Fe 2+), formed by the antioxidant and this produced a blue colour so the absorbance could be measured. Grapefruit had the lowest absorbance value of 0.9105 so had less antioxidant capacity. Various teas and coffees tested had larger absorbance and FRAP values and therefore a greater antioxidant capacity than the fruit juices tested. Figure 1 showed positive correlation between the concentration of vitamin C and absorbance value. This correlation suggested that the higher the concentration of Vitamin C, the greater the antioxidant potential. However vitamin C 1500 µM concentration had a much higher absorbance value than expected at 1.4293 and was higher than vitamin C 2000 µM concentration and this trend should not have occurred. The FRAP values had a wide range from vitamin C 100 µM with a value of 327.29 µM, through to green tea 2707.14 µM. <table/><heading>CalculationsFRAP assay</heading> FORMULA  10 mM solution in 50 ml of 40 mM HCl  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Actual weight of TPTZ used: 0.1557 g  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Vitamin C Standard curve - see graph in appendix Ascorbic acid: MW = 176.13 g Standard solution 100 mM: 1.761 g / 100 ml (100 mM) <table/>A593nm for 1000µM ascorbic acid standard: y= 0.0007 × 1000 = 0.7  FORMULA  Example:  FORMULA  <heading>Discussion and Conclusion</heading>The results of this study showed that green tea had the greatest antioxidant capacity. This was because green tea contained many flavonoids that possessed the antioxidant properties. Green tea had the largest absorbance value at 593 nm of 1.8950 and absorbance was used to measure colour intensity and colour intensity was proportional to antioxidant capacity. As the general trend for vitamin C was an increase in antioxidant capacity with increasing concentration, this could be used to compare the fruit juices and teas and coffees tested. Only the more concentrated vitamin C samples of 1500 and 2000µM had similar values to the beverages tested. The antioxidant capacity was important to investigate as the antioxidants quenched free radicals that reduce damage to the body. The reproducibility of the results is achievable as there are no difficult stages in the method. However absorbance values need to be repeated a number of times in this experiment because values vary for the same sample. This can be overcome by calculating an average of the absorbance readings. The literature values were difficult to obtain to check results were in the right order of magnitude. However a study on ascorbic acid concentration and FRAP assay suggested FRAP values of between 273 - 1270 µM (ref 4). Most of the vitamin C values obtained were within this range; however the higher concentrations of vitamin C had a higher FRAP value of 2041.86 µM. The FRAP values may not have been very accurate because the results for the standard vitamin C may not have been accurate as this standard value was calculated from the equation of the line. These absorbance values should have been repeated. The study provides information on antioxidant capacity of different foods and beverages and this could be used to aid consumers when selecting a diet where they want to increase there antioxidants. 