<heading>Introduction</heading>Traditionally, grammar books have unreservedly referred to past, present and future tenses in English. This ternary view was derived from the Latin model of tense according to which events occur in one of these three timeframes and the verb form is correspondingly marked. The scope of tense-relations in this essay includes the past (represented in regular verbs by the suffix [-ed]), the present (represented in regular verbs by the suffix [-(e)s] for the third person singular) and the future (represented by the modal auxiliary 'will' and the infinitive). The aspectual (progressive) and phase (perfect) characteristics of the verb form constitute a necessary part of any discussion on how the occurrence of events is represented along the time continuum, however, these forms do not drive the analysis of tense as it is addressed here. From a purely structural perspective, some linguists claim that the three grammatical forms described above only offer the possibility of two 'true' tenses in English: the past and present (or non-past) as these alone exhibit an inflectional verbal form that marks tense, whereas the future form is only a periphrastic construction derived from one of the many functions of the modal auxiliary 'will'. The counter-argument to this approach is that syntactic or surface representation fails to yield an adequate semantic interpretation at the temporal level and that it is necessary to examine the deep structure relationship of speech time, event time and the temporal primitive that mediates between these two (reference point), to provide an adequate theory of tense. This essay firstly defines the term 'tense' and contrasts the theoretical approaches of structuralists and logical semanticists. To illustrate the many-to-many relationship between tenses and the time locations to which they apply, examples are given of how these timeframes are expressed syntactically, followed by an outline of the uses of the past, present and future forms in English. Finally, the status of the term 'tense' is evaluated and the conclusions summarised. <heading>Definitions and Theories of Tense</heading>Comrie (1985:9) defines tense as "grammaticalised location in time." This definition is central to the debate between the proponents of the form-driven structuralist view and the meaning-driven functional view of tense. The former approach states that tense is purely manifested through the application of inflectional affixes which serve to relate an event to a timeframe, Quirkal. (1985), Palmer (1987), Berk (1999), Dowling and Lock (2001). In English, only two instances of such surface structure grammaticalisation exist: the past and present as illustrated in the following two examples where the inflections are underlined. (1)  FORMULA  - past tense (2)  FORMULA  - present tense According to this view, the verb form in the sentence: (3)  FORMULA  - future time cannot be attributed the label 'future tense' because the main verb form is non-finite and the auxiliary 'will' is modal. Furthermore, Quirk (1985:175) states "the future has no morphological form in English...and therefore is not really a tense." This claim is controversial because it directly challenges the traditional view of a ternary tense system in English. In contrast to this restrictive, structuralist view of tense, Reichenbach (1947) postulated that there are three inherent time points associated with all manifestations of the verb. These points represent the deep structure relation between the moment of Speech (S), the Event (E) and a temporal primitive called the Reference point (R). The deep structure evidence for R is readily observable in examples using the two complex verb forms Past Perfect (4) and Future Perfect (6): (4)  FORMULA  where the temporal disposition of E, S and R on a time continuum is: (5)  FORMULA  and: (6)  FORMULA  where: (7)  FORMULA  In non-complex verb forms, R is either contemporaneous with either S or E but is always part of the tense representation as shown below using the earlier examples given: (1a)  FORMULA  (2a)  FORMULA  (3a)  FORMULA  This theory claims that SRE points constitute the deep structure components of all tenses. Huddlestone (1968) demonstrated that for tense to be applied to deep structure, it is necessary to propose past, present and future tenses. Reichenbach derived 9 fundamental tense forms from a maximum of 24 combinations of SRE arrangements. Hornstein (1990) reduced these to a subset of 6 Basic Tense Structures comprising the simple and perfect form of the past, present and future, thus including the grammatical category 'phase' as a distinctive feature of tense. The above theoretical exposition of the two opposing theories of tense will now be cast in a different light by examining how time relationships are expressed in English and the pragmatics of 'tense' usage. <heading>The Relationship Between 'Tense' and Time</heading>A full discussion on the many-to-many relationship between 'tense' and time in English is outside the scope of this essay particularly with respect to the progressive and perfective characteristics of time representations. It is pertinent, however, to point out the mismatch between the notion of past, present and future 'tense' and the verbal forms used to express corresponding temporal semantic categories. <heading>How Past, Present and Future Events are Represented</heading>An event in the 'past' may be expressed by the 'simple' past tense as demonstrated above: (1b)  FORMULA  However, an event occurring at the moment of speech is represented by the present progressive: (8)  FORMULA  not the present simple: (9)  FORMULA  Finally, events in the future are commonly expressed by the present progressive, the semi-modal 'going to' or even the present simple rather than the auxiliary 'will'. (10)  FORMULA  (11)  FORMULA  (12)  FORMULA  (13)  FORMULA  Therefore, without delving into the wider temporal implications of these examples, it suffices to say that in English, unlike in Romance languages, present and particularly future events are not expressed using the verb form defined by traditional syntax, whereas this is the case for at least one representation of the past. As Comrie (1985) points out, there is an inherent asymmetry between the definite nature of events expressed in the past and present, and the uncertainty associated with those located in future time. I propose that this may have contributed to the additional number of alternative ways in which future time can be expressed. The following section outlines the actual uses of past, present and future verb forms. <heading>How Tenses are Used in English</heading>With reference to classifications provided by Bolinger (1947), Quirk et al (1985), Berk (1999) and Dowling and Lock (2001), the following uses of the past, present and future have been identified. <list><heading>The past is used to express:</heading>a) Completed events separated in time from the present: (14)  FORMULA b) Events associated with a specific moment in the past: (15)  FORMULA c) Habitual past events, using an example from Quirk et al (1985): (16)  FORMULA d) Indirect speech: (17)  FORMULA e) Volition and polite request: (18)  FORMULA f) Hypothetical events: (19)  FORMULA </list>Therefore, the past tense can be used to express concepts pertaining to the past, present and future. <list><heading>The present is used to express:</heading>a) Timeless states and eternal truths: (20)  FORMULA b) Habitual actions: (9b)  FORMULA c) Instantaneous actions:  (21)  FORMULA  - Commentaries (22)  FORMULA  - Demonstrations (23)  FORMULA  - Exclamations (24)  FORMULA  - Performativesd) Past actions: (25)  FORMULA  - Historic Present, Narrative (26)  FORMULA  - Stage Direction (27)  FORMULA  - Verbs of Communicatione) Future planned events: (28)  FORMULA </list>Therefore, like the past, the present tense can be used to express concepts pertaining to the past, present and future. Palmer (1987) identifies the epistemic use of 'will' in such expressions as: (29)  FORMULA  and the conditional use of 'will' in combination with the present tense: (30)  FORMULA  In addition, Palmer identifies five future modal uses of 'will': (31)  FORMULA  - Envisaged outcome (32)  FORMULA  - Hoped for event (33)  FORMULA  - Future scene setting (34)  FORMULA  - Event is part of a plan (35)  FORMULA  - Instructions, guidance Haegeman (1983) provides a very comprehensive analysis of eleven further uses of 'will' in English. The first six also refer to futurity: <list>a) Future Facts: (36)  FORMULA b) Emphatic Prediction: (37)  FORMULA c) Future Volition: (38)  FORMULA d) Refusal: (39)  FORMULA e) Intention: (40)  FORMULA f) Determination: (41)  FORMULA </list>The second category does not imply futurity: <list>a) Timeless Truth: (42)  FORMULA b) Habitual Actions: (43)  FORMULA c) Habitual Willingness: (44)  FORMULA d) Persistent Wilfulness: (45)  FORMULA e) Physical Capacity; (46)  FORMULA </list>Therefore, 'will', apart from being a device for expressing futurity, is also used to express timeless and habitual events which, it can be claimed, also exist in the present and past timeframe. On this basis, the future form shares the same characteristics of broad usage as the present tense. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This essay has evaluated the controversial structuralist claim that English has only two tenses. The Reichenbachian approach proposes that in deep structure, there are potentially more fundamental tense representations (9) than there are in surface structure. The work of Huddlestone (1968) and Hornstein (1990) support the proposal that it is necessary for deep structure to represent past, present and future tenses. I agree with the notion that there should be three equally valid tenses in English mainly because of the evidence presented here, but also because they clearly each have psychological reality from the point of view of the speaker, be that derived from our exposure to theories of traditional grammar through education or from the mental model of the temporal dimension that our culture has encouraged us to develop. This conclusion is not problematic with respect to the surface structure manifestation of the past and present, but the conundrum still remains regarding the future tense. In my view, the examples presented here provide solid evidence to propose that there is a future tense represented by 'will' and, in accordance with the variety of verb forms that are applied to the past and present sections of the time continuum, concepts relating to future time can equally be expressed using alternative surface structure devices such as the simple and progressive present. It is concluded, therefore, that English exhibits a ternary tense system. 