Since the 1980s there has been an important shift in the way how technology generation for agricultural development is being promoted. Leaving the conventional top-down, transfer-of-technology schemes, NGOs, public sector and international institutions have more and more progressed towards participatory research and extension approaches. Proponents of this change have argued that traditional, public-funded, on-station research does not address the needs and problems of poor farmers in "complex, diverse and risk-prone" areas, because their physical and socioeconomic conditions are too different from those at the research stations. This marginal agriculture takes place in rain-fed, diverse and fragile environments and is characterised by its small scale, complexity and lack of access to markets and resources, in profound contrast to the monocropping, high-input, large-scale farming systems promoted by conventional research (Chambers et al, 1989: p. xviii). It has been asserted that the high levels of diversity among these poor farmers make it unlikely that a specific innovation can be appropriate for a large number of users (Sumberg et al, 2003). Therefore, national agricultural research and extension agencies, as well as private institutions working with agricultural and rural development projects, are aiming at a broader participation of farmers themselves in some or all the stages leading to decision-making for technology adoption: problem identification, research design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation (Okali et al, 1994). An important part of the latest literature on agricultural research deals with the benefits that have been accomplished in many parts of the world as a result of this increase in farmers' participation in research and the progress from contractual to collaborative and collegial relationships between farmers and scientists as defined by Biggs (1989). The idea is that cooperation between organisations and local people can create extra benefits (synergies) by exerting pressure on the formal sector to be more effective. The level of local participation and thus the potential synergies to be achieved will depend, however, on the objectives of the project: more involvement of the formal sector will be promoted when general outcomes applicable to a wide range of contexts are sought, while the goal of meeting local farmers' needs will promote more collegial relationships (Humphries et al, 2005). There are, nonetheless, some critics of these new participatory approaches, who claim that "little synergistic benefit should be expected in bringing farmers' experimentation and formal experimentation into closer contact". According to Sumberg et al (2003), synergy is only achieved when the knowledge generated by cooperation is greater than the sum of the knowledge generated by each of the parts (formal researchers and farmers) involved. They sustain that synergy can only be attained among collaborators that are not too homophilic (thus lacking enough differences to bring about really new findings) nor too heterophilic (thus not being at all able to communicate with each other). As farmers' experimentation is fundamentally similar to formal experimentation ("adaptation experiments" based on comparison of new technologies against a control, see Rhoades and Bebbington (1991) and Ashby et al (1995)), they conclude that farmers' participation should not be regarded as synergistic but "as a partial substitute for the adaptive end of the formal research spectrum", with the aim of adapting or specifying new technologies to the diversity of local conditions (Sumberg et al, 2003: p. 751). Another major criticism argues that farmers' knowledge can not be straightforwardly incorporated into the scientific stock of knowledge, because its logic, contents and interpretation are specific for the cultural, economic, agroecological and socio-political context, from which it should not be removed in order not to lose its relevance. Thus, it is not possible to build generalisations from farmers' experimentation, and its outcomes are not applicable to other realities. Farmers' and researchers goals seem to be irreconcilable, because when experimenting, farmers seek to develop solutions for the present, ever changing conditions of their fields, while researchers look for general outcomes applicable in any scenario and any time (Scoones and Thompson, 1994; Braun et al, 2000). Not only in their objectives, but also in their methods are scientific and farmers' experimentation different. So for example, farmers usually have qualitative rather than quantitative methods for data collection; they do not generally control non-experimental variables or use repetitions to reduce undesired effects; they do not keep formal records of their data but remember their results for using them in new comparisons; and their experimentation and the interpretation of results are limited by gaps in their knowledge (Braun et al, 2000). All this makes it very difficult to bring scientific rigour and indigenous "informality" together. Attempts to reduce these methodological differences have also been criticized by claiming that the efforts being made to add a "more systematic and scientific base to farmers' own research" by means of training them in experiment design, management and analysis, imply a lack of confidence in local skills and only emphasise the positivist view of how research should be done, contributing to the loss of local experimentation methods (Okali et al, 1994: p. 8; Scoones and Thompson, 1994). Finally, some other issues that could complicate the task and/or reduce the potential impacts of bringing farmer and formal experimentation into closer contact are: the unequal power relations and the diverse nature of the links between different groups of interest both at the local and the macro level; the difficulties of matching not only farmers' and researchers', but also institutional, governmental and donor's agendas; the time-related differences between farmers' priorities (generally short-termed) and long-term research programmes; the geographical distance from the work at the community level and the decision-making centres; the skills required for farmers to participate in experimentation; and the broader structural issues influencing poor farmers' livelihoods beyond the agricultural technological aspects (Okali et al, 1994). Although there are many constraints that limit the applicability or the scaling up of participatory research interventions, it is clear that the traditional research and extension system has not worked equally for all farmers and that therefore a change is needed. Furthermore, many real cases have evidenced major actual and potential benefits for poor farmers. Firstly, poor farmers have been traditionally excluded from the technological achievements of public-funded research, situation that has to be addressed. As already said, formal research has been (and still is) driven by the government's macroeconomic agenda (see as an example INIA, n.d.), by the donors' agenda or even by the personal interests of researchers themselves. It is aimed at achieving yield increases for commercial monocrops and is conducted in research stations or universities under controlled, ideal conditions without significant restrictions in terms of material, financial or human resources (although it can be argued that many poor countries have major restrictions for large investments in agricultural research as a whole, the statement above is meant with respect to specific technologies under development to which resources have already been allocated). These conditions are non-existent for small farmers in marginal, complex and diverse areas, so that the outcomes of formal research are not applicable for them (Chambers et al, 1989; Braun et al, 2000). Thus, conventional research is useful only for commercial or resource-rich farmers, who are in the capacity to pay for these services and therefore don't really need a state-funded system, and therefore it is essential that resource-poor farmers have a word in the definition of the research agenda, so that research investments would be better oriented to appropriate technologies that can satisfy their actual needs under their socioeconomic and cultural conditions (Chambers et al, 1989; Hangmann et al, 1999; Humphries et al, 2005). Participatory research interventions, such as local agricultural research committees or farmer field schools, have succeeded in linking farmer experimenters with formal research systems, allowing farmers and scientists to develop a common language and understand each other better. These interactions have showed positive outcomes further than the ones directly related with productivity enhancement at the farming level: they contribute to legitimate local knowledge and capacities in the eyes of development professionals and scientists; accelerate and improve the feedback between farmers and researchers for the development of useful technologies; increase the local capacity to raise demands on the formal system; and help farmers to gain access to useful information, technologies and skills. Farmers then gain in capacity to do research by themselves, in new technological choices, in confidence as their results become positive, and in power to decide how to manage better their livelihoods (Braun et al, 2000; Ashby, 1987; Scoones and Thompson, 1994). As an evidence that synergies do arise in such experiences, the Participatory Research with Farmers (IPRA) project developed by the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) in Colombia can be mentioned. In a series of tests, IPRA found out that research without farmers' participation in the early stages "ran the risk of developing technologies of little relevance and of low probability of adoption"; that farmers' experimentation without guidance obtained lower yields and different conclusions than trials with the help of researchers; and that the early interaction between both led to the selection of technologies that had been previously discarded by researchers working on their own (Braun et al, 2000; Ashby, 1987). Furthermore, the criticism related to the existing differences in farmers' and formal experimentation methods and goals can also be regarded as an opportunity for both formal and rural research systems to improve: researchers have experience outside the local environments that could be useful to local people, while farmers have a long tradition of experimentation, technology development and engagement in real-life problem solving that could enrich and help to focus the formal research system (Mutimba, 1997). It is not only a matter of maximum yields and efficiency, it is more likely a matter of obtaining the best possible results, at lowest possible risk levels, with scarce resources and harsh conditions and considering the social and cultural context of the community. Scientists need thus to incorporate risk assessment and social science considerations when developing and promoting new technologies, aspects that are naturally taken into account by farmers when making decisions. All of these arguments support the view that it is positive and desirable to bring farmer experimentation and formal experimentation into closer contact, and that this proximity has already generated synergies in a number of projects. Nonetheless, there are still constraints that need to be addressed: attitudinal issues (researchers and extension workers regarding themselves as "superior" than local farmers); strategies for achieving adequate, sustainable, bi-directional links between local actors and researchers; the costs associated with the work at the local level and eventually with more varied research demands from many localities; the institutional framework (farmer organisations) needed to be able to have influence at the national level decision-making; the issue of trying to keep local and decentralised research systems and all the institutional and resources requirements to establish them at national levels. In addition, other different, underlying issues should not be undervalued: The main constraints for poor farmers to improve their livelihoods are not generally of technological but of structural nature. So, issues such as poverty, exclusion from markets and financial resources (credits), environmental risk and insufficient education should not be forgotten but be addressed at the same time or even before the technological, research-driven ones. Therefore, closer interaction between researchers and farmers should be promoted, but in a framework of integrated, sustainable development. 