The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) was established in 1971 in response to worldwide concerns about an imminent famine due to food shortage in developing countries. It started as an initiative to join international efforts to examine the needs of developing countries for specialization in agriculture; coordinate international, regional and national agricultural research activities and budgets; provide finance for high priority agricultural research projects and undertake continuing review of priorities. Initially it merged 4 already existing research centres: the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), the International Centre for Maize and Wheat Improvement (CIMMYT), the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) and the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) (CGIAR, 2006). Nowadays, CGIAR supports 15 agricultural research centres worldwide (13 located in developing countries), providing them with financing, technical support and strategic direction. Among its 64 members there are 25 developing and 22 industrialised countries, 4 private foundations (Ford Foundation, Kellogg Foundation, Rockefeller Foundation and Syngenta Foundation) and 13 regional and international organisations (FAO, UNDP, World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, among others). CGIAR employs more than 8500 scientists in more than 100 countries, and its annual budget exceeded US$ 400 million in 2004 (CGIAR, 2006). CGIAR's focus has been continually changing along its lifespan. During the first decade, the emphasis was on "increasing the pile of food", so research on cereals was prioritised and the green revolution technologies were developed. In the second decade, the objective became to increase "sustainable food production in the developing countries in such a way that the nutritional level and general economic well-being of the poor are improved". The focus was no longer only on yield increase, but also on biodiversity, land and water protection for poverty alleviation (CGIAR, 2006). In the third decade, the new mission was "to contribute to sustainable improvements in the productivity of agriculture, forestry and fisheries in developing countries in ways that enhance nutrition and well-being, especially of low-income people." The research interests of the Group were expanded to include agroforestry, forestry, fisheries and water management as other fundamental components of rural peoples' livelihoods. After a period of renewal, and incorporating the new concerns about sustainability and environmental degradation, the current mission statement of CGIAR is "to achieve sustainable food security and reduce poverty in developing countries through scientific research and research-related activities in the fields of agriculture, forestry, fisheries, policy and environment" (CGIAR, 2006). CGIAR's mission is based on the assumption that agriculture is the key to development: "Agricultural growth and increased farm production in developing countries creates wealth, decreases poverty and hunger and protects the environment." Thus, the developmental goals of CGIAR's research projects comprise 5 areas intended to improve all the critical aspects of the agricultural sector: <list>Sustainable production of crops, livestock, fisheries, forests and natural resources.Enhancement of the National Agricultural Research Systems through joint research, policy support, training and knowledge sharing.Collection, characterization and conservation of genetic resources.Improvement of germplasm for priority crops, livestock, trees and fish. Policy development to foster a major impact on agriculture, food, health, spread of new technologies and the management and conservation of natural resources (CGIAR, 2006). </list>CGIAR's decision making processes rely on its institutional framework, which is comprised by the CGIAR itself, an independent Science Council, the 15 agricultural research centres and other support bodies, among which the Executive Council and the System Office are the most important ones. The Science Council is vital to ensure the relevance of CGIAR supported research, enhance its quality, assess its impact and help to mobilise global scientific expertise. The research agenda is set by the 15 agricultural research centres in close collaboration with the partners (countries and institutions). Research is generally carried out by one or more centres in cooperation with national agricultural research systems, high-level research institutions and NGOs. CGIAR's activities are financed by the members' voluntary contributions. Individual members support centres and projects of their choice, so that they can target their own specific areas of interest (CGIAR, 2006). Typical CGIAR's projects are oriented towards research and germplasm conservation, although nowadays their focus has expanded considerably. A good example is IITA's project "Preserving and enhancing germplasm and agrobiodiversity with conventional and biotechnology tools", which aims at achieving sustainable food production and enhanced livelihood in sub-Saharan Africa by means of: improving genetic resource conservation and utilization, broadening the genetic base of adapted germplasm and developing efficient methods for crop improvement and germplasm management with a focus on the staple crops of that region (cowpea, cassava, yam, plantain and banana, but also maize, soybean, rice, groundnut). The project's strategy is thus to create new public goods in the form of well-preserved genetic resources, improved genetic material (with enhanced tolerance to droughts, increased vitamin and mineral content, improved resistance to pests, among other features) and new capacities within the national scientific body in order to contribute to food security, poverty alleviation and enhanced livelihoods (IITA, 2004). The impact assessments show that there is an important contribution from IITA's improved varieties for yield improvement and increased food production in Africa. However, most assessments are made at the macro level, considering national averages in yields, food production and food demand (Manyong et al., 2000 a, b). Thus, the benefits for the poorest farmers are not really measured. Considering that IITA focuses on food crops, it is likely that its impact on subsistence farmers is relatively high, but the impact of other centres, focused on high-yielding cereals, could not be the same. Due to the diverse focus of the different centres conforming CGIAR, it is difficult to generalise about its projects and outcomes. So, although estimations claim that the impact of CGIAR's research (in terms of increased food productivity and production, reduced stress to fragile ecosystems, reduced malnourishment rates, reduced food prices, among others) amounts to 9 times the money invested in research since its creation (CGIAR, 2005), there are also claims that their traditional focus on on-station research has not fully addressed the needs of the poorest and remotest farmers (Ruttan and Hayomi, 2001). The shift in focus from increasing agricultural productivity to incorporating environmental and social concerns has led in any case to an improved orientation towards sustainability. The question about how much its work is really helping in rural poverty alleviation is still unanswered though. Considering that local social, institutional and environmental issues are frequently critical for poverty reduction, it is fundamental that CGIAR manages to articulate international research with national agendas and local needs. 