<heading>A brief history</heading>During the last decades, agricultural research and extension services have been delivered at a national scale, in the form of top-down transfer of technology systems. The green revolution technology promoted by them has been successful at achieving macroeconomic growth in the agricultural sector and at improving the efficiency and quality of commercial farming, but it has not helped the poorest farmers (Chambers et al, 1989). While having various strengths, such as a nationwide coverage; the encouragement of close and periodical links to research; an ordered structure that simplifies supervision, monitoring and evaluation and offers career opportunities for field staff; some level of participation of farmers in the planning sessions; regular training of the extension agents; and an unified extension system where farmers have to deal with only one agent, the national extension services, based on the T&V concept, have also many important weaknesses fundamentally of methodological nature (even without considering external limiting factors, such as the policy environment, and the financial aspects). Resource-poor farmers have not been reached by the service, due to agents relying on "contact farmers" who comprise only 10% of the total farmers and are commonly better off. Thus, the rate of transfer of the delivered messages to the remotest, poorest non-contact farmers is low. Moreover, the system is focused on general messages and standardised techniques designed to maximise impact in the short term, which are not adapted to the local environmental, social and/or economical conditions and which do not take into account the risks that poor farmers face when adopting innovations. The large scale of the operations further increases the difficulties of delivering technologies that are appropriate for each location. Additionally, as participation of the clients is very limited, comprising only the installation of on-farm test plots by contact farmers, indigenous technical knowledge is hardly recognised and used (Albert et al, 1999, Anderson and Feder, 2004; Hangmann et al, 1998a). As a general consequence, the lack of participation of the farmers, as well as inadequate ways to measure the effectiveness of extension (using general, quantitative indicators not directly related to its quality), has lead to a weak accountability towards the clients and their real needs and thus to much less real impact than expected (Anderson and Feder, 2004). With the development of commercial agriculture, private extension services have been established in many countries, offering advice to farmers rich enough to pay for it. But subsistence farmers, living in remote, complex, diverse and mainly rain-fed areas, still need publicly funded help in order to improve their livelihoods. Paradoxically, these farmers are the ones that have been systematically neglected by conventional extension (Chambers et al, 1989). This is why many institutions have started to change the extension approaches, trying out more participatory methodologies that aim to grasp poor farmers' real demands and needs, and reducing the scale of the delivery agencies. <heading>What is needed instead? The new approaches</heading>However, there is still a large range of different understandings of participation, both in its purpose and its practical application. Basically, three main levels of participation can be distinguished (Scherler et al, 1998): <list>Contribution of beneficiaries in form of "cash and kind". This aims to reduce the costs of the interventions and to increase the level of appropriation of the innovation by the clients (instrumental view).Participation and institutional building in order to increase the local capacity for reaching the projects' objectives (functional view).Participation as a process involving the relationships of different interest groups affecting the community (both from inside and outside), with the goal of improving the balance of powers influencing development initiatives and use of resources (socio-political view).</list>Despite many organisations still work at the first level of participation, in which farmers still do not have a say in the problem definition and the search for solutions, it is the second and rather the third level that need to be achieved. In order to do this, our understanding of extension needs to change: The new approaches are based on the concept of facilitation, whereas "rather than extension providing answers to farmers, the aim (...) is to enable farmers to define their own problems and develop their own solutions" (Albert et al, 1999, p. 6). Cross-sectoral interventions are needed, where agricultural technology development is integrated with institutional and capacity building. This goal requires multidisciplinary approaches that address technical and social issues at the same time. Empowerment and community participation must be the basis of the solutions, so that the process focuses on raising farmers' critical capacities and on sharing knowledge with them. Thus, farmers are provided with a basket of technical options and the criteria for identifying their problems and choosing or developing the most suitable solutions, combining foreign knowledge with their own and adapting them to their local conditions. Additionally, assistance must be offered for developing rural institutional frameworks that ensure sustainability and encourage the dissemination of the successful innovations (Csaki, 2001; Hangmann et al, 1998a). The extension agents' role is to assist in this process, acting as facilitators and mediators. Researchers provide access to external knowledge and technical options, help in the experimentation encouraging the farmers to take control of it and learn from it, and provide them with tools for analysing and systematising their findings (Hangmann et al, 1998b; Gündel, 1998). <heading>Outcomes of these new approaches</heading>There's evidence that decentralised participatory research and extension experiences show higher levels of adoption of agricultural and natural resource management technologies (Dalton et al, 2005; Axinn, 1997; Garforth and Harford, 1997), because the technologies developed are relevant and appropriate toward the real needs of the population. But participatory approaches have other positive outcomes that reach beyond the mere spreading of agricultural technologies (Ashby, 1987; Braun et al, 2000; Scoones and Thompson, 1994; Okali et al, 1994; Dalton et al, 2005; Garforth and Harford, 1997; Hangmann, 1998b): The relationship between farmers, development professionals and scientists is improved: local traditional knowledge and capacities gain in legitimacy in the eyes of professionals; farmers' capacity to raise demands on the formal systems is increased, and thus the feedback to scientists for the development of useful technologies is accelerated. The intervention is more legitimate: the project team is accountable not only to the intervening organisation or the donors, but directly towards farmers aswell. Therefore farmers more easily accept the intervention outcomes as theirs, so that local support and direct involvement of the beneficiaries increase the sustainability of the project. People are "empowered": their knowledge, innovative capacity and confidence are improved, helping them to respond to problems and/or opportunities in different situations. There is more equity in the access to means of production by different groups or individuals in the community, because participation implies the negotiation of interests among these groups and provides space for the poor and marginalised in collective decision-making. Poverty is reduced because most of the promoted technologies are labour-intensive, providing employment for the landless and near-landless. Food security and children nutrition are enhanced due to increased production security. Natural resources and the environment are managed in a more sustainable way. <heading>Lessons to learn</heading>There are some aspects, fundamental for the definitive success of participatory research and extension, which most experiences presented by the literature still do not describe clearly. Thus, the following questions may be raised: How are participatory extension and research projects managed? What are the costs involved in their implementation? What are the needs in terms of institutional framework, human and technical resources and structural conditions in order to achieve success? What kind of success indicators can be used for their monitoring and evaluation? Are their outcomes sustainable once the intervening agency has left? Is it possible to scale them up beyond the community level? What kind of training do extension agents need in order to respond to the new challenges posed by participatory approaches? How can their hierarchical, teaching, paternalistic and often self-important attitude be changed into one that is more facilitating, inviting, promoting, encouraging and supportive? Additionally, the following risks should be taken into account and prevented: <list><heading>In decentralised extension systems (Anderson et al, 2004):</heading>"Misuse" of extension agents, for example for local political campaigns.More difficulties in organising links between extension and research, especially when extension is decentralised but research remains in a central body.Higher costs of training staff, due to economies of scale.Increases in staff size due to a more demanding approach.Less financial sustainability, because of higher costs. A possible solution for reducing the financial risks is to work in partnership with local farmer associations, which are more able to recover costs (through membership fees, for example). </list><list><heading>In participatory, demand-driven projects (Scherler et al, 1998; Fastenau, 1998; Bostroem, 1998):</heading>Limited time and attention given to achieving changes in staff's attitudes and behaviour due to pressure for producing visible results rapidly."Shopping list" made by villagers, demanding especially infrastructure, because they anticipate to possible funds for such expenses from the intervening agency, and not because of a real need. This demonstrates that also the villagers are also used to an output rather than a process orientation. To overcome these problems, methodologies such as needs analysis, priority ranking, etc need to be introduced.</list><heading>Management and organisational implications</heading>The questions, risks and threats mentioned above clearly show that implementing participatory extension and research means much more than training the staff in new methods and techniques and releasing them to the field. As stated by Scherler et al (1998, p. 12): "If extension workers are supposed to change attitudes and behaviour, the organisation has to adjust its structure, the roles and responsibilities of staff at different levels, as well as its overall strategy. But there is also a need for new forms of outside cooperation with other organisations and third parties involved". <heading>General management</heading>Institutionalising participatory approaches implies a redefinition of the roles of all actors involved. For example, the job descriptions of extension staff should be modified to include the additional tasks required by the participatory approach, such as work planning and budgeting (Albert et al, 1999; Hangmann et al, 1998a; Scherler et al, 1998). Informal communication channels within the organisation are useful for improving the relationship between staff members, enhancing participation and changing its top-down culture. Thus, mutual trust and solidarity, a sense of respect and responsibility and changes in behaviour towards people (especially subordinates) need to be developed (Hangmann et al, 1998a; Scherler et al, 1998). Decision-making needs to be shared between senior officers, extension personnel and the clients themselves, so mechanisms that allow for appropriate fora between them need to be developed (Scherler et al, 1998). Being able to accept mistakes and problems and tackle them in a proactive manner is crucial in the iterative learning processes used in participatory approaches. Feedback mechanisms need to be established in order to progressively learn from past failures and successes (Albert et al, 1999; Hangmann et al, 1998a; Scherler et al, 1998). Flexibility is fundamental, because there are no pre-established or predictable outcomes of extension, which depend on farmers' needs and demands (Scherler et al, 1998). Cooperation with other institutions / public agencies is needed in order for integral solutions to be found when there are problems outside of the mandate of the extension system (Scarborough et al, 1997). The differences among rural communities (gender, wealth, property rights, dependence on common property resources, degree of reliance on agriculture for livelihood) need to be considered in order to facilitate processes of negotiation between them, to achieve better distribution of knowledge and to improve the targeting of the rural poor (Garforth and Harford, 1997; Albert et al, 1999). Cooperation with existing organisations and farmers networks can strengthen the system, enhancing its effectiveness, efficiency and equity of provision and access. Farmer organisations are a vehicle for participation, for increasing accountability and for clients to pay for the services. But care need to be taken so that these organisations don't reinforce previous patterns of exclusion (Garforth and Harford, 1997). Budget availability at district level is a major requisite for a good decentralisation framework. It allows for decentralised planning, implementation and decision-making (Scherler et al, 1998; Fastenau et al, 1998). Finally, it should be remarked that frequently not only extension is needed to improve farmers' quality of life, because there are underlying structural issues affecting their livelihoods. Thus, integration within an holistic development programme, managed at the local level is required to best suit local needs and conditions. <heading>Role of training</heading>Training has a mobilising and motivating effect and is the first entry point for organisations to move towards participatory approaches. But it is not enough to enable staff to completely master the methods and techniques of participatory extension and research, which needs a longer learning process. For institutionalisation of participation, training courses need to be integrated into a mid-term organisational and personnel development strategy focused on the problem-solving capacity of individuals and organisational units (Scherler et al, 1998). Some hints to improve training of staff are: A "living" participation in normal working situations is more effective than a formal training. Extension agents need to feel how it is to be able to take part in decision-making, as well as the opportunities and responsibilities related to participation. Thus, the organisational culture needs to be changed in order to allow extensionists space for active participation, communication and cooperation. (Delvecchio, 1998; Scherler et al, 1998). The existence of many approaches to participatory extension and research can cause confusion of terms and methodologies. It is useful thus to present all the approaches and then ask the extension workers themselves to develop their own approach, including all steps, the methodologies and techniques to be utilised in each of them and the performance indicators (Hangmann et al, 1998a). Training can be used for changing the top-down relationships within the organisation. It is normally carried out in a top-down manner, first attending specialists and officers, then supervisors and in the end field workers. But when delivered first to field workers, training can create a situation where extensionists know more than their superiors, causing discomfort, generating more demand for training and allowing for changes in the hierarchical structure (Hangmann et al, 1998a). The training programme should include following topics (Garforth and Harford, 1997; Albert et al, 1999): <list>Farming systems.The interactions between agriculture and the physical and socioeconomic environment.Development of good analytical skills.Development of communication skills and the ability to work with communities and groups (facilitation skills).Participatory rural appraisal.Participatory problem-solving. Facilitation skills should be important in the training curriculum. </list><heading>Incentives and motivation</heading>In public organisations there are few incentives for staff to work more or with more enthusiasm because of fixed salaries and of promotions depending on years of service and age rather than on performance. Thus, some changes need to be done in order to improve the incentives and create the motivation for change: Supervision should be oriented to performance rather than control of individuals or groups, so that productivity and accomplishment of goals become the main motivators. Performance-oriented bonuses and advancements, and qualitative rather than quantitative indicators of performance (such as measuring the extensionists' documentation of indigenous knowledge) are useful for achieving this task (Hangmann et al, 1998a; Bostroem, 1998; Albert et al, 1999). Additionally, farmers' demand for improvement of the extension agents' performance should also be used as an indicator, for by means of staff appraisal by the clients and by close interaction with farmer associations (Hangmann et al, 1998a). The general idea that the poor community needs the assistance of the state and has the right to be served free of charge should be abolished in order for extension staff to stop having a paternalistic approach (Bostroem, 1998). <heading>Attitudes and behaviour</heading>Changing the attitudes and behaviour of extension staff is a major challenge, because they normally feel superior to farmers and because of the rigid hierarchical structures of public institutions which condition them to think and act in a top-down manner. These changes, needed for an appropriate facilitating interaction with farmers will not only affect the relationships between field workers and clients, but also the ones between superiors and subordinates in the organisation. These changes take place at a personal level. Thus, a collaborative atmosphere should be developed within the organisation, where the fears to lose power and control are reduced and where new forms of relationship can be arranged (Hangmann et al, 1998a). A simpler, more horizontal organisational structure would also help to increase participation and collaboration between all kinds of staff. Only when participation is institutionalised within the organisation, will the relations at the interface between service providers (this is, the extension agents) and the clients (the farmers) be improved. Nonetheless, this is also an iterative process. Working together with farmers has shown to increase the cultural identity and pride of extension workers, because they mostly grew up in farming families and this recognition of farmers' value is a recognition of their own roots. In turn, these feelings significantly improve their personal motivation and dedication and help to change their attitude towards farmers (Hangmann et al, 1998a). <heading>Our goal</heading>As a conclusion to this briefing paper, it shall be remarked that the goal of this initiative is to build a local, decentralised, non-bureaucratic, effective, efficient and demand-driven agricultural technology development and extension service in order to achieve a real improvement in the quality of life of the poorest farmers. It should aim at encouraging sustainable agricultural systems, preserving and making use of the local traditional agricultural knowledge, promoting more equity in the distribution of knowledge and generating self helping initiatives by the farmers. Hard work lies ahead in order to achieve these outcomes, but with everybody's collaboration and with appropriate coordination with other sectors or institutions within the agricultural sector this will become the new reality in our district. 