<heading>1. Introduction</heading>The English Noun Phrase (NP) is a constituent which can function as a number of elements in a larger construction called a clause. Berk (1999:55) highlights these functions as 'subjects, direct objects, indirect objects, subject complements, and object complements...object of prepositions...' Example (1) below illustrates an NP which functions as the subject within a clause. (1)  FORMULA  The NP, highlighted in italics, is the subject of the monotransitive main verb hated. The noun man can be identified as the 'head' or 'central element,' (Berk, 1999:57), which symbolizes an entity or thing (Lock, 1996). For this reason, the terms 'noun' and 'head' will be used interchangeably when referring to NP's. Without a noun, an NP cannot exist, thus it can be argued that the noun selects the modifiers to be included within an NP, (Berk, 1999). For example, in (1) above, the central definite determiner the, pre-modifies the noun man. According to Berk (1999), determiners are the most common type of noun modifier in the English language and are usually required for grammatically correct NP's. This rule applies to example (1) which would be regarded grammatically incorrect with the absence of a determiner, as shown in example (2) below. (2)  FORMULA  However, it is very possible for an NP to consist of just a noun, like single use of pronouns like I, we and she. Nevertheless, when a determiner does pre-modify a noun, it cannot do so in any position or in any form as there are grammatical rules which prevent this. Thus, when using determiners there always has to be agreement within the NP. For example the indefinite article a is a central determiner which cannot pre-modify a plural noun within an NP, as shown below in (3), whereas the is a central definite determiner and can also pre-modify plural head nouns in (4). (3)  FORMULA  (4)  FORMULA  Different types of determiners function in different environments, as shown above and do different things to the noun. For example, the indefinite article cannot usually precede non-count or mass nouns as shown in (5) below, but demonstrates that a 'referent cannot yet be identified as something known to the reader from anything that has been said previously in the text or from general knowledge,' (Downing and Locke, 2002:408). Thus, an NP like a cat is more suitable for this particular determiner. (5)  FORMULA  However determiners are not the only part of speech which functions to pre-modify the head in a NP. Adjectives and other nouns can also fulfill this role (Quirke, 1985), but are different to determiners with regard to position or function within an NP. This notion will be examined in section (2). Section (3) will analyse the placement of central determiner combinations within NP's. <heading>2. Pre-head Modifiers</heading>Pre-head Modifiers within an NP include a range of word classes and participles, (Quirke et al, 1985). In order to explore how determiners differ to other pre-head modifiers within an NP, there will be a comparative analysis between determiners and other parts of speech including adjectives, nouns and some participles in terms of the following: <list>How they modify the head within an NPTheir positioning within an NP.</list><heading>2.1. Modifying the head of an NP</heading>Quirke, (1985:253), stated that, 'the kind of reference a particular noun phrase has depends on its determinative element, i.e. the item which determines it.' Additionally, Downing and Locke (2002:436) comment that determiners 'identify a normal entity by telling us which or what or whose it is...' This definition heavily implies that determiners function to identify. Assessment of these definitions together suggests that determiners function to identify a referent and consequently determine what kind of reference a particular NP possesses. (6)  FORMULA  (7) <table/>Sentence (6) above can be regarded as one which could easily be produced in spoken or written discourse and the NP in (7), removed from (6), is italicized. In (7) the NP is broken down into its grammatical categories and it is possible to see that the determiners All, the and many are pre-modifying and identifying the noun people. For example, many is a post-determiner which only pre-modifies plural count nouns and therefore identifies the noun as this. The use of definite determiner the gives the NP a definite reference. This is due to the fact that the is a definite determiner which functions to inform the reader or listener that the referent 'can be identified somewhere either in the text or in the situation or in our common knowledge of the world at large.' (Downing and Locke, 2002:408). As noted and illustrated above, different determiners modify nouns in different ways. Other examples include central demonstrative determiners such as this, that or these, which provide information about the spatial diexis of the entity the noun represents (i.e. where it is in relation to the speaker). Nevertheless, demonstrative determiners can still identify the noun as something which is or is not near the speaker 'in space or time,' (Downing and Locke 2002:409). Therefore, the general function of determiners within an NP remains to be to determine reference and identify referents. According to Lock (1996:50), adjectives 'tell us something about the quality of the thing the noun represents.' This definition would suggest that when adjectives pre-modify a noun, they aim to describe it. Thus, in (7), whereas the determiners identify the noun, the adjective amazing pre-modifies and describes it. Downing and Locke (2002:409) categorize pre-modifying adjectives into two subclasses. 'Epithets,' which describe 'subjective and objective qualities of an entity,' and 'classifiers,' which 'indicate a subclass of the entity,' (Lecture 7). An epithet is a more open class and can be replaced by many other adjectives as shown in (8). However, classifiers are a more closed class of adjectives and an example of this is shown in (9). (8)  FORMULA  (9)  FORMULA  Therefore, the sub-classes of adjective function differently within NP's in the sense that some types of adjectives belong to class which is more restrictive - however, they still modify the noun by describing it. Whereas adjectives and determiners appear to be the most common pre-head modifiers, there are other grammatical elements which modify the head. For example pre-modification by -ing participles demonstrate the progressive aspect of the noun whether it is 'a smil ing person 'or'an approach ing train' (Quirke, 1985:1326). The 'permanence' of the noun, signaled by participles such as - ing is important when considering how nouns select particular pre-modifiers. For example, 'the indefinite article favours the habitual or permanent,' (Quirke, 1985:1326). This can explain why the examples of progressive aspect above are grammatically correct when they proceed a. <heading>2.2. Positioning within an NP</heading>As a rule, determiners 'constitute a single grammatical category because they always occupy the same position in an NP; they always precede both the noun and any adjectives,' (Berk, 1999:58). However, as Quirke (1985:1323) demonstrates, pre-head modifying adjectives may be placed before an indefinite article in more formal contexts as shown in (10). (10)  FORMULA  The pre-modifying adjective, (italicized), clearly precedes the indefinite article in (10), showing there may be more flexibility with regard to this rule. However, contrary to this, the three classes of determiner, labeled in (7), are inflexible with regard to their sequential position within an NP. Although the presence of all three classes of determiner is not essential to form a grammatically correct NP, whichever ones do appear must do so in a particular sequence. As stated in Quirke (1985:253), a sequence of determiners must appear in this order: <list>Pre-determiners (e.g. all, both)Central determiners (e.g. in/definite articles, demonstrative determiners)Post-determiners (e.g. many, five)</list>Thus, when observing (6) it is possible to identify the types of determiners according to their position within the NP. For example in the table (7), the NP begins with pre-determiner All. Pre-determiners are usually the first type of determiner to be used in an NP and mainly refer to the quantity or distribution (Downing and Locke, 2002) of the entity the noun represents. The is a central determiner and must come before the post-determiner, if there is one, within the NP. The determiner Many is a 'non-specific' (Berk, 1999:66) post-determiner which always 'follows the determiner but precedes the adjective' (Lecture 7). It is non-specific in the sense that it does not refer to a particular number. Adjectives have somewhat more flexibility with regard to the way they modify a noun as they have the option of pre- and post-modification, widely known as attributive (11) or predicative (12) functions. (11)  FORMULA  (12)  FORMULA  However, an attempt to predicate a determiner, like post-determiner five, can change the meaning of the NP and a grammatically incorrect NP could then be the consequence, (Quirk, 1985), as shown in (13): (13)  FORMULA  According to Lock (1996:49), 'when there is more than one describer, the order of words is not arbitrary.' Thus, although adjectives may either be predicative or attributive, there are also limitations with regard to the way that they may precede each other when used in a sequence to pre-modify the head. Nouns can also pre-modify the head noun of an NP. However, they are often very closely associated with the head and are usually compounded with it, (Quirke, 1985). Examples adapted from Quirke (1985:1330) include (14) and (15) below where the pre-modifying noun is italicized. (14)  FORMULA  (15)  FORMULA  From these examples, it is possible to infer that the pre-modifying noun seems to immediately precede the head and may also be pre-modified by an adjective. This can be demonstrated by inserting an adjective in (14) which becomes; (16)  FORMULA  and not, (17)  FORMULA  Further evidence to suggest pre-modifying nouns may also be modified includes the fact that the noun life is also being pre-modified by genitive determiner his. Genitive determiners fall into the sub-class of central determiners, and will be examined in more detail in the next section. <heading>3. Combinations of Quantifying, Demonstrative, Interrogative and Genitive determiners as pre-modifiers within the same NP.</heading>Genitive, quantifying, demonstrative and interrogative determiners are all central determiners. Thus they precede any post-determiners, adjectives or nouns in an NP, and follow pre-determiners within an NP construction. Each of these central determiners constitutes, 'a closed class of small function words,' (Berk, 1999:63), and modifies the noun differently: A Quantifying determiner expresses quantity, and this is its 'sole function' (Berk, 1999:63). E.g. each, some, every. An Interrogative determiner 'expresses specific/non-specific reference,' (Lecture 7). E.g. which, whose, what. A Demonstrative determiner 'reflects a quality called diexis,' (Berk, 1999:61). E.g. that, those, these A Genitive determiner expresses possession. E.g. my, hers, ours, Mary's. These definitions will be later expanded through use of examples. Within an NP there may be more than one central determiner pre-modifying the noun. This results in combinations of these determiners and, not unusually, there are particular rules which govern the sequence of these determiners. This is reflected in meaning of the sentence. When Quantifying and Genitive determiners are combined to pre-modify the head in an NP, they form a 'partitive determiner construction,' (lecture 7). Partitive determiner constructions, also known as 'partitive selection,' (Downing and Locke, 2002:441) are marked by the use of preposition of, in NP constructions shown below: (18)  FORMULA  In (18) the direct object NP is italicized. Within it, the determiners four of my, pre-modify the head children. The preposition of, indicates that the referent is from a 'selected set of class members,' (Downing and Locke, 2002:441). Or in other words, the noun children refers to an entire class of entities called 'children' and using the preposition of like it is in (18), means the speaker is referring to a selected group of this class. This is further supported by the use of Quantifying determiner four, which identifies the size of the selected group and Genitive determiner my, which identifies the referent as belonging to another entity (the subject NP, I). Genitive and Quantifying determiners are not the only determiners which form partitive determiner structures when they combine to pre-modify a noun. Quantifying determiners can combine with Demonstrative determiners (19) and the trend continues as Demonstrative determiners can also combine with Interrogative determiners (20). (19)  FORMULA  (20)  FORMULA  In (20) the Demonstrative determiner these refers to a particular set of within the class of 'books.' The Interrogative determiner which gives the NP a definite reference because it is a specific Interrogative determiner which can be used if the amount of possible noun referents is constrained, (i.e. when it is clear which options are available), (Berk, 1999). Thus the ways in which central determiners unite to modify a noun is very flexible once they incorporate of, otherwise the NP could become grammatically incorrect as shown in (21): (21)  FORMULA  A demonstrated above, there are constraints to the ways in which combinations of the determiner types above may combine within the same NP. Thus, when Downing and Locke (2002:442) state that the preposition  of is 'obligatory when the noun referent is definite,' this can be seen as regulation within English grammar regarding the ways in which these determiners may be arranged. <heading>4. Summary.</heading>It is possible to conclude that when determiners pre-modify the head of an NP, there are obligatory grammatical rules which mean they do so in a particular way depending on the type of determiner or the type of noun. English grammar handles combinations of determiners by application of grammatical rules like obligatory inclusion of preposition of for clusters of central determiners, and a general sequential rule taken from (Quirke, 1985). However, the requirement for agreement is applicable to other parts of speech which behave as pre-head modifiers. Yet, these parts of speech tend to have more flexibility in terms of what position they can be in when they modify the noun (adjectives), or can indeed be modified themselves (adjectives and nouns) by other pre-head modifiers (adjectives and adverbs). This can be explained by the fact that these various parts of speech each have different functions and roles within NP's. Despite this, on observation of NP's, determiners are usually easy to identify and this is due to the restrictiveness of their position within the NP structure. This is often helpful as it would otherwise be difficult to distinguish a central quantifying determiner like each as belonging to a different subclass to many, which is a post-determiner. Thus observing the positioning of determiners in the NP makes these things clearer. 