<heading>Introduction</heading>Since the mid-1980s regional trade agreements (RTAs) have increasingly become the instrument of choice for countries as they seek to reduce trade barriers, encourage investments, and improve transparency in the market for goods and services (OECD, 2003). This essay analysis the implications of RTAs for developing countries (DCs), considering both integration with other DCs and with industrialised countries moreover, possible interactions between the multilateral trading system and RTAs are illustrated. In this context special attention is given to agricultural trade. <heading>Regional Trade Agreements</heading>As of November 2005, 186 RTAs (WTO, 2006) were in place, accounting for almost half of world trade (OECD, 2003). An RTA can take the form of a customs union with trade barriers between member countries being removed and a common external tariff , or, the more common form of a free trade area where barriers vis-à-vis each other are removed but not vis-à-vis the rest of the world (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002). Although, RTAs are inconsistent with the Most Favoured Nations (MFN) principle of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which demands that no one member should get preferences over another in member state markets, they are allowed under Article XXIV of the GATT and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (Gaisford et al., 2003). WTO rules require the RTA to be complete in its provisions for internal free trade (elimination of duties and other restrictive regulations of commerce); to compensate for any increase in tariffs on third countries when member states form a customs union; and to cover substantially all trade (Coleman et al., 2004). <heading>Economic effects</heading>The static welfare effects of the formation of an RTA are explained in this section. Trade creation takes place when an RTA member increases its imports from its partner country, as the goods become cheaper due to tariff removal, but it maintains its level of imports from the rest of the world. The RTA members specialise to a greater extent according to their comparative advantage and thus production is shifted from higher-cost to lower-cost sources (Sloman, 2003). In case of trade diversion the RTA diverts consumption from goods produced at a lower costs outside the union to goods produced at higher costs but tariff free within the union. The liberalising country forgoes tariff revenue from the RTA partner but does not face a lower price for the imported good as the partner cannot meet import demand at a price less than the tariff inclusive price on sales from the rest of the world (Robinson and Thierfelder, 2002). South-South RTAs are generally expected to entail trade diversion as it is most likely to arise when small countries form an RTA, (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002) and/or when countries do little trade with each other prior to integration (Matthews, 2003) such as in the case of Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) (Robson, 1993). Accordingly, when estimating the magnitude of trade creation and trade diversion for eight African RTAs, Grant and Lambert (2005) found significant negative trade diversion effects in 5 out of 9 commodities. However, if the trade restricting barriers are cost-increasing rather than rent-creating such as the transportation system for intra-African trade, telecommunications and postal services, their abolishment is not associated with a loss in tariff revenues and trade creation arises because domestic prices are reduced as supplies are sourced from the RTA member. Still, the investment in regional infrastructure to ease trade between the partners has an opportunity cost, and the returns from integrating with the rest of the world may well be higher (Matthews, 2003). Generally it is thought that the reallocation of resources in an RTA promotes intra-industrial specialisation by means of product diversification, and positive effects on industries with a potential comparative advantage, leading to improved international competitiveness. However, if resources are idle, like it is the case in many low income countries, their employment becomes the relevant problem and not the reallocation of employed resources. Possibly, this argument is more relevant in low-income countries such as SSA than in middle-income countries of the Latin American type. If available resources are indeed fully utilised, a South-South RTA may be able to promote growth by expanding the volume of investable funds, i.e. the availability of local private as well as public savings, and of foreign risk capital (Langhammer and Hiemenz, 1990). Moreover, if a South-South RTA leads to a rise in the growth rate of the member countries, their demand for imports from the rest of the world could increase thereby offsetting any static trade diversion effects (Hine, 1992). Grant and Lambert (2005) found for Africa RTAs only in 1 out of 9 cases trade diversion to exceed trade creation, while APEC members created trade across all commodities. Consequential, the reduction or removal of trade barriers on a non-discriminatory MFN basis would reinforce the above mentioned effects and further enhance national and global economic welfare (Stern, 1999). Accordingly, the analysis APEC countries showed, that all countries individually gain more from global liberalisation than they do from joining APEC alone (Grant and Lambert, 2005). Generally, the effects of an RTA on welfare depend on the relative magnitudes of trade creation and trade diversion effects; and net effects of trade creation and diversion may vary across the commodities within the same RTA, between RTAs, and over time (Jayasinghe and Sarker, 2004). <heading>Domestic policy</heading>Most domestic agricultural policy requires protection at the border in order to be effective which is one of the reasons why agriculture has often been excluded from the provisions of a free-trade area in the past (Josling, p. 82/83, 1997). Agriculture has received special treatment in NAFTA and in MERCOSUR which liberalised trade in most agricultural products but maintained trade barriers for sensitive products such as sugar, dairy and fruit and vegetables (Grant and Lambert, 2005). African RTAs generally included agriculture as it makes up a large share of their trade (Josling, 1993). Exceptions may take the form of continued use of instruments of contingent protection such as subsidies or marketing systems that offer hidden subsidies (Josling, 1998), or the use of highly restrictive rules of origin. The latter are usually implemented in order to prevent trade deflection. This arises if goods are channelled into a country, which is member of a free trade area, trough an RTA partner with a lower external tariff level. Producers in the low-tariff country sell all their output in the high-tariff country and let the demand in their home market be entirely satisfied by imports (Panagariya, 2000). This is legitimate to the extent that a country is allowed to export its production up to the level of domestic production to the high-tariff partner and import for consumption (Josling, 1998). However, agricultural products are homogeneous commodities they are difficult to track and label with a country of origin (Panagariya, 2000). Moreover, rules of origin can be manipulated to effectively to restrict internal liberalisation or to increase effective protection against the rest of the world. It is for these reasons the WTO requires RTAs to cover substantially all trade between members of the agreement (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002). Still, RTAs can gear domestic policies towards trade liberalisation. First, as the degree of competition within the RTA becomes a matter of interest to partner countries, distorting subsidies and marketing systems, that appear to offer hidden subsidies, may be abolished (Josling, 1998). Second, if the agricultural industries in partner countries all compete against third suppliers, protection by one partner offers the opportunity to free-ride to the other member states. This process can result in less protection than in the absence of an free trade area (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002). An additional outcome may be that the preferential access to RTA member markets and the additional investments create a positive attitude towards trade liberalisation among DCs making them more supportive of multilateral trade negotiations (Fernández, 1997). Once policy reforms are accomplished they can be "locked in" by the binding RTA commitments. This in turn may reduce policy uncertainty, whereas RTAs with high-income countries are perceived to be more binding (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002). Because of RTA membership the cost of even small deviations from agreed trade liberalisation become large, as the deviating country may be forced to exit from the agreement or it may be punished by the other RTA members (Stern, 1999). In the context of an RTA it is easy for a country to retaliate and to ensure that a concession on its part will elicit a counterpart from the other country, benefiting itself. This reduction of uncertainty could make risk-averse individuals more favourable to an RTA than to multilateral trade liberalisation (Fernández, 1997). However, it is unlikely that an RTA can increase policy credibility, investment, and growth in a DC in the absence of complementary domestic policy reforms (Foroutan, 1998). The role of the WTO is to restrain and referee regional manifestations of agricultural protection. Moreover, against the background of the difficulties that countries have had in the past in incorporating agriculture into their RTAs, it is likely that in the future multilateral trade negotiations will play a decisive role in the developing of rules for agricultural trade (Josling, 1993). <heading>Investments</heading>The formation of an RTA can aid DCs attract FDI, technology and cross-border investment. By becoming the favoured low cost supplier to northern country with a large market, the attractiveness of an DC to FDI increases significantly (Fernández, 1997). North-South RTAs, which are perceived to be more binding, tend to lead to greater FDI and lower risk premiums (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002). By means of FDI DCs may be able to broaden the base of their agricultural commodities, and develop comparative advantages in trade in differentiated products such as fruits and vegetables. Further, FDI may help building markets through quality and name recognition (Josling, 1993). However, although RTAs with the North may increase policy credibility, investment and growth, this is unlikely to happen in the absence of complementary domestic policy reforms (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002). The adjustment to differentiated products such as fruits and vegetables will require these issues to be dealt with on an RTA level and on a multilateral level. Hence, it may be more efficient to negotiate the topics regarding FDI, such as new rules that deal with investment, copyright law, and the harmonisation of health and safety regulations, on the multilateral level (Josling, 1993). <heading>Market access</heading>Generally it is assumed that DCs, having small domestic markets, benefit from economies of scale and product differentiation that arise from increased market size (Langhammer and Hiemenz, 1990). However, agriculture tends not to enjoy these economies; sourcing out is rarely possible; and innovation rents are less common (Josling, 1993). Differences in resource endowments usually ensure that agricultural trade will be profitable between areas which have ample arable land in relation to population and those that have less. These differences in endowments will often occur across regions, not within regions. Similarly, trade in crops requiring particular climatic conditions will tend to be among rather than within regions (Josling, p. 30., 1997). Accordingly, DCs trade agricultural goods predominantly with a single large trading country such as the EU or the US, not with each other. This circumstance lead to a group of African countries lobbying the EC against tariff cuts on tropical products in the Uruguay Round negotiations (Hine, 1992). North-South RTAs are popular among DCs because they offer some insurance against possible disruptions to access to the market of these large member countries. However, this insurance comes at the cost of becoming more dependent on a larger partner, possibly making the DC more vulnerable to a re-imposition of protection and to economic fluctuations in the larger country. DCs may even start competing for insured market access to become the favoured low cost supplier which then becomes more attractive to FDI (Fernández, 1997). As to South-South RTAs, agricultural trade is increasingly taking on the nature of industrial trade patterns, including two-way trade within the same sector. In case of intra-industry specialisation trade grows among countries with rather similar resource endowments and at similar stages of development. Trade in processed foodstuffs already moves among countries each of which produces similar products (Josling, p. 30., 1997). Although DC have a strong interest in RTAs in particular with the North, it is clear that the gains from increased market access are potentially greater the more countries are involved and the broader the product and issues covered making multilateral trade liberalisation potentially more beneficial to DCs (Anderson, 2005). <heading>Consensus finding</heading>Multilateral trade negotiations in the WTO with its 140 members are often considered to be slow and cumbersome, while RTA negotiations involving only a small number of countries are considered to be comparatively easy (Anderson, 2005). In practice, the serious and definitive multilateral negotiations are concentrated within a relatively short period of time and, most of the actual negotiations involve a limited number of the major trading countries or blocks (Stern, 1999). However the latter circumstance is seen by many DCs as a problem because they in their opinion they tend to be underrepresented in the negotiations. The new regionalism is seen by some as evidence of DCs wanting to participate in a multilateral system currently dominated by developed countries (Robinson and Thierfelder, 2002). <heading>Coordination Device</heading>Trade liberalisation and related policy reforms create winners and losers, an RTA may serve as a coordination device for those who stand to gain from trade liberalisation, and it may increase cooperation on issues that are important to the interests of the RTA members (Stern, 1999). Since in the event of trade creation domestic production is replaced by cheaper imports from partner countries, resistance will be strongest against an RTA having this outcome (Hoekman and Schiff, 2002). Generally, coordination is more difficult for those favouring free trade than those opposing it, as gains from liberalisation are widely distributed, uncertain, difficult to quantify, and perhaps longer term, while losses are immediate, visible and fall on specific and identifiable sectors (Fernández, 1997). In case of North-South agreements, the exporters of agricultural products being beneficiaries may promote further liberalisation. While farmers are likely to oppose the accession of additional members because, although in the initial stage of an RTA formation the established farmers earn some profits due to their unrecoverable investment costs creating quasi-rents, the rise in sales and profits will attract new entrants (Baldwin, 1995). RTA can also serve as a coordination device in making tradeoffs between different policy areas such as environmental and labour standards. In case of NAFTA, the US commits to continue its relatively open trade policy with Mexico, while Mexico commits to improving labour and environmental standards so that both sides benefit. In multilateral negotiations this is far more difficult to pursue, as they have to deal with multiple issues as well as numerous countries having widely varying standards (Fernández, 1997). <heading>Bargaining power</heading>Combined, DCs have greater bargaining power than separately (Gaisford et al., 2003). Bargaining power of customs union having a common external tariff is greater than those of a free trade area (Stern, 1999). Neighbouring DCs tend to belong to the same climatic belts and or the same geological areas, which increases the probability that they supply homogenous agricultural and mineral commodities in the same markets. RTA partners may engage themselves in concerted actions in primary commodity markets, in jointly demanding better access to markets of industrialised countries (Langhammer and Hiemenz, 1990). According to Krueger (1999), DCs need the multilateral system of rules, because it offers some protection against the large industrialised countries who have bargaining power in international trade. DCs are small economies with comparative advantages only in a small range of goods and therefore they are highly dependent on trade. Moreover, they are in an earlier state of development and their stake in the healthy growth of the world economy is larger than those of the industrialised countries (Krueger, 1999). Multilateral institutions with their dispute settlement processes give DCs the chance to take disciplinary actions against erratic anti-dumping, countervailing duty actions and efforts to achieve protection against developing countries' exports via labour standards and/or environmental agreements (Krueger, 1999 and OECD, 2003). However, according to Fernández (1997), in the event of an industrialised country arbitrarily imposing e.g. health standards it is easier to appeal in the context of an RTA than in the WTO system. For instance, Mexico benefited in the case of NAFTA, where the US was pressured to resolve a long-lasting dispute over avocado imports from Mexico (Josling, 1998). A concern is that, if DCs get increasingly involved in RTA negotiations, a large part of their available negotiating effort and expertise is shifted to that area, while it is lacking in the multilateral trade negotiations which may be crucial though for DCs in the long-run (Stern, 1999). Accordingly, World Bank advocated the discouragement of the integration efforts in Africa on the grounds that they would divert attention from efforts to integrate the continent with the world economy (Robson, 1993). <heading>Protection against adverse developments in world markets</heading>DCs are predominantly trading with industrialised countries and they are dependent on agricultural export commodities. In this context RTAs seem to offer protection against volatile agricultural commodity prices in world markets by fostering structural change in production from the primary to the secondary sector and within exports towards manufactured goods. This in turn would make price fluctuations in commodity markets less detrimental to the import capacity and the planning conditions in the countries concerned. Moreover, an intra-regional division of labour is might be more consistent with the comparative advantages of member countries without exposing their economies to the rough competition in world markets (Langhammer and Hiemenz, 1990). Further, against the background of uncertainties of nature surrounding the production and trade of primary commodities and structural impediments such as they are found in many low-income African countries (DeRosa, 1997), RTAs could be beneficial in terms of food security by allowing an evening out of production fluctuations (Josling, p. 30., 1997). However, distributional conflicts and political disputes are relatively common in DCs so that protectionism and economic fluctuations may affect regional trade even more than it does affect trade with industrialised countries (Langhammer and Hiemenz, 1990). <heading>Conclusion</heading>RTAs can be seen as complementing the existing multilateral trading system since they liberalise trade on a regional level, which can be facilitate further multilateral trade liberalisation. They offer some benefits to DCs such as increased market size, help to overcome cost-raising trade barriers, and the "locking in" policy reforms leading to greater attraction to FDI. The latter applies in particular for North-South RTAs. Further, RTAs can be seen as means for DCs to organise themselves and to gain more influence in the multilateral trade negotiations. However, in this context the multilateral trading system and the institution it provides, may be even more suitable to represent the interests of DCs. Thus it is vital that sufficient negotiation expertise is devoted by DCs to WTO negotiations, in order to take advantage of the chances the multilateral system offers to them. Moreover, the gains from regional trade liberalisation are likely to be outweighed by possible gains from multilateral trade liberalisation if it can be than achieved. As to agricultural trade in particular, RTAs seem to be only of minor importance in the future, as its uneven treatment in RTAs suggests that the future development of its trade rules is largely going to stay on the multilateral level (Coleman et al., 2004). 