Linguistics, the scientific study of language, is essential in the field of speech and language pathology. It provides the foundation in understanding the nature and causes of communication disorders. In carrying out clinical work, linguistic knowledge is applied in identifying and assessing speech and language disorders in children and adults, as well as in planning and performing appropriate therapeutic interventions. Linguistic theories provided a distinction between speech and language. Saussure, the founder of modern linguistics, contributed the basis of explaining spoken communication. Speech is a physiological act made by an individual, which results in the production of physical sound waves that is considered of having concrete existence. Language is a psychological abstract that does not have substance but exist as a 'form' in the shared knowledge of a linguistic community. Within language, it can be divided into two aspects, language execution (expression) and language reception (comprehension) (Grundy, 1995). Thus, speech impairment can be differentiated from language impairment. Assessment and diagnosis of speech and language disorders is built on the linguistic-descriptive approach. The method is based on describing language, using metalanguage, at different levels of the linguistic hierarchy. The frame work of linguistic components is illustrated in Figure 1 (adapted from Crystal, 1984). <figure/>The different levels of language, which are briefly defined in the following (Fromkin, Rodman & Hyams, 2003), are important in providing a systematic linguistic analysis. <list>Phonetics - The study of linguistics speech sounds; how they are produced (articulatory phonetics), how they are perceived (auditory phonetics), and their physical aspects (acoustic phonetics)Phonology - The study of sound system of a language; includes the inventory of sounds (phonetic and phonemic units) and the rules for their combination and pronunciationMorphology - The study of structure of words; includes the rules of word formationSyntax - The study of rules of sentence formation; it represents speaker's knowledge of the structure of phrases and sentencesSemantics - The study of linguistic meaning of morphemes, words, phrases and sentencesPragmatics - The study of how context and situation affects meaning </list>It is important to recognize that although language can be separated into multiple levels, each linguistic level interacts and has influence on one another. A breakdown in any of the linguistic levels will result atypical communication condition. I would further discuss the links between linguistics with speech and language pathology, including its role in assessment and management, with reference to two communication disorders: <list>(a) speech disorder developed in children with cleft palate(b) language disorder acquired by adults with aphasia </list>Cleft palate is a congenital malformation that involves the hard or soft palate or both, unilaterally or bilaterally. There is sub-mucous cleft where the surface of the palate appears intact in contrast with overt cleft. It is a type of articulatory disorder, which may be accompanied with or without phonological consequences. Knowledge in phonetics, especially articulatory phonetics in this case, is crucial in understanding the pathology of cleft palate. Majority of English consonants are oral sounds produced with a velic closure, where a sufficient air pressure is achieved in the mouth; except for the nasal consonants [m], [n] and [ŋ], which is produced by lowering the velum to allow air flow through the nose. Problem in the velopharyngeal mechanism in children with cleft palate causes hypernasality. Hypernasality can also be influenced by degree of mouth opening, tongue position and relationship of maxilla and mandible (Stengelhofen, 1989). A nasal snort, a disturbance caused by nasal emission may be heard. Due to velopharyngeal insufficiency, with air escaping into the nose, oral plosives may be substituted by glottal stops where manner of articulation is maintained but there is a shift of place as a compensation to achieve plosion. Misuse of larynx in glottal articulation results a harsh quality phonation with uncontrolled loudness (Berry & Einsenson, 1972). Lawrence & Phillips (1975, cited in Stengelhofen, 1989) stated that there is also a tendency for contacts to the back of the mouth. Backing, is a deviation from normal speech development, for example in [gægi] for 'daddy', which is different from the stopping of fricatives in [tu] for 'sue' and cluster reduction in [pun] for 'spoon' that are observed as part of the normal development process in children. Dental abnormalities and malocclusion between the upper and lower jaw may be present in children with cleft palate and interfere in speech production of fricatives / s /, / z /, / ʃ /, / ʒ /, / f / and / v / and alveolar plosives / t / and / d /. A compensatory substitution for labiodental [f] and [v] with bilabial [ɸ] and [β] may be seen (Starr, 1979). Phonetic impairment may lead to phonological impairment of reduced phonological contrast, for example when the child produces both alveolar fricative / s / and postalveolar fricative / ʃ / as palatal [ç] by saying [çəʊ] for both 'sew' and 'show'. The child with cleft palate may be subjected to language delay. Hearing impairment resulting from chronic otitis media as well as malfunction in the opening and closing of the Eustachian tube can reduce auditory input and feedback, which consequently slows the development of language comprehension and expressive language. Besides taking a thorough medical history of the size and extent of the cleft including any surgical repair done or any usage of palatal training appliance or obturator, a descriptive profile of the child's speech and language abilities is made, for example by collecting a phonetic inventory as well as conducting the Phonological Assessment of Child Speech (PACS). Instrumental articulatory phonetics such as the electropalatograph may also be used. Phonetic and phonological analysis helps to estimate the developmental level areas associated with language acquisition. Intervention is performed through play. Articulatory therapy, with preparatory work focusing on auditory discrimination using minimal pairs, should be progressive; plosive sounds should be tackled first before the fricatives and affricatives in coherence with the normal development sequence. Initial focus is placed in facilitating the production of sounds in isolation and then into simple nonsense CV syllables and followed by meaningful words. Further consonants of a similar group might be elicited through the first consonant acquired, for example, firstly acquired [ʃ] can be modified to produce [s]. Complexity of the phonetic context of target sound should be gradually increased, for example, practice / t / at the final position of the word as in 'hat' before going into initial position as in 'top' which requires additional aspiration component. Appropriate progression will strengthen the sensorimotor patterns and achieve desired modification of the child's Sound Pattern Template (Lancaster & Pope, 1989, cited in Grundy & Harding, 1995). Speech production requires rapid and precise movements. Therefore, the child with cleft palate is encouraged to experiment with his articulatory ability to try a wider range of speech and to boost sensory feedback of oral kinesthetic and proprioceptive information. Next, let us look into aphasia in adults. Aphasia is the loss or impairment of language function caused by brain damage. Brain damage can be due to various problems such as cerebrovascular accident, brain trauma or encephalitis infections. Aphasia can affect different modalities of language, not only speaking, but also reading (such as alexia) and writing (such as agraphia). In this discussion, I will focus only on spoken language in aphasics. There are many classification systems for aphasia. Some uses localization of brain damage such as Broca aphasia (frontal, where Broca's area is associated with serial organization and motor programming), Wernicke aphasia (temporal, where the Wernicke's area is associated with spoken language comprehension) or conduction aphasia (parietal), while others refer to the speech pattern, using the dichotomy of fluent and non-fluent aphasia, as well as grammatic and agrammatic aphasia. It should be noted that there is a lot of variation in aphasia as no two individual's brain anatomy and physiology as well as language usage are identical. Alongside, the location and the extent of damage generate different manifestations with different severity (Benson & Ardila, 1996). Descriptive linguistics and structured analysis is used to detect impaired linguistic skills caused by the brain damage, as well as to determine linguistic performance that is unaffected. Assessment is made by communicating with the patient through conversation, making relevant observation and accurate transcription, and implementing appropriate linguistic test. Below is some language impairment at different linguistic levels that may be found in aphasic patients: <heading>Phonetics and phonology</heading><list>Speech apraxia Production of non-fluent speech with phonetic errors and also phonological errors that fail to comply with phonotactic rules due to problem in phonetic planning, Caplan (1992, cited in Grundy, 1995) suggested that there is breakdown in preparation of representation for articulation and programming of the articulators.Phonemic paraphasiaProduction of fluent speech with phonemic errors of omissions, additions, displacement and substitution that comply with phonotactic rules, for example 'squottle' for 'bottle'. Garrett (1984, cited in Grundy, 1995) proposed that the word meaning is accessed but its phonological form is impaired.Neologism, the production of bizarre meaningless word, may result from severe phonemic paraphasia where a random selection of phonemes is made.</list><heading>Syntax</heading><list>AgrammatismDescribed as a non-fluent output, appearing as telegraphic speech, where content words especially nouns are used in greater extend than grammatical words, for example 'Boy home' for 'The boy went home'. Grammatical morphemes such as affixes are often omitted (Benson & Ardila, 1996).ParagrammatismDescribed as a fluent output, consisting grammatical errors, that violates the normative morphosyntactic rules. Unlike in agrammatism, grammatical morphemes are overuse and rarely omitted while content words are instead lacking. This may be due to difficulties in syntactic selection and organization.</list><heading>Semantics</heading><list>CircumlocutionTalking around and describing the target word (for example, 'soft' for 'snow'). In severe case, empty speech such as 'it is over there, like the other one, the one he has' is produced.Semantic paraphasiaProduction of a real word that has either the same grammatical function or has semantic association with the target word (for example, 'walking' for 'running').Verbal paraphasiaProduction of a real word that has the same grammatical function but no semantic association with the target word (for example, 'walking' for 'wishing').Perseveration paraphasiaProduction of word expressed in previous context, which is inappropriately repeated in later utterance.</list>Aphasic connected speech may present with word searching behavior such as pauses, hesitation and re-attempts of sounds, syllables or words, which display awareness of difficulty in word retrieval and production of lexical items. <heading>Pragmatics</heading>Holland (1991) stated that pragmatic skills are particularly resilient in aphasia and a certain level of communicative competence can be achieved. Although speech may be unintelligible or absent, aphasic patients are able to use non-verbal signals to convey their intentions through eye gaze, facial expression as well as gesture. There are exceptions where pragmatic problems do occur, when the brain damage is widespread and affects the right hemisphere. Patients may ignore turn-taking, as well as continue to jargon (production of incomprehensible utterances) in spite of negative feedback from conversational partner. Comprehension in word level is affected when there is a failure to activate the phonological structure responsible in spoken word recognition, or when there is a problem in evoking appropriate sense relation, may it be reference, hyponymy, antonomy, or synonomy. In sentence level, a comprehension breakdown may be caused by phonological, syntactic, semantic or pragmatic deficit, or attention, memory or other cognitive problem (Ross, 1995). . Therapy is tailored according to the specific language deficit that is found in the particular aphasic patient. For example, phonological therapy, which concentrates on analyzing word shapes and practicing naming, making rhyming judgments about words and naming pictures with phonemic cues, can be applied to tackle phonological deficit (Nettleton & Lesser, 1991, cited in Ross, 1995). Syntax therapy such as Helm Elicited Language Programme for Syntax Stimulation (HELPSS) (Helm-Estabrooks & Ramsberger, 1986, cited in Ross, 1995) can be carried out to help to expand the complexity and range of syntactic structures in agrammatic patients with syntactic deficit. Semantic therapy involving word-picture-matching task that requires appropriate selection of an item from a spoken name, and written label, as well as categorizing tasks are directed to remediate semantic deficit of word retrieval error (Mackenzie, 1991, cited in Ross, 1995). Residual function should be utilized besides focusing on correcting language impairment present. It is also important to target items with high degree of relevance to the individual and in everyday context of communication. Strategies such as emphasizing key words at the end of sentence, giving time to respond, repetition to clarify and providing cues to help linguistic access can support better outcome in communication. In conclusion, the study of linguistics provides a vital framework for assessment and treatment for speech and language disorders. Application of linguistic principles, combined with the knowledge of psycholinguistics and anatomy, enables a holistic approach towards communication disorders. 