<heading>1. Introduction</heading>Deixis is an essential element in a language as all the languages have a tendency to economically express meanings and it will be redundant and inconvenient to repeat the names of places, time and people within the same context; therefore, deixis is a universal phenomenon as Huang (2005) has also mentioned. Among its three basic categories, respectively, space, time and person, the last one - person deixis is the background of this essay which is going to study on plural first-person deixis in Modern Chinese. The first-person plural pronounce in northern standard Chinese has two different expressions women and zanmen. They have different pragmatic uses in the northern Chinese and are unable to exchange in the spoken language; however, in the southern regions of Chinese, only women is used in the colloquial speech. It is worth questioning whether the lack of zanmen may result in ambiguity in the south if only one first person plural is employed in everyday speaking and why zanmen is unnecessary in the south if it plays a different role from women in northern Chinese. This essay will firstly research on the use and functions of zanmen in northern dialects of Chinese by comparing with women with certain analysis and examples; secondly, it will attempt to focus on the absence of zanmen in the south, trying to find out some possible reasons that zanmen is redundant from three aspect - the historical development, linguistic theories and the consciousness level. <heading>2. A Simple Description of Person Deixis in Modern Chinese </heading>For an initial introduction, it is necessary to present a brief description about the whole Chinese system of pronouns (see Table 1). All the person pronouns in Chinese have no distinctions in grammatical functions such as between nominative and accusative use, neither do the two plural first-person pronouns which are different only in a semantic status or a pragmatic status. Thus, the following section 3 will present the details in distinguishing the two words within the northern Chinese setting. <table/><heading>3 Four Basic Distinctions</heading><heading>3.1 Inclusive and Exclusive</heading>As zanmen does not exist in southern Chinese (Sun 2004), it is perhaps interesting to distinguish zanmen from women initially in a northern background, which might show the indispensability of zanmen in the north.. The most prominent distinction, which was first time realized by the Chinese linguist Yuenren Chao (Zhu 1933) in 1922, is between the inclusive and exclusive characteristics as women refers to 'we-inclusive-of-addressee' and zanmen means 'we-exclusive-of-addressee' (Huang 2005) in the spoken language. This kind of distinction does not correspond with the English pronouns we/us which are identical both in inclusive and exclusive situation; however, this characteristic of northern Chinese is not a special feature because some languages like Gujarati, Malay, Zayse, etc. (Huang 2005) also include this distinction. Some examples in Chinese are provided as following: (1)  FORMULA  The sentence is for the speaker (A) continuing another person (B)'s words. Therefore, it clearly means that A and B are both amateurs from the first sentence and according to the second part, the speaker A will hold some activity every week. B may be one of the participants but will not front for the activity with A together. (2)  FORMULA  Different pronouns clarify the meaning quite simply and efficiently in this situation where the speaker stay with a few people. The two sentences look quite different in English but in Chinese they are just shown with different subjects. In the first one, the addressee(s) should understand that the speaker is asking him/them to go as well while the second one just shows that the speaker is leaving with other people except the addressee(s). (3)  FORMULA  This is an opposite example in which the speaker uses zanmen instead of women, so the surface meaning of the first sentence has changed into another sentence that you and we are both southern people. Obviously, it contradicts the second sentence. <heading>3.2 Intimacy of Zanmen</heading>Comparing to women, one of the effects of zanmen is to make interlocutors feel intimate with each other. This is the second commonly agreed function of zanmen when people use this word in the north. Zhu Ziqin (1933) found this effect of zanmen in the early twentieth century that zanmen made interlocutors feel near each other and women increased the distance between them. (4)  FORMULA  Women can appear in northern Chinese, but only in writing or formal situation. Thus, if zanmen is replaced by women, this sentence will sound a little strange to the addressee as if the speaker does not really think that they are good friends. This feature has been applied into some marketing strategies in which zanmen is used in speaking for making customers easily involved in a company's advocacy. For example, a land agent in Beijing named one housing estate Zaman which they were investing in, because they wanted to establish a circumstance of solidarity in the living region and made residents have more motivation to purchase houses (Xiaolu 2004). Another example is in a cooperation strategy in computer programming. Zanmen was considered as a word of motivating a better cooperation in work, comparing to separate women and nimen which might create a mood of self-defence. <heading>3.3. Singular Use of Zanmen and Women</heading>Although zanmen and women are used as plural first-person pronouns, they may be differently used as singular pronouns in distinctive situation. With concerns of zanmen, it is sometimes used to refer to the addressee alone rather than both interlocutors. For instance, a teacher may say to his student (Xiaohua)'s parents that (5)  FORMULA  In this example, Xiaohua is not the teacher's son, but the teacher can show his love and care to Xiaohua as the same as the student's parents by using zanmen. Similarly, a teacher could speak to his student like (6). (6)  FORMULA  It is not saying that both the teacher and the student should obey the rules because the deep meaning of this sentence only refers to the student. But using zanmen can reduce the tone of demand in the teacher's words and make it more tactful for listening. Thus, zanmen in the two sentences (5) and (6) only concerns the addressee(s). Women is different from zanmen because it can mean the speaker himself or herself but not the addressee(s) although it has the singular use as well. It is very similar to the use of we in English, which is often used in academic articles instead of I for depersonalizing certain points of view and making them more objective (Sun 2004). An example like (7) is shown below. (7)  FORMULA  So, it means the writer himself or herself has not found the evidence. Furthermore, it is not suitable for zanmen replacing women in this sentence because the sentence emphasized on the writer's own research not including the addressee and also because this is a relatively formal or written sentence, zanmen may reduce the extent of caution and authority. To sum up, this kind of singular use of the two words may be treated as the extension of the function of zanmen and women in Section 3.2 like the second section is the extension of the first one. To be more precise, zanmen reduces the space between communicators due to its 'we-inclusive-addressee' function; when the intimacy increases to certain extent, it can be only referred to the listener for an effect of further intimacy which is more convenient for people expressing the emotion like praise and criticism without too much consideration. However, it will be quite confusing why zanmen does not appear in south Chinese if the distinction between zanmen and women is so crucial in northern spoken language. The essay will try to simply explore the reason of the disappearance of zanmen in the south. <heading>4. The Reasons of the Disappearance of Zanmen</heading><heading>4.1 Division of Northern Chinese and Southern Chinese</heading>Before studying further on this question, the division of northern Chinese and southern Chinese should be clearly clarified. Actually, it is impossible to draw a straightforward boundary between the north and the south, as there is a large area of mixture dialects which often involve characteristics of both northern and southern dialects. Nevertheless, it is feasible to find the changing trace of zanmen from the north to the south. According to a series of simple interviews and some observation, the tendency of reducing zanmen becomes increasingly prominent in speaking from the north to the south. The northern areas such as Beijing, Hebei, Henan, Shangxi and Shangdong distinguish zanmen from women as listed in Section 3 very clearly; zanmen and women are nearly unchangeable in their speaking. But the distinction between the two words becomes vague when the location moves to the area near the Long River and the Huaihe River in Anhui. In a few places like Fuyang and Huainan, zanmen and women can both have an inclusive use in the spoken language although zanmen may show more intimacy depending on individual preference; contrarily, zanmen are nearly replaced by women in all the situation when the location moves further to the south to Hefei, Anqing, Nanjing, Shanghai, Hong Kong and so on; these areas are also the places where another feature - the chocked vowel (ru sheng) becomes a remarkable symbol in the dialects. <heading>4.2 The Historical Reason</heading>Tracing back to the history of the emergence of zanmen and women, it can be seen that both words originate from their singular forms zan and wo with a common plural mark  men. The early period when wo appeared in  Shuo Wen Jie Zi was about in 1 st Century. (Huang 2003); the Chinese character zan is the combination sound of zijia (自家), so it reasonably appeared later than wo. The early record of zan was in Northern Song Dynasty which existed from approximately 10 th to 11 th Century and it was popularly used by the nation Yuan in Yuan Dynasty (i.e. after Song Dynasty); thus, the word zan was used more often in the north owing to the territory of the Yuan nation (Li 2001). According to Lü Shuxiang (Li 2001), the plurality mark of men was popularly used in the north and middle of China (Beijing, Jinan, Taiyuan, Xi'an, Nanjing, Yangzhou, etc.) in Ming Dynasty (i.e. after Yuan Dynasty), so naturally the words zanmen and women began to be popular in people's speaking. From the above backward trace, it may explain the reason why zanmen disappears in the southern Chinese; nonetheless, it is still not clear why there is no corresponding word having the similar function as zanmen does. <heading>4.3 The Two Linguistic Reasons</heading>Firstly, in the situation where there is no ambiguity between inclusive women and exclusive women, there is not necessity of differentiating women such as one speaker say to one listener the sentence (2) (2)  FORMULA  It is straightforward for the addressee to understand the speaking setting. Secondly, in the situation where ambiguity may cause the comprehension difficulty, southern speakers may paraphrase and reorganize their sentence structures. Taking the example (2) again, North:  FORMULA  South:  FORMULA  A little change in the modal particle may clarify the meaning of the two sentences. Ba can send a suggestion to the addressee while la means a decision or an emphasis. The use of modal particles in the south such as la, ba, ne, me is much more common than in northern Chinese, so it may be the reason that one entire word  zanmen is less important in the south as the meaning of zanmen can be complemented. Furthermore, the speaker can change his or her stress, volume and speed of the sound with different gestures and actions. In a word, it is not difficult to make each other sufficiently understood in a conversation. <heading>4.4. The Consciousness Reason</heading>The absence of zanmen may result from different awareness of others and the self. The appearance and the reinforce of plural first-person plural zanmen in the north may indicate the identification of the addressee in the conversation, because the presence of the addressee who is you in the speaker's point of view has been marked with a different deixis from the one for the absent people like them, him and her in the speaker's view. The concept y ou has obtained a higher status than others because one of the effects of  zanmen can show intimacy between interlocutors. Thus, using zanmen is to show an active perception of the actual participants in the conversation. Contrarily, the identical first-person plural in both inclusive and exclusive situation shows a potential equality between the listener and the absent people. In other words, they are in the same group which is not the speaker himself and it could be seen as a strong consciousness of the existence of oneself. In Huang (2003)'s words, others are some beings alien, strange and dangerous. Thus, they are all treated identically in the deixis selection perhaps because of the underlying self-consciousness and self-protection of the subject group. <heading>5. Conclusion</heading>In the conclusion, this essay initially talked about the usage of the first-person plural pronoun zanmen only appearing in the northern colloquial speech by comparing to another common one women used in both the north and the south but with different functions. Basically, there are three difference between zanmen and women in the north, the range of inclusion and exclusion of the addressees, the extent of intimacy in the speech and the extended use of the two words performing a singular function in special situation. However, the importance of zanmen does not impact on its complete absence in the south. From a simple data collection, the independence of zanmen was gradually reduced as the location moves to the south until an utter replacement by women. This essay explored the reasons of a lack of zanmen in southern Chinese in the second part and found that three possibilities may result in the current southern Chinese characteristics, namely, the historical reason, the linguistic reason and the consciousness reason. Additionally, the final reason about consciousness might not be explained very adequately or require more convincing evidence and reasoning; furthermore, this may be related to the influence of society, geography, history, etc. which is too far from the topic of this essay. Thus, it was just pointed out as one hypothesis of the absence of zanmen in south Chinese. 