<heading>1. Introduction</heading>Studies about L2 foreign accent have been done a lot in the linguistic area, as linguists are curious about the causes and solutions to foreign accent, and about the effects of foreign accent on individuals and relevant impact on the whole society. Strong foreign accent may result in the difficulty in listeners' comprehension and sometimes it is considered as weakness of pronunciation as the same as speech defect, hyper-nasal and dialect (Rodman, 2000). Therefore, while speakers are trying to reduce their foreign accent in various ways, linguists have researched into the factors affecting degree of L2 foreign accent attempting to find the deep reasons of this phenomenon. This essay is going to review two articles, namely, Factors Affecting Strength of Perceived Foreign Accent in A Second Language (Flege, J, Munro, M., & Mackay, I. 1995) and Factors Affecting Degree of Foreign Accent in An L2: A Review (Piske, T. Mackay, I, & Flege, J. 2001). They provided several factors - age of L2 learning (AOL), length of residence (LOR), gender, motivation, language use and so on. The essay will summarize the main factors presented in both two articles with analyzing the reliability of these factors with the support from other research and individual experience; moreover, it will also briefly mention other existed factors in the end. <heading>2. Five Factors Affecting L2 Foreign Accent </heading>There are various factors which affect L2 foreign accent apparently and potentially. They include certain common factors and individual factors as well. In these two articles, linguists are attempting to find the common and representative reasons for explaining the L2 foreign accent. In the first one, Flegeal. (1995) provided a specific example by doing certain research with a group of Italian speakers of English, comparing to English native speakers in Canada; Piskeal. (2001), in the second article, summarized a few main factors on a basis of the results done by Flege et al. and other linguists. Therefore, five common factors can be found from both articles as prominent reasons for L2 foreign accent, although they may still cause disagreement. <heading>2.1 Age of L2 Learning (AOL)</heading>Age of learning (AOL) is a well-studied factor which has convinced the most linguists, according to different reports on this subject. It is said that there is a critical period (CP) existing for human learning speech. Individuals who started learning before the end of CP can usually achieve a much better pronunciation that who started after the end of CP (Piskeal. 2001) <figure/>In Flege's research (1995) on immigrants, the age of arrival was used as an index of AOL (other two ages are age of first exposure and acquisition). From the research, the critical period is limited at 6 years old which can be show in the left chart. There were two groups of people, English native speakers whose arrival ages were zero as shown at the beginning of these columns, Italian speakers of English who stand for the following columns and both of them read ten sentences (represented by different icons in the chart) which were rated by native speakers of English. The result indicated that English native speakers surely obtained the highest score and the arrival age near 6 became a dividing line between accent-free speech and foreign accent. It is reckoned that the age of 12 years is another important criterion for authentic pronunciation as the subjects who learned after it probably speak with accent and after another age of 16, no one can obtain standard pronunciation without accent (Flegeal. 1995). However, the age division is not absolutely correct, which can even be seen from the above chart that the subjects who started before age 6 could also got low marks and this result was also confirmed by Flegeal. (1997 in Piskeal. 2001) again. Likewise, 6% Italian subjects who began after age 12 in Flegeal. (1995) still achieved standard criterion of English pronunciation On the other hand, although the general viewpoint about the age of learning L2 is the earlier the better, Long (1990 in Piskeal. 2001) found that adults and adolescent learners might have a temporary preceding advantage of imitate certain sounds in L2 over younger children but the advantage disappeared with the time passing. Besides those argument, another question may be about other two age factors, namely, age of first exposure and acquisition, because for the people living in the expanding circle of the English language like China, they may have no opportunity to learn English as immigrants do but many people believe that accent-free speech requires learning at early ages. Therefore, it is doubtable if those three age division are still suitable for this kind of people for they do not live in a convenient environment of studying English and most children who start early to learn English can only speak to their teachers in class (Wan 2005). With such low percentage of English learning time, it is less possible for them to achieve authentic pronunciation even if they start before the age of 6. However, it is just individual suspicion without evidence from experiments and research. <heading>2.2 Length of Residence (LOR)</heading>Length of Residence (LOR) is another well-studied factor among different variables. It means the length of a speaker's residence in the target language environment and it only concerns with the period rather than the starting point. However, it is a controversial factor proved in certain research (e.g. Purcell & Suter 1980, Flege & Fletcher 1992 and Flegeal. 1995, all in Piskeal. 2001) and disproved in other research (e.g. Oyama 1976, Tahtaal. 1981 and Elliott 1995, all in Piskeal. 2001). According to Flegeal. (1995), it shows that LOR is a very small although important factor among the variables because LOR is related to AOL. For those subjects, the earlier they learn English, the longer the residence length is, but LOR has only effects on foreign accent within the 'initial phase of learning' (Piskeal. 2001). In other words, AOL is still the primary factor compared to LOR, in the critical period, AOL with corresponding LOR can affect the accent, but LOR will not influence the accent as an independent variable after the learning age. Another interesting conclusion pointed out by Uematsu (1998) after a research on 48 Japanese school students in the U.S., in which he compared the AOL, LOR, foreign accent and TOFEL results. The degree of foreign accent of the students highly correlated with AOL but not the LOR factor; in contrast, TOFEL results corresponded with LOR of those students but not the age reason. It also suggested that the critical period only fitted for the degree of foreign accent rather than other areas in L2 language study; LOR was more related to the overall L2 language achievement. It might be true from my observation that in the same situation, young immigrants are more likely to be accent-free while their parents usually speak with strong accent although they have accuracy and fluency in their speech. <heading>2.3 Gender</heading>Gender is also a debatable factor. Divergent results were concluded about the effects of gender on L2 foreign accent. <figure/>Asher & Garcia (1969 in Piskeal. 2001) found that female children and adolescents obtained higher ratings than age-matched males did. In a study by Thompson (1991 in Piskeal. 2001), females also received higher rating than males. Contrarily, Flegeal. (1995) related the effects of gender with age of learning in his experiment on Italian speakers of English in Canada. Female Italian subjects received higher ratings than males did when their AOLs were both less than 12 years, but lower than males with AOLs longer than 16 years (see Page 4). Meanwhile, many linguists did not find any significant contribution of gender to the foreign accent such as Olson & Samuels (1973), Purcell & Suter (1976) and Elliott (1995) (all in Piskeal. 2001). However, I found the support of a gene research reported by Sunday Times which showed that the girls' speech ability was much better than boys' in the early stage of L1 development and it seemed that the language gene had different ways of developing language ability on girls and boys (Medicine Online 2002) This might be a possible reason for girls having better performance on L2 pronunciation learning in an early stage if girls have a inherently genetic advantage, as an individual hypothesis. <heading>2.4 Motivation</heading>This is another factor agreed by both Flegeal. (1995) and Piskeal. (2001). Flegeal. (1995) reported in their research, the motivation, which was divided into 'integrative motivation' and 'instrumental motivation', was essential for obtaining standard pronunciation. Italian speakers of English were asked to list factors that they thought were important for impacting their foreign accent and the comparing results between men and women showed that females considered instrumental motivation was more significant; rather male subjects believed that integrative motivation was important as well as the instrumental one because the former one was supported by economic reasons and the latter one was due to a social and cultural desire. Nevertheless, it was not very clearly shown in the table provided in Flege's article (see the table in Page 8). Motivation only appears at the bottom of males' ratings. An actual example was collected in Piske et al (2001). Eleven Dutch adult learners of English with high motivation and success in learning were examined by Bongaertsal. (1997 in Piskeal. 2001) and 5 of 11 received similar ratings to those from a group of English native speakers. Actually, most studies agree that motivation at least has some influence on non-native speakers' pronunciation. In my private experience, motivation is really important for reducing foreign accent. The accent could be concealed a little when my desire to speak standard English became strong; then I would have more concerns with pronunciation and tried to standardize the sound before pronouncing it. But if I lost the concentration on pronunciation, the foreign accent would be more distinct in my feeling.. However, it is not a totally effective factor. Firstly, some studies like Oyama (1976) and Thompson (1991) did not find relevant support from their research. Secondly, motivation is more likely to be internal and psychological activities and it is difficult to be scaled. In other words, it is not clear to what extent the individual subjects differ in their motivation to pronounce an L2 and it is not sure whether the same grade of motivation can have the same effects on pronunciation. <heading>2.5 Language Use</heading>Language use means the use of languages in different situation including home use, work use and social use and it also includes L1 and L2 languages <heading>2.5.1 L2 language use</heading>The language use is reckoned as an important factor in some research. It accounted for 15% influence on non-native speakers' foreign accent for both males and females in Flege et al (1995). In the following table which is from the same article, the ratings of factors affecting foreign accent were estimated by Italian subjects of both genders. It can be easily seen that language use was identified as a very important factor and the difference is that males thought the language used at work was the second important factor just less than the age influence, while females thought a lot of overall language use. Other studies from Piske's article also agreed with this point such as Tahtaal. (1981 in Piske 2001) who said that the home use of English as L2 accounted for 9% of the variance in degree of foreign accent but this percentage raised to 26% for early bilinguals with AOLs of 7-12 years. Divergences about this factor exist in different research. Thompson (1991 in Piskeal. 2001) found that language use was simply related to the degree of foreign accent but this factor was confounded with AOL as well as gender mentioned before. Moreover, Flege & Fletcher (1992 in Piskeal. 2001) and Elliott (1995 in Piskeal. 2001) discovered little or no influence on subjects' foreign accent. In my experience and observation, language use does not automatically lead to accent-free speech, especially for adult learners, but it is quite useful for improving fluency in speech. Sometimes people may have a wrong impression that their pronunciation has become more standard when they can talk fluently with native speakers. Moreover, if the subjects speak to non-native speakers in L2 for a long time, it is not difficult to speculate that their foreign accent will be more distinct than the accent of those who practice with native speakers. <heading>2.5.2 L1 Language Use</heading>The use of mother tongue is also taken into account by some linguists but as a negative factor. It is said that the proficiency and frequency of L1 use is in an inverse proportion to the degree of L2 foreign accent. Thompson (1990 in Piskeal. 2001), as already mentioned, did not find the effect of L2 language use but thought L1 language use was a negatively important factor in reducing L2 foreign accent. The Russion subjects in her study who had detectable foreign accent had 'professional speaking proficiency' in their L1 and the L1 proficiency was suggested as a reason of their accent. Furthermore, as seen in the above table (in Page 8), native language loyalty which was explained as use of mother tongue was considered as one factor by females (Flegeal. 1995); however, Flege et al. did not consider it as a significant factor at that time. In 2000, Flege with his colleagues (Flege & Liu 2000 in Jesney 2003) found another factor that foreign accent of some Korean-English bilinguals significantly corresponded with first language use; those who used Korean more frequently typically had stronger foreign accents in English <table/>. From a private point of view, I agreed with this result again. The overmuch use of one's first language is not helpful for learning L2 pronunciation, especially when those two languages are distinctive in their segmental and suprasegmental qualities. However, it is a little confusing that the two factors - L2 language use and L1 language use can be analyzed separately which more look like one integrated factor. The increase of L2 use should naturally lead to a decrease of L1 use, vice versa. Probably, those studies emphasized subjects' conscious attempts of choosing languages. <heading>2.6 Other factors</heading>In addition to the above factors, there are still some other factors which have drawn attention of linguists and have been occasionally discovered in various studies. <heading>Formal Instruction </heading>This factor was not found in Flegeal. (1995) but appeared in the review one. Bongaertsal. (1997 in Piskeal. 2001) mentioned the use of formal instruction in modifying foreign accents; moreover, Derwing & Rossiter (2003 in Jesney 2003) found that adult ESL students who received global pronunciation training received benefits to their pronunciation. However, there is little evidence showing that it is an important factor in most studies. It will be quite frustrating if this conclusion is true because various training of pronunciation is so popular universally. At least, Chinese people who want to learn perfect English pronunciation have expected too much from formal instruction because most people cannot move to an English speaking country for learning. <heading>2.6.2 Language Learning Aptitude </heading>Language learning aptitude, as listed in Piskeal. (2001) means both musical and mimicry ability. It is said (Piskeal. 2001) that all studies except Flege's (Flegeal. 1995) have found mimicry ability is a significant factor but musical ability has not been identified. Strangely, a similar factor - imitation ability in Flege's original report (Flegeal. 1995) was listed by both male and female subjects in a higher position than length of residence, but this was intentionally ignored in their final result without explanation. I think this ability should account for some people's performance on their pronunciation. If different learners with the other identical conditions of learning, they may be reasonably expected to have different achievement in their pronunciation when their language learning ability shows great distinction. The importance of this factor has been proved in other research. <heading>2.6.3 Further Factors</heading>Immersion in an L2 environment (Elliott 1995; Purcell & Suter 1980; Riney & Flege 1998 in Jesney 2003), attitude toward the second language (Elliott 1995 in Jesney 2003) and field independence (Elliott 1995 in Jesney 2003) have also been found to be significantly correlated with L2 foreign accent. Additionally, in Yeon's result (2004) input quality differs between school setting and non-school setting; thus, it may have different influence on student groups and non-student groups. More factors could be added in the list; however, it is difficult to account all the examined factors for researchers. Although several important and common factors have been found to have effects on L2 foreign accent, there may be due to more individual variances among different subjects. <heading>3. Conclusion</heading>As a review of those two articles by Flegeal. (1995) and Piskeal. (2001), the first finding is the five common factors, namely, age of learning, length of residence, gender, motivation and language use of L1 and L2 which have been introduced and analyzed with evidence from both articles, other research, certain private experience and observation. While age of learning is most popularly acceptable factor affecting the degree of L2 foreign accent, the rest four factors are still more or less controversial in this area. Some other factors have been also simply added in the end of this essay, which are not as significant as the five main factors. Another finding is that certain factors are unclear in their independent effects on L2 foreign accent. Firstly, they may impact L2 foreign accent by confounding with other factors; for example, effects of LOR, gender and motivation differ in different groups of subjects. Secondly, it is difficult to measure some of them such as motivation; attitude toward the second language might be also a quite private and unstable factor. In a word, the factors do not affect the pronunciation separately but with influence from other factors or some subtle variance in individuals. Therefore, it may be difficult to confirm their own influence. Finally, it is not a finding but a doubt, which has been pointed out in the analysis in Part 2.1, about the degree of the validity of these factors when applied to people who live in their motherland. As can be seen, most subjects in the research in this article lived in a L2 environment, so some factors like age of arrival, length of residence and language use aimed at that group of people. However, a large number of people learn their second language in a L1 speaking environment and may encounter more difficulty from L1; therefore, internal drive and some individual factors might play a more important factor comparing to immigrants. Whether those factors mentioned above are equally suitable from them is suspecting and maybe the future research can take this group of L2 learners into account. 