The ancient Greeks believed that citizens of Greek city states that conformed with the rest of Greek society could be classed as 'Greek'. Anyone who did not fit into this category was classed as non-Greek and was usually deemed inferior. Non-Greeks were generally known as barbarians as this was derogatory of the different sound their languages made. Prominent barbarian groups in the greek world were the Persians and the Amazons, if they truly existed. The Egyptians and all Eastern civilisations would have also been called barbarians as their beliefs and customs were different to that of the Greeks. Differences in cultures appeared in sexual practices, the role of women, art and politics, and were used by the Greeks to define who was Greek (i.e. civilised) and who was not (i.e. barbarian.) History and heritage was also important as were "the bond of blood and language, our holy altars and sacrifices and our common way of life". (Herodotus Histories 8.144) In ancient Greek society women were treated as inferior beings. Despite being citizens of cities, and therefore 'civilised' and Greek, they had no political rights. Propaganda on vases and in literature shows that the ideal place for a woman was in the home where she could not see other men and could not be educated. Women were thought to be wild and dangerous so the greeks believed they needed to control their women. Myths of women with freedom that caused trouble for men served as a warning to greek men. One of these myths, one that could be based on fact, is the legend of the amazon women. The amazons were a race of women that dominated men and lived independent lives. Although their myth was prominent in Greeek culture the amazons were seen as barbarians because of their androgynous lifestyle. They did the work of men such as farming, building and even fought in battles. Taking the place of men, as well as cutting off one of their breasts, reduced their feminity and made them frightening and vulgar to the Greeks. The tragedy, Medea, also serves as a warning to men about women. Medea, like the amazons was considered to be non-greek. She ultimately escapes unpunished but leaves behind her the destruction and death of greek people. It is not just her knowledge of witchcraft that makes her powerful but she is an intelligent woman and a skilled orator. No doubt many 'proper' greek women were bright but they were quick to disguise their intelligence around men lest they be shunned by society. A society where women had rights and freedom, especially where they were allowed to dominate men, was seen as dangerous and barbaric. Egyptian women were seen as being equal to men and had rights and political power. These women were especially dangerous and the men were seen as barbarians for letting their women have such freedom. Another factor that contributed to the Egyptians being labelled as barbarians was the fact that having harems was widely accepted in Egypt. The Egyptian royalty even practised polygamy and the Pharaoh was encouraged to have more than one wife. He could even have hundreds of concubines in his harem. The people who considered themselves to be greek would have found this custom extremely barbaric as monogamous marriage was practised throughout Greece. Greek men did have mistresses but kept them secret as adultery was highly disapproved of. Adultery was seen as stealing another mans property; the woman belonged either to her husband or her father (or another male member of the household if her father was dead) Persians, the enemies of Greece,also had harems and other customs that were strange to the greeks. They were considered to be the most brutish of barbarians, probably due to the conflict with Greece. Their portrayal as primitive and uncivilised people was part of the propaganda the greeks used to inspire hated for the Persians and get men to fight. Sex was, and still is, an important issue when deciding whether a culture is 'civilised' or not. Barbarians were thought of as being lustful and enjoyed eating, sleeping and generally living unproductive lives. The greeks spread rumours that barbarians raped women despite having harems because of their high sex drives. They believed that civilised people did not rape women and flaunt their sexuality. It was even considered to be rape if a man had an affair with an unmarried girl because he had made her impure. Paintings on the inside of skphos' that depict people having sex show that the greeks were not prudish about sex, they just had morals about what was right and wrong. The main rule concering ancient greek sexual practices is that the three categories bed, bread and dead i.e. sex food and death, (lecture notes, 06/10/03) did not get combined. Necrophilia, therefore, was not tolerated and any culture that practiced this was immediately classed as barbarians. According to this rule, sex with food should also have been thought of as an un-greek thing to do yet there are stories of people trying to have intercourse with food such as pieces of meat. This shows that the greeks had double standards; if the greeks practised a certain custom then it was civilised. If another culture did something that was different, then it was unnatural. Greek art is extremely helpful to our understanding of what the greeks defined as 'greek' and 'non-greek'. Barbarians are shown as being ugly whilst greek people are depicted as being beautiful and athletic. Friezes on the Parthenon in Athens show the greeks fighting the amazons and various groups of barbarians. Nudity in paintings and sculpture was common in Greece as it represented beauty rather than sex. Some statues, like the skyphos, were suggestive but in a humorous way. If the ancient greeks are to be believed, their art and customs are tasteful whereas barbarians such as the Persians flaunted their sexuality in a pervers manner. The city states of Greece were often at war with eachtohter for various reasins but they still allied themselves in order to fight common enemies such as the Persians. Athenains and Spartans believed themselves to be different and better than others but thery still agreed they were all greek and that unted them. They spoke the same languae and worshipped the same gods even though each city had slightly different religious festivals. In comparison, Persians, Egyptians and other barbarians worshipped different gods and spoke different languages. The greeks also felt united and superior in their education and intellectual progress. Unlike previous civilisations the greeks were quite advanced in the areas of mathematics, philosophy, medicine, astrology and other sciences. The greeks tried to convince themselves that they were civilised because they were intelligent, whereas the barbarians were still quite primitive in their thinking. It is interesting to see that some 'greek' ideas about astronomy, medicine and religion appear to have been adapted from the ideas of those they considered to be barbarians. Again we see the double standards of the greeks because when they studied these subjects they were civilised and educated but when barbarians developed ideas they were radical and strange. The greeks often relied on double standards when deciding whether a culture was civilised or not. This is probably because the greeks wre more like the barbarians than they liked to admit the reeks claimed barbarians were brutal war mongerers whilst the greeks themselves wre waging war on other countries as well as amongst the other greek city states. Pottery and literature shows war to be a glorious thing for the greeks. All males had to contribute to war and conquest in order to be considered a man. If foreigners demonstrated these ideals they would have been regarded as bloodthirsty and dangerous. In conclusion, there are many reasons why the greeks considered themselves to be 'greek' and civilised whilst the rest of the world was barbaric. They simply considered their civilisation to be better than others, just like the Persians, Egyptians and any other country did. Ideals and beliefs that the greeks upheld were marks of civilised people even thought they were usually adaptations of foreign beliefs. The changes greeks made to any theories and ideas made them greek and acceptable in civilised society. Despiute this, the greeks still felt united due to their "bond of blood and language", which was probably the most important reason they considered themselves to be greeks and to unite when the occasion called for it. 