<heading>1. Introduction</heading>If one embarks on a study of determiners and other prenominal modifiers, one central problem emerges quickly: categorisation. Almost every publication features its own classification of what a determiner is, what subcategories there are, and on what grounds to distinguish them. To answer the questions at the heart of this essay in detail, a systematic overview of the most prominent approaches to premodifier categorisation would be helpful. Unfortunately, this would exceed the time and space constraints evident in this assignment; therefore the different classifications of various scholars will only be referred to when they are of immediate relevance to the essay questions. The first question will be dealt with in section 2, the second question in section 3 of this paper. <heading>2. Determiners and other prenominal modifiers</heading>As the first essay question calls for a distinction between determiners and other prenominal modifiers, section 2 will be headed by a very brief outline of what elements are categorised as determiners within the scope of this paper. This endeavour may seem rather basic, but in the face of extremely varying definitions in the literature it should be deemed important to set a parameter that the other elements can be compared against, before engaging in an analysis of borderlines. <heading>2.1 Types of determiners</heading>The basis for the following analysis is Berk's (1999) classification system as it is arguably the most straightforward. However, in order to illustrate particular problems and concepts, other classifications will be referred to. The determiner is a vital element of the noun phrase. As a functional constituent, it carries information about the "scope of reference" of the head noun (Lock 1996: 27). It particularises the referent (or referents) of the noun amongst a group of possible referents, thus acting as an essential linguistic device to communicate meaning in discourse. <enote>Huddleston (1984:54) and Downing & Locke (2002:409) distinguish between the grammatical category 'determiner' and the lexical items used in this function, the 'determinatives'. To avoid overcomplication, both concepts will be labelled 'determiner' here. </enote>There are three subcategories within the determiner category: <list>Predeterminers (e.g. half, all, double)Central determiners (e.g. the articles the and a/an)Postdeterminers (e.g. numerals, many, few) (Quirkal. 1985: 253)</list>In the above order, determiners precede other constituents of the NP, e.g. adjectives or the head noun itself. However, members of the same subcategory cannot co-occur. (Berk 1999:58)  FORMULA  In the following, each subcategory will be briefly described in terms of what types of determiners they encompass. <heading>2.1.1 Predeterminers</heading>Predeterminers generally express quantity (Berk 1999:65) and thus make the determiner's reference even more specific.  FORMULA  Members belonging to this subcategory are: <list>all bothmultiples like twicefractions like a quarter</list><heading>2.1.2 Central determiners </heading>In this paper, five major types of central determiners (Berk 1999:64-65) shall be distinguished: <list>articles:indefinite a/an, somedefinite theExample:  FORMULA demonstratives:this, thesethat, thoseExample:  FORMULA genitives:my, ouryourhis, her, itstheirNP + 's (Halliday 1994:438)Examples:  FORMULA  FORMULA quantifiers:noeacheveryanyExample:  FORMULA interrogatives:whichwhosewhat Example:  FORMULA </list>Central determiners may co-occur as part of a partitive determiner structure. In these cases, the preposition of indicates that the noun referent is a subset of a previously selected set (Downing and Locke 2002:441).  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>2.1.3 Postdeterminers</heading>A postdeterminer can occur after a determiner, but it must precede the adjective(s) (Berk 1999:66).  FORMULA  <list><heading>Like predeterminers, postdeterminers express a notion of quantity, albeit through:</heading>cardinal numerals like twoordinal numerals like secondmanylittle few</list>The lexical items listed under each subcategory are neither an exhaustive list nor a properly explained account of all determiners of English as this would be beyond the purpose of this paper. They provide, however, a minimum background for the following discussion. <heading>2.2 How is the next category different? </heading>Determiners are elements that premodify the heads of a noun phrases. However, there are other elements acting as prenominal modifiers, most notably adjectives. They can be distinguished from determiners on both semantical and grammatical grounds. The semantics of most adjectives differ from those of determiners as to the nature of their reference. While determiners particularise and select the referent in relation to the speech context, adjectives describe the "more permanent qualities" and inherent features of the head referent (Downing and Locke 2002:409). Both elements complement each other in order to clarify the referent of the head noun.  FORMULA  Presuming the speaker was standing in front of two ships, one blue, one red, and in the distance were a multitude of blue and red ships, both describing blue and deictic this would be required to particularise the referent. Contextual and more permanent quality information, normally realised in determiner and adjective, are distinct ways of prenominal modification. There are problems with this distinction however, because some adjectives tend to have a selective rather than a describing function. Termed "adjectival determinatives" by Downing & Locke (2002:440), they refer to features such as similarity (e.g. same), difference (e.g. other), totality (e.g. whole), familiarity (e.g. familiar, famous), usuality (e.g. regular), particularity (e.g. certain, original) and uniqueness (e.g. only). Although the selective (as opposed to descriptive) character of words like famous or original seems arguable (depending entirely on speech context), words like other or whole certainly particularise the entity in question in a determinative way. <enote>Halliday (1994:183) describes this set of words as 'post-deictics'. </enote> FORMULA  If they were to be classified as determiners, it would be difficult to place them into one of the three distributional subcategories, as they can either act as a postdeterminer or occupy the position between central determiner and postdeterminer.  FORMULA   FORMULA  In general however, distribution is an excellent criterion for distinguishing determiners from other prenominal modifiers. The latter, e.g. adjectives, can co-occur while determiners are mutually exclusive within their three subcategories.  FORMULA   FORMULA  A further characteristic of determiners that distinguishes them from other prenominal modifiers is their property of being a 'closed class' (Berk 1999:58). The category of adjectives for example will admit new members fairly quickly, whereas the creation of new determiners is highly rare if not unthinkable.  FORMULA  <enote>pukka: imported from Hindi (Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2002), famously used in the sense of 'excellent' by TV chef Jamie Oliver. </enote> FORMULA  <enote>*thot: hypothetical deictic expression that might be used to refer to items on TV, thus near but far from location of speech event. </enote>Determiners also stand in contrast to other prenominal modifiers because they are often required for grammaticality (Berk 1999:58), whereas other prenominal modifiers like adjectives never are.  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  The features exemplified above show how determiners can be distinguished from other elements that premodify nouns. As so often, the grammatical checks seem to be a more reliable source for categorisation than the initial semantic distinction. <heading>2.3 Types of prenominal modifiers other than determiners</heading>In the angles for distinction between determiners and other prenominal modifiers above, only one member of the latter category, the adjective, has been used as a juxtaposition to the former. In the following, other elements that premodify nouns will be outlined briefly. There are two kinds of prenominal modifiers that can follow the determiner: the epithet and the classifier, which "describe the inherent, more permanent qualities of the entity itself" (Downing and Locke 2002:409). The epithet, termed 'describer' by Lock (1996:58) typically takes the form of an adjective, and it indicates a quality of the head noun referent (Halliday 1994:184). This quality can refer to an objective property of the Thing (the term for the head noun referent used by Halliday) or to the speaker's attitude towards it.  FORMULA   FORMULA  A classifier indicates a certain subclass of the head noun referent (Halliday 1994:184), and is usually realised as an adjective or noun.  FORMULA   FORMULA  Both epithet and classifier can also be realised as participles (Lock 1996:48-50).  FORMULA   FORMULA  As it may be hard to tell sometimes whether a premodifying word is an epithet or classifier, Lock (1996:50) suggests a test based on a specific characteristic of the classifier. It indicates a subclass of the Thing that the noun referent is either a member of or not. Thus, if the word in question is a classifier it cannot be modified by adverbs like epithets can.  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>3. The influence of determiner semantics on determiner grammar</heading>Determiners are a category that hosts very different semantic notions. This fact explains the wide variation of different classification systems that have been introduced. Downing and Locke distinguish between two main types of determination: deictic and quantifying (Downing and Locke 2002:436). These two groups are divided into various subtypes, and deictic determiners can also be divided into specific and non-specific. Huddleston (1984:354-399), on the other hand, distinguishes the articles from 14 types of "other" determinatives, with exact, but rather small categories like "alternative-additive determinative" (another) and "positive paucal determinatives" (a little etc.) A lot of efforts have been made to categorise determiners according to their semantics. The grammatical behaviour of such categories has mainly been linked to the position of their members within the noun group. Berk (1999:58) and Quirkal. (1985:256) have published an account of which type of noun head can be specified by which types of determiners. However, it only gives information on which determiners occur with singular count, plural count and/or noncount nouns, and these co-occurrences are not linked with a coherent semantic parallel. The only semantic classes that display a distinct grammatical behaviour seem to be the types outlined in section 2.1. The position of articles, genitives, demonstratives and interrogatives in the noun group is fixed: they occupy the central position amongst the elements before any epithets, classifiers and the head noun. Quantifiers however can be found in all three determiner positions, although the central position can only host exact quantifiers like no, each, every and any. The quantifiers all and both, which are normally found in predeterminer position, can sometimes move into the verb group ('quantifier float') (Berk 1999:66).  FORMULA  FORMULA  Thus, taking into account a few exceptions and bearing in mind the difficult case of quantifying determiners, it seems possible to assign a distinct grammatical behaviour to certain semantic classes of determiners. <heading>4. Conclusion</heading>The answer to the first essay question, "How do we distinguish determiners from other elements that premodify nouns in English?", has shown that there are relatively reliable checks to distinguish between determiners and other prenominal modifiers. Section 2 however, dedicated to the second essay question, has shown that distinguishing between different semantic classes within the determiner category is not a question of clear-cut boundaries and obvious perspectives. But it is possible to point out some "semantic classes of determiners that behave in grammatically distinct ways", at least as to their typical position in the noun phrase. <heading>Notes</heading>