From the outset of Ridley Scott's Gladiator (2000) the audience is presented with a picture that conforms to the epic tradition of its predecessors such as Spartacus (1960) and Ben-Hur (1959) yet simultaneously pitches itself as a "new epic" different from everything that has come before it, a more "real" epic that does not idealise the ancient world and one that the audience can identify with despite the historical setting. This "new" epic ideal can be seen clearly in the opening sequence of the movie. The filmmakers have chosen to show the distributors' logos in sepia which contrasts with the grandiose and colourful presentation of these in the majority of other films yet gives the picture its own unique ancient feel and coupled with a sombre and mysterious opening score putting the audience on edge anticipating the first shots of the film. This also sets the tone of the movie well before the audience sees any of the actual characters or images on screen. The title is a bold and strikingly simple black rising out of dark red smoke conjuring negative images of death and war foreshadowing the upcoming first act and preceding the prologue which acts as a narrator simply setting the scene and its historical significance for the audience. The director uses literary techniques such as alliteration in the final line of the prologue to draw the audience in and set their focus on specific words that will give them an idea of what they should expect from the opening of the film. The prologue also sets the audience's view on the Roman Empire by describing it in a similar way to the sole world superpower of modern times, the USA, and thus comparing them as a juxtaposition between an empire of great advance and brilliance underscored by the immense bloodshed and death that was, and still is necessary to establish and maintain such a superior status in the world. This juxtaposition is also shown visually as well as textually in the prologue through the separation between the first and second paragraphs and the appropriate temporary darkening of the background smoke as the second paragraph fades in with its substantially darker subject matter concerning the empire and simply stating, <quote>"Over one quarter of the world's population lived and died under the rule of the Caesar's."</quote>It is no secret that the filmmakers want us to see the parallel between the Romans and modern America, in fact they want the audience to identify with the Romans and they knew that an American audience would to some extent even before seeing the movie due to the infrastructure of the American political system being based upon its Roman predecessor. However, it could be argued that this is in fact a snide comment on American foreign policy highlighting both empires' constant need to achieve "peace" by invading other countries and it would seem appropriate that director Ridley Scott's next picture "Black Hawk Down" (2001) dealt with this very subject using the modern American army's troubles in Somalia as the backdrop. In essence Scott reproduces the battle from the opening sequence of Gladiator replacing the Romans with Americans and the Germanians with the Somalian militia. Indeed the similarities are endless, the intense focus on the technological superiority and humanity of the US/Roman Army and the portrayal of the enemy as savages among other things. After the prologue the text and smoke fades out leaving the screen completely black in a transitional state that forces the audience to stop their train of thought and simply anticipate the first images of the film. Most would probably expect a battle scene of some type to follow the prologue just presented however instead we are shown an almost poetic image of a man's hand gently caressing the wheat in a seemingly endless field. The camera is placed behind the subject and level with his hand which is in close-up giving the impression of walking with him whilst the shot is toned with a warm and neutral colour creating a calm and gentle aura that relaxes the audience whilst the actual caressing of the wheat invokes our senses re-enforcing our presence in the scene. The image is accompanied only by the simple sound of wheat swaying in the gentle breeze and the distant sound of a child at play complemented by the hauntingly sorrowful female vocal score making the image more emotional rather than "real". The hand itself is shot in close-up and through this shot we learn much about this character. There is a wedding ring on his finger telling us that he is married and coupled with the faint sound of a happy child in the distance we are inclined to think that he is a family man which immediately endears him to the audience and implies that he will be the hero of the picture. He wears a forearm/cuff guard indicating that he is a soldier and that he has most probably fought many battles. The fact that he gently caresses the wheat and that his hand is weathered suggests that he in a way cares for the crops and has worked the land in the past which allows the audience to associate him with the average modern person or perhaps draw parallels between him and the farmers-come-soldiers who fought in the American Civil War.  <fnote>"The Hollywood Gladiator: narratives of heroism and morality" by Kim Shahabudin </fnote>The next image we see is in complete contrast to the previous one. The image has been shot in a far colder and more unsettling blue tone rather than the warm orange and gold tone of the wheat field however the music has not changed and thus the same mournful atmosphere is present but this time accompanied by a much harsher wind which acts as a means to bring us into the reality of war in ancient times when coupled with the colder blue tone. We see Russell Crowe as the sole focus of the shot in a medium close-up restricting our view to just his face and shoulders. The grand white fur and gold edging of his armour leads us to believe that he is in a position of some importance, whilst the expression of realisation on his face tells us that we have been engaging in his thoughts, we have seen what he longs for which humanises him to a certain extent and hints at the possibility that he may have a distinctly modern outlook on war perhaps seeing it as quite pointless. He appears tired and does not give the audience eye contact; instead he looks down and past us, which stops us from engaging in anything but his thoughts before he attempts to leave the shot. However rather than leaving the shot he half turns and looks back past the audience once again refusing to give us eye contact. The camera then cuts to a close-up of a red robin perched on a small branch not too far away from Crowe that flies away immediately after looking at us which could be read as an omen foreshadowing the battle ahead. The bold colour of the robin contrasts with the cold toning of the shot and its blood red colour gives the impression that life and nature themselves are fleeing from this place before the battle commences. The fact that Crowe's facial expression changes to a smile as he follows the robin's flight and then returns to a stern and mournful face once he loses sight of the robin further humanises him and suggests that he may envy the robin's freedom to come and go when and where it pleases whilst he is forced to fight for Rome in such an awful place further emphasising the possibility that he has a modern perspective on war and allowing the audience to further identify with him. The next image is a long-shot of the barren and desolate battlefield enclosed by a dense mass of trees which creates a sense of claustrophobia despite the immensity of the space similar to that of the arena floor of the Colosseum. It is occupied solely by Crowe who we can just about see in the distance for close to two seconds before the music becomes more regal as horses enter the shot diverting our attention away from Crowe temporarily as the camera pans then rises to follow their movement revealing the rest of the Roman army marching away from the camera. This is our first glance of the immense Roman army and the first thing we notice is that everything about them is near perfectly organised, a point that will be discussed in more detail later. The lighting is noticeably darker and the director may have chosen to light this scene naturally creating an even more sombre feel and foreshadowing the darkness of the battle about to commence. We are then confronted by the horses galloping towards us from a low angle shot making them appear much bigger and more powerful which also acts as a metaphor for the difference between the Roman army and their enemies. Richard Harris is also shot from a low angle which appears to be a point of view shot from Crowe's perspective giving him a greater stature and marking him out as hierarchically the most important figure in the opening sequence due to the form of hierarchy in height present in the opening sequence. His richly colourful purple robes and gold armour convey the idea of royalty whilst his facial expressions are similar to those of Crowe except Harris' face is considerably wearier and greyer than Crowe's indicating that he probably has the same feelings about the forthcoming battle as the hero. Crowe is also shot in ways that make him appear regal at various times such as when he walks between the soldiers, they all kneel out of respect and we see very few of their faces forcing us to focus on Crowe and their reaction to him rather than the actual soldiers themselves. The camera is placed low behind Crowe so that all we see of him is his red cloak and white fur collar which are both very regal and the low camera angle also makes him appear much bigger and far superior to the other soldiers that he passes. This is followed by a number of shot-reverse-shot shots that create a feeling of kinship between Crowe and his soldiers and the fact that he stops for one of his men purveys a sense of friendship and camaraderie that indicates that these are the "good guys" who we should identify with. Amongst the crowd of people surrounding Marcus there are two soldiers wearing leopard skin headdresses which not only allude to the animalistic personas that will soon surface in battle but also act as a metaphor visible in many of the Romans' costumes for the strength and power of the Roman army signalling that they are the predators whilst their enemies are the prey. As Crowe approaches his commanders we walk beside him through a tracking shot showing us the "war machines" of the Roman army before we finally hear the hero's voice. He has a British accent which is in tune with the general tone of the film considering that it is not aimed solely at a mass audience looking simply for entertainment but it is trying to portray itself as a dramatic film rather than a dumb action movie. The next key image we see is that of the messenger returning from the forest on his horse. Before we even see the horse we hear a war-cry and the music becomes much tenser reflecting Crowe's anxiety for the upcoming battle. The brutal image of a headless horseman and his head then being thrown down onto the ground partially revealing his face presents the audience with a savage image that immediately separates the Germanians from the Romans. The music has once again become mournful reflecting the situation, that bloodshed is now completely unavoidable. Added to this the contrast between Crowe and the Germanian commander further emphasises the differences between the two sides. Crowe is dressed in red and white colours, colours symbolising life and goodness, and his hair and beard are reasonably tidy considering he is at war, in contrast to the Germanian commander who wears complete black symbolising evil (perhaps also foreshadowing his imminent death) and he has an untamed beard and hair portraying him as a more savage character. Furthermore, Crowe speaks English whilst the Germanian speaks in an ancient tongue which once again tells the audience which side they should identify with. The next shots focus on the contrasts between the two armies firstly focusing on the Germanians. We see them appear out of the forest in a long shot followed by a medium close-up shot from below directed down the lines of the Germanian army. They appear unorganised and technologically inferior to the Romans by banging their weapons against their shields yet they still appear intimidating especially from the low shot that makes them seem bigger and more numerous than they probably actually were. In contrast, the Romans remain still and appear calm and organised as they stand in their ranks ready for battle. The image that follows the stand-off is a close-up of Crowe as he picks up some earth and rubs it in his hand. This action is part of a recurring theme throughout the movie that alludes to Crowe's agricultural roots and gives him a heroic and humanising need to be one with the earth before he spills blood on it, as Jon Solomon explains, <quote>"Every time Maximus prepares for combat... he rubs dirt into his hands, a primordial reminder that he is a farmer and a warrior, a kind of Cincinnatus in touch with Mother Earth."</quote><fnote>"Gladiator from Screenplay to Screen" by Jon Solomon (year) p14 </fnote>We are then presented with a shot-reverse-shot between Crowe and his dog which Jon Solomon believes represents the she-wolf of Rome from the Romulus and Remus myth due to the fact that in the first draft of the script the dog is called "The Wolf of Rome". Therefore Crowe's dog can also be read as symbolising the fighting spirit of the Romans as the battle approaches and hence the quickening of the music's tempo and transformation of it into a more classical Wagnerian score plus the fact that all the soldiers rise into their positions ready for battle when the dog is unleashed and passes them with Crowe acts a metaphor for the imminent unleashing of the Roman army upon its inferior enemy. Prior to this we have seen a medium close-up of Crowe's face which is now much sterner as he says to his generals, "At my signal, unleash hell." The quickening of the score as if building up into a crescendo, the increased amount of movement on screen and dramatic weight of the previous line prepare the audience for the upcoming spectacle of the Roman army moving into battle. The dog itself seems anxious about the battle like Crowe and thus there seems to be a bond between dog and man that once again endears Crowe to the audience. This is followed by various shots that emphasise the superior technology and organisation of the Roman army in comparison to the Germanians as each side prepares for battle and accordingly the music quickens and becomes louder as the armies get ready to fight preparing the audience for the immense battle about to commence. <fnote>"Gladiator from Screenplay to Screen" by Jon Solomon p4 </fnote>