Human societies have always been obsessed with the natures and roles of male and female throughout our history and this is evident in no one society more so than that of the Greeks, most notably that of the Athenians. Considering the political and militaristic dominance of Athens in Greek history it is not surprising that the majority of Greek mythological evidence that we have today originated from the very same place. Before we begin to discuss the application of the gender stereotypes in relation to various examples of Greek mythology I believe it would be intelligent to define what we mean by stereotypes and to examine the specific way in which the sexes were seen in ancient society. It should be stressed that a stereotype is not a fact; it is not what something is but what a majority perceives it to be or what a majority believes it should be. Therefore since Athens was a heavily patriarchal society where women were marginalised and for the most part uneducated, the perceptions we have of women from that era are deeply biased. The basic stereotype we have of an Athenian woman was what, according to Athenian men, she should endeavour to be like rather than what she actually was: "A woman was expected to be submissive and passive...raised to be invisible and silent." This stereotype included her obligations to her kyrios (be that her father or husband) to take care of the oikos when he was not there, to remain faithful to her husband when married and to produce and mother legitimate children for him. However, this stereotype is the polar opposite of what a woman's true nature was seen to be by Athenian medicine. Nevertheless, it was regarded as her duty as a good woman to strive against these innate natures. <fnote>Reeder (1995), p26. </fnote><fnote>Reeder (1995), p20 </fnote><quote>"A woman was viewed as intrinsically irrational, insatiable, promiscuous, vindictive, and incapable of self-control."</quote><fnote>Reeder (1995), p27 </fnote>Men were most often stereotyped as being the manly guardians and protectors of their families. It was their duty to ensure that the oikos and everyone compromising it worked efficiently, and to raise sons that would inherit their wealth and family name. In regard to faithfulness, there was somewhat of a double standard when it came to men since they were in no uncertain terms free to sleep with whomever they wished whereas women were expected to stay in the house of their master almost permanently and to spend their hours working at traditional tasks such as weaving. This concept is one of the many themes at hand in the myth of Jason and Medea as told by the playwright Euripides in his tragedy "Medea", which when examined, presents us with many interesting ideas in regard to the stereotypes of male and female in mythology. Jason's behaviour after arriving in Corinth (his decision to marry Glauce and abandon Medea), support the notion of an unfair patriarchal society since Medea is only informed after the plans have been made for Jason's new marriage that she is going to lose her beloved children and husband. Jason's actions are also representative of the male exploitation of the double standard that permits men to do whatever they want concerning faithfulness as part of Greek marriage, which has been mentioned already. In Euripides' tragedy he is marrying another woman even though his foreign wife has fulfilled all her duties as a spouse (children & chastity) because he seeks to gain power and prestige. Hence Jason is conforming to the male stereotype somewhat since he is being ambitious and trying to preserve his inheritance in the best way possible. The aggressiveness and independence that Medea shows here are more commonly associated with males and thus her rejection of her gender stereotype can also be seen by her attainment of masculine characteristics. The protagonist's bloody rebellion against the constraints of marriage and the female stereotype provide a means to express what divorced Athenian women probably felt towards their husbands and allows Medea to reclaim her identity that she had previously had to suppress in marriage. She is clearly challenging the female stereotype through her violent vengeance and her refusal to attempt to control her emotions. It can be noted also that Jason should have known better when he chose to marry Medea considering that in Colchis he encouraged this type of behaviour by persuading her to give in to her feelings for him and by getting her to murder her brother on his own behalf. However, this should not overshadow Medea's absolute departure from the stereotypical female role in Euripides' play. Medea primarily rebels against the two things men hold sacred in a woman: her role as a wife, and her role as a mother. By killing her sons she has rejected her role as mother and she has also metaphorically killed Jason as she has therefore destroyed his only heirs and his future. Lefkowitz emphasises the gravity of Medea's actions in regard to how an audience would have perceived her after her story when she comments: <fnote>Euripides, Medea, 16-20 </fnote><fnote>Lefkowitz (1981), p44 </fnote><quote>"Since Greek myth glorified the role of mother, it also tended to condemn to infamy those who in some way rebelled against it... women who consciously denied their femininity were regarded as enemies and monsters."</quote><fnote>Lefkowitz (1986), p36 </fnote>The absolute rebellion of Medea in regard to the role of the mother that we have just discussed is in complete contrast to the female lead in the myth of Demeter and Persephone which we shall now examine as Demeter fully embraces the stereotypical role of mother to her offspring in The Homeric Hymn to Demeter. We once again see a reflection of the stereotypical patriarchal nature of the Greek family and society through mythology as in this instance Zeus arranges the marriage of Persephone to his brother Hades without any female consent from Demeter or from her daughter. Hades conforms to the male stereotype here because he wants a wife. His kidnapping of Demeter from childlike innocence (she is kidnapped while picking flowers in a field) and the fact that Persephone resists being taken into the underworld by screaming for her mother and father can be interpreted as making this an act of rape and thus this act is further symbolic of a young virgin being taken away from her childhood by a stranger who soon becomes her husband. It also once again highlights the lack of power and choice of Athenian women owing to the patriarchal nature of their society. Demeter spends much of the myth either trying to find her daughter or to compensate for her loss through raising another child, a mortal child Demophoon, as her son. This shows her strong attachment to her child and can be compared to her role as mother to mankind since she is goddess of the earth and the harvest, a kind of "Mother Nature". Demeter conforms to the stereotype of a mother throughout this myth and her grief for the loss of Persephone is representative of the grief one would expect an Athenian mother to feel when her daughter is taken away from her to be married to a stranger without her consent: <fnote>Homeric Hymn to Demeter, 19-21 </fnote><quote>"Sharp grief seized her heart, and she tore the veil / on her ambrosial hair with her own hands. / She cast a dark cloak on her shoulders / and sped like a bird over dry land and sea / searching... Then for nine days divine Demeter roamed over the earth, / holding torches ablaze in her hands; / in her grief she did not once taste ambrosia / or nectar sweet-to-drink, nor bathed her skin." </quote><fnote>Homeric Hymn to Demeter, 40-50 </fnote>However, unlike an Athenian mother Demeter is a divine goddess and thus has the power to express her feelings of anger over losing her daughter, something mortal women could not do but probably wished that they could. Therefore Demeter challenges her stereotypical position of mother of a virgin bride by refusing to let seeds grow out of the earth in an effort to reclaim her daughter from Zeus and Hades. In the end Zeus must compromise with her since the humans cannot get food to either eat or to sacrifice to the gods and as a result of this the gods and mortals are on the verge of dying. In this sense Demeter has succeeded because she has achieved what no Athenian mother could ever achieve, however, she is only really semi-successful because she has failed to restore the status-quo, Persephone is to remain in the underworld for six months of each year for eternity. In this respect Zeus has still been able to marry his daughter to his brother and thus Demeter's refusal to conform to the female stereotype has not changed a great deal. Persephone is now no longer a child, she is now Hades' wife as well as Demeter's daughter and the eating of the pomegranate would seem to represent the loss of her virginity and therefore the loss of her innocence also. Despite these examples of women challenging their stereotypes in mythology I think it should be noted that in both of these myths the leading women are still reliant on men in order for them to overcome these stereotypes. In Euripides' tragedy the protagonist is guaranteed asylum by Aegeus of Athens before she kills her sons in fury. Also Helius plays a key part in this respect in both of these myths. In Medea he sends the witch her dragon-drawn chariot and in The Homeric Hymn to Demeter he is vital in helping Demeter in her search for Persephone since he is the only one who actually saw Hades take Persephone away. Lekowitz explains this point well when se says: <fnote>Euripides, Medea, 726-733 </fnote><fnote>Homeric Hymn to Demeter, 60-87 </fnote><quote>"The women who occupy the centre stage so often determine the outcome of Greek dramas that it is easy to forget that none of them commits any act without a man's help... But to an Athenian audience such dependency would not seem remarkable. Athenian women had title only to their jewellery and the clothes on their backs; everything else, their marriage, their property, their dowry, remained under the control of male relatives."</quote><fnote>Lefkowitz (1981), p48 </fnote>From the myths covered in this essay we can see that the stereotype of the Greek male appears to be conformed to throughout whereas the female stereotype put forward by Athenian society is one that is often challenged and thus broken by numerous women such as Medea and Demeter who successfully overcome some part of the patriarchal nature of their societies. However, these stereotypes are only overcome to an extent, not completely as mentioned in the previous paragraph. Even when these women are seen to overcome their stereotypes it is only with the aid of another man who is seemingly not as important to the story as the female and male protagonists that they are able to do this. Due to this fact the perceived freedom of women is somewhat more limited than it could be. It is obvious that battle of the sexes is something that will never end throughout history and this is illustrated in the mythology of Greece in the same way as it can still be seen today. <quote>"Gender is a central component of identity. So it is no wonder that gender differences have been emphasized in most versions of the myths, ancient and modern. It may seem to some observers that a modern preoccupation with gender conflict, growing out of women's movements for social and political rights, has distorted our view of the ancient myths by importing distinctly modern concerns into our readings of them. But a hard, honest look at the ancient texts reveals an ancient preoccupation with gender conflict... The specific forms and causes of gender conflict in our age are clearly different from those in ancient Greece and Rome, but there can be no doubt that such conflict existed then as now."</quote><fnote>Doherty (2001), p12 </fnote>