<heading>Introduction:</heading>There are a number of different ways of determining the number of bacteria in a food sample. Firstly, it needs to be determined whether a count of all organisms (alive or dead) or just those that are living is to be performed. Total count methods will count both living and dead organism whereas a viable count method (as is going to be used in this experiment) will show only those organism that are living. This is providing that the conditions for growth are appropriate for the type of organism wishing to be grown. Three different methods of determining the number of viable organisms in the food sample are to be used, these are; the pour plate method where one ml of the sample to be tested is pipetted onto a plate and then agar is poured over the top, mixed and allowed to set. Another is the spread plate technique whereby a quantity of the sample to be tested is pipetted onto a pre-set agar plate and then spread over the surface of the plate using a spreader (or 'hockey stick'). The third method is called the most probable number (MPN) and this works to see whether acid or gas is produced when the sample is put into a solution. <heading>Method:</heading>The following procedure should all be carried out under aseptic conditions - i.e. beside a Bunsen burner. A Bunsen burner creates and aseptic environment by creating a column of hit rising air. This basically means that no particles are able to fall down and contaminate the procedures. The first stage of the experiment is to weigh out 10grams of minced beef into a sterile stomacher bag. To this, 90ml of maximum recovery dilute (MRD) is added. The mixture can then be placed into a stomacher for 90 seconds. A stomacher consists of two moving plates which have the effect of homogenising the mixture. The resulting solution is said to have a dilution of 10 -1 - although a concentration of this level would very rarely be used for food products. From this 10 -1 dilution it is possible to make a series of further dilutions - in this case the sample wants to be in a serial dilution down to 10 -6. This procedure is simple; from the homogenised 10 -1 dilution take 1ml and pipette this into 9ml MRD in a tube labelled 10 -2. At this first stage it is important that the pipetting is done carefully as it is preferable if there are no food particles transferred to the other dilutions. Further dilutions may be made by taking one ml from the previous dilution and adding this o the next - it is important that the tubes are mixed on a vortex machine between each serial dilution. This should be repeated until a dilution of 10 -6 is obtained. Once a set of serial dilutions has been obtained they may be tested for the level of bacteria contained in each. To do this the three methods mentioned above (pour plate, spread plate and MPN) are to be used. Each method is to be done in duplicate so as to obtain more meaningful results. With the pour plate method, a set of four plates should be labelled from 10 -6 through to 10 -3. It is standard laboratory practice to write this information on the base of the plate as the lid may be lost (along with any information written on it) during incubation. It is also standard practice to include information such as type of agar used, date and temperature of incubation. Having said write all of this information on the bottom of the plate it is important that it will still be possible to count any colonies that may have grown after incubation. Into each of these plates 1ml of the respective dilutions should be added. Into each of the plates 20ml of plate count agar (PCA) may be added - this may be done roughly and does not need to be accurately measured. The agar is kept in a water bath at 45°C, once removed it should be poured fairly quickly as it will set fairly quickly. It is also important to dry the outside of the bottle as any water drops from the water bath are likely to be contaminated (the water in the water bath is going to be at a good temperature for m microbial growth). Once the 20ml of agar has been added to each of the plates it needs to be mixed with the 1ml of the dilutions. This too should be done quickly as the agar will rapidly set. To achieve a satisfactory mixing, the plates should be gently moved in an up and down motion five times. They should then be moved clockwise five times, left-right five times and anti clockwise five times. The plates may then be left to dry before being incubated at the required temperature for the required time (in this case for 48 hours at 30°C). With spread plates, the agar has already been poured and allowed to set. Four plates should again be taken and labelled as before (with the exception that they should be labelled for dilutions of between 10 -5 and 10 -2). Instead of putting 1ml of the respective dilutions onto each of the plates, just 0.1ml needs to be added. This should be quickly spread over the surface of the agar with a sterile spreader. The plates can then be put into incubation for 48 hours at 30°C. Plates should always be inverted for incubation - this is because, if the weren't condensation may form on the lid of the plated and fall onto the surface of the agar which would make the results inaccurate. Another plate count method is the drop count method. With the drop count method a plate of dried PCA agar is split into quarters. Each quarter is then labelled (in this case between 10 -2 and 10 -5). Then, using a Davis Pipette (which should dispense 0.02ml with each drop) place one drop of each dilution onto the respective quarter. Only one Davis pipette needs to be used as each drop may be done in descending order of dilution. Three identical plates should be prepared and incubated at 30°C for 48 hours. The last method to be used is known as the most probable number (MPN) method. From the 10 -5 dilution, take 1ml of solution and put this into a tube of MacConkey broth. Three tubes should be prepared like this. Another serial dilution can now be performed and 1ml of the MacConkey solution can be taken from each of the three tubes and added to three further MacConkey tubes. This should be repeated until a serial dilution to 10 -2 has been obtained. Each of the MacConkey tubes has a small inverted Durham tube inside it - these should all be free of gas and caps should be placed on the top of each of the tubes. <heading>Results:</heading>It is not necessary to count the plates at each of the dilutions. It is normally recommended that the number of colonies on any one plate should be between 30 and 300. If there aren't this many colonies obtaining meaningful results becomes difficult and if there are more than 300 colonies as well as being laborious to count the colonies may start to affect the growth of one another so the results will again become inaccurate. <table/><heading>Most Probable Number (MPN) of Coliforms in Minced Beef</heading><table/>Combination of positives = 3-3-0 Therefore MPN (from p22 of Laboratory Schedule) = 2400 <heading>Conclusion:</heading>Looking at the results in table one and two above it is possible to see that the number of colonies counted ranges dramatically for the different methods used. The count for the pour plate method was the highest at 1.3 × 10 6 and the lowest was for the most probable number (MPN) method at 2.4 × 10 3. The reason for this is the different ways in which the different methods allow the micro-organisms to grow. Looking first at the most probable number method it can be seen that a count of 2.4 × 10 3 was obtained. The MPN method has a number of advantages in that it is quick to perform and it is unaffected if food particles are allowed into the MacConkey tubes (if food particles get onto the surface of an agar plate it can be difficult to distinguish between these and the actual colonies). The major problem with MPN method comes when the detection between the positive or negative result. In most cases it is easy to detect whether a result is positive (a tube must show the production of both an acid and a gas for this to be so). The drop count method too isn't really favoured in industry. In the results above it can be seen that a count of 2.55 × 10 3 was obtained. This is very similar to the MPN method. The drop count method too has its advantages. Agar can be expensive and by using 1 plate with four dilutions on it instead of four individual plates costs are going to be greatly reduced. Having said this however, squeezing all four dilutions onto one plate can make the confidence in the results less. This is due to the fact that a difference between 1 and 2 colonies will be multiplied by a factor of 5 (this is because just 0.02ml of the solution is used - if performing the spread plate method 0.1ml will be used). The confidence limits to in this procedure were less than both the pour and spread plates methods. The pour plate method gave the highest count at 1.3 × 10 6. The confidence in this result is fairly high with a small range. The colonies in the pour plate method are usually easily distinguishable from one another which makes an accurate count easy. The procedure is quick and easy to perform as just 1ml of each dilution can be put into a plate and then agar can be poured over the top. The major problem with the pour plate method is that the agar has to be liquid when it is poured. For this to be achieved the agar is kept in a water bath at 45°C. This doesn't sound that hot but it is hotter than the optimum temperature of many organisms and although unlike to denature any of them this is possible. This means that the count may be on the low side. The preferred method in many cases is to use the spread plate method. This has all the advantages of a pour plate in that the whole surface of the plate is used for one dilution and unlike with the MPN method, actual colonies may be counted. Unlike the pour plate method though, the agar is already set in the plate and the organisms are therefore not being affected in any way as in the pour plate method when warm agar is poured over the surface. The pour plate method too gives results in which there is confidence so, of the four methods used I think that this gave the most realistic results in which we can be the most confident. <heading>References:</heading>Prescott, Harley and Klein, (2002) Microbiology 5th Edition, New York, McGraw Hill. <heading>Questions:</heading><table/><heading>1. </heading> FORMULA  Where X = number of replicates at chosen dilution And n = arithmetic mean number of colonies at chosen dilution  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>2. </heading>Looking at the results calculated above it can be seen that as the number of colonies that were counted increased, so did the confidence limits. This can be seen because with a count (mean) of 35.5 the confidence limit range is 23% of the mean count. However, with a count of 250 the 95% confidence range is at 6% which means that it could be said with more certainty that any results of replicate experiments would fall within this range. The number of replicates too greatly affects the confidence limits. This cane be seen looking at sample E in comparison to sample C. Both of these have a count of 250 so it would be expected (as stated above) that the confidence limits in these two samples would be fairly similar. However, Sample E had 4 replicates whereas sample C only had 2 and the results show that this had a significance effect on the confidence limits. Sample C had a percentage confidence limit of 9% whereas sample E with the same count had a 6% confidence limit. The reason for this is purely due to statistics and the larger the sample you take the more confidence you are in the sample and its representation of the group (or food product) being tested. <heading>3. </heading>If the count of colonies is being referred to as the 'total viable count' it is being implied that a count has been done which looked at all the possible micro organisms that may grow. However, it would be virtually impossible to account for all the micro-organism that may be in the food sample. There may be spores present which would not be detectable as colonies and there may also be colonies that are not visible to the eye. It is therefore better to refer to the count as a 'colony count/g' or 'colony forming units/g' as this doesn't imply that all the organisms have been accounted for. 