<abstract><heading>Executive Summary:</heading>Data was collected from 250 respondents on their chocolate spending habits from major supermarket retailers in the London area. The data analysis software SPSS was then used to analyse this data. Expenditure on chocolate was categorised into three groups; standard, organic and fair-trade. Chocolate spending banded by age group shows that proportionality more is spent by the oldest age groups than younger (the 45+ age group spends approximately twice as much on chocolate than any other age group). The general trend shows that shoppers of more affluent supermarkets (such as Waitrose) spend more on chocolate than those of less affluent supermarket chains (such as Kwiksave) - Waitrose customers spend more than four times more on chocolate than Kwiksave customers. Customers with children are likely to spend, on average, significantly more on chocolate than those without - they are likely to spend 2.5 times as much. There is a strong correlation between the amount of television viewed and expenditure on chocolate. Those who watch large amounts of television spend up to six times as much on chocolate as those who watch less. </abstract><heading>Introduction:</heading>The chocolate market within the UK is vast. Chocolate accounts for 37% of the confectionary sector and in 2003 this would have been estimated to have a market value of £3.7 billion. The UK also tops the table for consumption of chocolate across Europe with the average person consuming 10kilos per year. <enote> URL  </enote>The chocolate market is now fairly mature and growth through until 2007 is expected to slow - the chocolate market is under particular pressure from increasing interest in diet and health. In recent years, for example, supermarkets have been forced to remove chocolate bars from the checkout areas. Certain sectors within the market are still open to rapid growth. This includes the fair-trade market which is expected to double over the next few years. <enote> URL :8080/ext_1/Development.nsf/0/14ac97bcc9b820a980256c7c004937d6?OpenDocument </enote>The Easter and Christmas periods continue to be major sales areas for the confectionary market and this is particularly true with respect to chocolate and is particularly competitive amongst the major retailers. <heading>Discussion</heading><heading>Methodology:</heading>The supermarket chain Sainsbury's has asked for a report to help them understand consumer preferences for chocolate in their London sales area. To this extent, data was collected by interviewing 250 customers about their chocolate purchasing habits - data was collected from customers of Asda, Tesco, Kwiksave, Safeway, Sainsbury and Waitrose (all in the London area). The data analysis programme SPSS was used in the analysis of the data collected, and Microsoft Excel was used to form some of the charts shown in this report. A number of standard statistical analysis techniques have been used in the production of this report. As well as looking at mean and standard deviations across the supermarkets by age group, and whether the household had children effects expenditure on chocolate, other techniques were used. These include; the 'independent sample t-test' which allows a comparison to be made between two groups. The test is able to generate a null hypothesis which can be used to see whether there is a clear difference between the two data sets. ANOVA (analysis of variance) was also used to a similar extent to compare samples where more than two means were present. For the purpose of this analysis, the probability threshold for t-test and F values has been set at 0.05 (or 5%). If the value generated falls below this, the null hypothesis will be rejected. <heading>Results:</heading>The 'visual bander' was used to categorise age into four groups which were approximately equal in size. This resulted in the four groups; 'below 35', '35 to 40', '40 to 45' and 'over 45'. Table one (which can be seen in the appendix) and charts one to three (shown below) are outputs from this analysis. Chart one below shows total chocolate expenditure (sum of expenditure on the three chocolate categories) categorised by age group. It shows in age groups from 'below 35' through to the age of 45, each category accounts for approximately 20% of 'total' expenditure whilst the fourth group, '45+' accounts for 40% of total chocolate expenditure. <figure/>From the data, it is also possible to see how spending on chocolate varies between the different age groups and across the different supermarkets - this is shown in chart two below. Looking at chart two, from left to right, it can be seen that more is spent, on average, by each age group as we move from Kwiksave through to Waitrose. From this table it is also possible to see that within each of the supermarkets, the highest spenders on chocolate (with the exception of Waitrose) are those in the '45+' age group - confirming the data reported in chart one. <figure/>Table two below shows a summary of mean chocolate expenditure between those with and without kids. The table shows a clear difference in the average amount spent by shoppers with children. <table/>Going on to look at table three, it can be seen that both assuming, and not assuming equal variance, that this data is statistically significant and that the null hypothesis may be rejected. That is to say, there is a significance that customers with children, do spend more on chocolate than those without (null hypothesis rejected a p-value is smaller than 0.05). For this test, the 'independent sample t-test' was used, and this compares the mean from two sub-groups of the same sample. <table/>Television viewing was then categorised into three groups (of approximately equal size); high, medium, and low. The linear regression function of SPSS was then used to determine whether TV viewing had an affect on chocolate expenditure. Table four below shows that there is significance between the amount spent on chocolate and the amount of television watched. <table/>As the significance value for TV watching is t < 0.05, the null hypothesis may be rejected and it can be said that television viewing does have an effect on total chocolate expenditure. Chart three below just summarises how total chocolate expenditure increases with the amount of time spent watching television. Looking at the table, it can be seen that 'heavy' (more than six hours per day) watchers of television are likely to spend approximately six time more on chocolate than those who are categorised as 'low' (less than two hours per day) viewers. <figure/><heading>Limitations:</heading>There will always be limitations within market research analysis unless the entire market is questioned which is impractical to say the least. In this case a fairly large sample of 250J (judgements/respondents) was taken. With this said however, this is only approximately 40 judgements from each supermarket. From the 250 respondents, only 34 had children and this may mean that with respect to finding whether those with children spend more may be slightly limited. Every care has been taken to ensure that the results have been interpreted in a statistically significant manner. One of the major limitations is that the research looked at the total amount spent on chocolate across the supermarkets. It did not take into account sales units (i.e. the number of individual chocolate bars sold within each supermarket). <heading>Further Research:</heading>As mentioned with the limitations, only 34 of the 250J had children, it may therefore be an advantage to increase the number of judgements with respect to those customers who had children. Sainsbury's customers over the age of 45 spend by far the most, compared with any other groups, in any other supermarket. Further research could be done to try and understand this market share, and to understand what could be done to carry this share through to other groups within the categories (i.e. all those under the age of 45). This would be valuable in allowing Sainsbury's to fully understand the current chocolate market. Again, referring to limitations, it may be an idea to try and grasp an understanding of a total volume of chocolate sales (e.g. by bar) rather than looking at total expenditure - again, this would give a valuable insight into the current confectionary market for Sainsbury's. <heading>Conclusion & Recommendations</heading>This study showed that the oldest age group tended to spend more (approximately twice as much) on chocolate than the three younger age groups. It may at first be expected that this is due to the fact that this group is, twice the size of any of the other three and, this could account for this. However, the age groups were categorised into four groups of approximately equal size and this can be confirmed from looking at the table in the appendix. This, therefore, does not account for this trend. The trend may be accounted for by the fact that, the older age group are more likely to have children and that their expenditure is as a result of this, rather than them, personally, eating more chocolate. Another explanation may be that the older age groups do just prefer chocolate and, therefore, spend more on chocolate. It may be that the chocolate they consume is more expensive and they therefore (by weight) eat equal quantities to the younger age groups. This could be confirmed with the further research mentioned investigating the sale by volume of chocolate bars. From the point of view of Sainsbury's, it can be seen that by total expenditure they are clear market leaders in the '45+' age group. They have a strong presence in the reaming three age groups too. It may therefore be suggested to try and aim any marketing to these three age groups (i.e. the under 45's) to increase sales, whilst keeping an eye on the '45+' age group. Analysis of the data has also shown that customers who had children spent far more on chocolate than those without. With the current market, however, it cannot be recommended that this is a market that should be pursued. There is currently a lot of interest in reducing the amount of 'junk food' aimed at children. It would therefore be recommended that, whilst an important area of the market, this is not one that should positively be chased at the moment. Perhaps one of the strongest correlations observed is between the expenditure on chocolate and the amount of time spent watching television. As has previously been pointed out, those customers categorised as 'heavy' watchers of television spent six times as much on chocolate as those who were categorised in the 'low' group. This has the potential to be a very strong market. Advertising campaigns for chocolate, could be conducted for Sainsbury's on television as the target audience will be captive. Other strategies such as positioning chocolate near DVD's (if present in the store) should actively be pursued. 