<heading>Results:</heading><table/><table/><table/><table/><heading>Discussion:</heading>Emulsions are, by nature, physically unstable. They tend to separate into two distinct phases over time. Creaming often occurs when dispersed oil droplets merge and rise to the top of an O/W emulsion or settle to the bottom in W/O emulsion. Surfactant is often put into an oil/water interface to reduce interface tension of the liquids and prevent the separation of two immiscible phases, finally form a stable emulsifying colloid or a single liquid phase. Such surfactants are usually simple amphiphiles consisted of a hydrophilic-oleophobic end (associated with water) and a hydrophobic-oleophillic end (associated with oli). In an emulsion, they partition between the oil and water phases according to their relative solubilities in those phases---usually a surfactant will be more soluble in one than in the other. When surfactants' hydrophilic property is stronger, they can form water occluded oil colloids, while as the oleophilic property is stronger, they can form oil occluded water colloids. The surfactant molecular hydrophilic and lipophilic strength can be expressed as the hydrophilic lipophilic balance (HLB) value, which is based on the fact that for a given oil and water system there is an ideal hydrophilic lipophilic balance that leads to the maximum emulsification efficiency and stability. The low-HLB surfactant is dominantly lipophilic and is added into the oil phase to stabilize the water in oil emulsion. The high-HLB surfactant is dominantly hydrophilic and is added to the outer continuous aqueous phase to stabilize the oil in water emulsion. Normally, multiple water-in-oil-in water (W/O/W) multiple emulsions contain both W/O and O/W simple emulsions, where small water droplets are entrapped within larger oil droplets that in turn are dispersed in a continuous water phase, which is in the case of this practical. Often, this kind of multiple emulsions require at least 2 emulsifiers (with either high or low HLB values) to be present in the system. The concentration ratio of these two surfactants are important to obtain stable and high-yields of W-O-W emulsions. In this experiment, two surfactants are applied, which are Tween (80) and Span (80). Tween 80 belongs to a class of food additives also known as Polysorbates. Span 80 is a Sorbitan Ester widely used in food products and oral pharmaceuticals. As seen from the observations taken in the practical, the emulsion with 200ml of Span has the largest oil layer, and is the cloudiest. On the other hand, the emulsion with 200ml of Tween has the most foam formed and is the clearest. Besides, as the concentration of Span decreases and that of Tween increases, the height of oil layer drops and the emulsion appears to be clearer and clearer, while the height of foam is increasing as well. That is because Span has a very low HLB value, it is lipophilic and added into the oil phase to form and stabilize oil occluded water colloids, while preventing the rupture of oil layer. Additionally, as the shear was put onto the emulsion, the water molecules in the oil phase become smaller and smaller, then finely dispersed into the emulsion. According to those, as the concentration of span increases, the extent of W/O emulsion stability rises, thus, more water droplets are emulsified, the oil layer becomes more stable and higher, and the emulsion becomes cloudier as well. With contrast, as Tween has a high HLB value, it is very hydrophilic and tends to dissolve in the water phase, forming and stabilizing O/W emulsion, with water being the continuous phase. As its concentration goes up and beyond a critical micelle concentration, the resultant micelles may tend to solubilize the lipophilic surfactant (Span) that is originally present in the oil phase and carry it into the outer continuous aqueous phase, resulting in a decrease in the concentration of Span in the oil phase. This can eventually lead to rupture of the oil layer and loss of the internal aqueous droplets (the water droplets absorbed on the oil layer). Therefore, the oil layer becomes smaller and smaller, and the emulsion becomes clearer with the increase in the Tween's concentration. As could be seen from the HLB-value table, when the concentration of both surfactants increases, their individual HLB values increase too. Also, it is evident that the combination of the two emulsifiers can produce more stable emulsions than using a single emulsifier. That is because, when Tween and Span are both present in the emulsion, Tween is hydrophilic and dissolve into the water phase, while pointing out of the oil phase and the oil droplets are finely dispersed on the O/W interface. Reversely, Span will stay at the oil layer and oppose to the water phase and the water molecules emulsify well at the W/O interface, which brings about intensively packaged W/O/W multiple emulsions. Additionally, it could be seen that at each concentration, the HLB value of combined surfactants mixture is higher than the individual ones. It is believed that the combination with the equal volumes of the surfactants can lead to a more stable emulsion, because the W/O and O/W emulsions in the multiple emulsions are at equilibrium. 