<heading>Introduction</heading>The purpose of this exercise is to examine the microbial flora of a food; (in this case raw mince meat). In undertaking microbial examination of foods, the groups of particular concern are the potential spoilage and disease causing organisms. A number of counts will be conducted to determine whether the food has an acceptable level of contamination, one that will not cause spoilage or disease. A general count will be conducted to determine the overall acceptability of microbial numbers. More specific counts will be conducted for potential pathogenic microbes such as Enterobacteriaceae and Staphyloccocus aureus. A count will also be conducted for faecal enteroccoci which is an 'indicator' organism signalling that faecal contamination has occurred. In previous exercises a simple nutrient agar has been used to grow colonies of microbes from samples of food. This exercise will use more selective mediums to test for specific microbes that are likely to contaminate the food. To know which microbes these are it is important to know the type of environment that the food provides and which microbes can thrive in this environment. <heading>Methods</heading><heading>Preparation of dilutions</heading>10g of the mince meat was weighed and homogenised with 90 ml of sterile diluent in a stomacher (for 1 minute). 10 ml of this was pipetted into a bottle to give the 10 -1 dilution. Further dilutions were prepared (up to 10 -5) by pipetting 1 ml of the previous dilution into 9 ml of sterile diluent. <heading>Table 1- Inoculations of media Procedure</heading>1 ml of 10 -5 dilution was inoculated onto the bottom film of the petrifilm, while the top film was lifted up. The top film was then dropped and a spreader placed over it, to distribute the innoculum. This is repeated for 10 -4 and 10 -3 dilutions. 0.1 ml of 10 -3 dilution was pippetted onto the nutrient specific S & B plates. This was spread over the plate with a plastic 'hockey stick'. This was repeated for 10 -2 and 10 -1 dilutions. 1 ml of 10 -2 dilution was pipetted onto a sterile plate and enough molten VRBDA was poured over the top to cover the plate. This was shifted forwards and backwards, clockwise and anti-clockwise to spread the innoculum over the plate. After the first layer of agar was set a second layer was similarly added. This procedure was repeated for 10 -2 and 10 -1 dilutions. 1 ml of 10 -1 dilution was divided between three plates. One plate was inoculated with 0.3 ml, another had the same quantity and the third had 0.2 ml. The innoculum was spread over the plates with a plastic 'hockey stick'. The lid was left slightly ajar to dry the surface of the plates (these were left close to a bunsen flame to prevent contamination from the air). <heading>Results</heading><table/><heading>Conclusions</heading>Mince meat provides an environment of relatively high water activity, near neutral pH and plenty of nutrients. These conditions would favour the growth of bacteria which can; multiply at relatively quick rate and, move around with the use of their flagella. Maintaining an environment of low temperature, by storing the meat in a refrigerator, would slow the rate at which the bacteria can multiply. From the results obtained it is clear that the raw meat contained an inappropriate level of contamination. The general viable count calculated, (table 2), is 1 x 10 9 cfu/ ml which is much higher than the acceptable level of contamination set at < 5 x 10 5/ g. The counts for faecal enteroccoci, enterbacteriacae and Staphyloccocus aureus were also higher than the acceptable levels of contamination for these specific microbes. The number of pathogens present is so high this mince meat would be potentially harmful to consume, even after undergoing heat treatment. It is likely the meat has been stored incorrectly, for example left at ambient temperatures, giving the microbes an opportunity to multiply. If the counts for faecal enteroccoci, enterbacteriacae and Staphyloccocus aureus were added together the total number of microbes present would be higher than the general viable count. (9.7 x 10 3 + 5.1 x 10 3 + 8.4 x 10 4 is greater than 1 x 10 9) This suggests that there is a degree of error in this procedure, which may have occurred due to the sampling techniques. The meat sample was particularly difficult to pipette because some larger (fat) particles became stuck in the pipette. While making the dilutions and inoculating the media the sample taken may not have been representative of the whole sample. <heading>Questions</heading><heading>i) </heading>It is acceptable for fresh meat to have a level of contamination of up to 50 Enterobacteriaceae bacteria/g and 100 Staphyloccocus aureus/g. Cooked meats should have less than 10/g of each of these bacteria. The source of the initial contamination from meat can either be from the internal microflora of the animal itself or the environment it is initially exposed to when slaughtered. The acceptable level of contamination reflects the fact that fresh meat will have a certain level of contamination from either (or both) of these sources. During processing the meat will undergo heat treatment which will kill bacteria and bring the contamination level down to a point at which it can be consumed without carrying any risk of causing illness. This is why the acceptable level of contamination is lower in fully cooked meat products. Post-processing contamination of the meat would occur if the cooked product came into contact with a surface containing unacceptably high levels of contamination. This could be a surface that has been in contact with fresh meat and would infect the cooked product with potentially harmful levels of bacteria. The storage conditions of meat are fundamental in keeping the numbers of microbes to a minimum. If kept refrigerated at 5˚C the microorganisms' rate of multiplication, in fresh and cooked meat, is minimal, and will not be able to multiply to potentially harmful levels. In cooked meats heat- resistant bacterial spores can survive processing. Therefore, appropriate storage conditions should be maintained even when the bacterial count is low. The counting method used does not give an exact number of microbes present so the processed and raw meats are given a range on which to access their acceptability. <heading>ii) </heading>It is acceptable for fresh meat to have a level of contamination of up to 50 Enterobacteriaceae bacteria/g and 100 Staphyloccocus aureus/g. Cream cakes should not contain detectable numbers of these bacteria. This is because fresh meat will be cooked before consumption killing the bacteria present whereas cream cakes will not undergo any further heat treatment so should not have any detection of these microbes. The source and nature of the initial contamination of cream cakes is the bacteria in the cream itself. These bacterium exist naturally in relatively low levels as the milk comes into contact with the environment on exiting the cow's udder. The milk, and cream which is separated from it, should be kept chilled and processed soon after milking to prevent multiplication of the bacteria. During processing the cream will be heated to pasteurisation temperatures. This kills bacteria and brings the contamination level down to low enough levels that, if stored at chilled temperatures; such low numbers of bacteria will exist that multiplication will be very slow. The cream should be packed in aseptic conditions to prevent post-processing contamination. If post-processing contamination did occur the amount of bacteria in the cream would pose a risk to the consumer. When the packaging which separates cream from the environment is opened the cream is in contact with bacteria in the environment and should be stored at refrigerated temperatures and consumed before the bacteria have an opportunity to multiply. <heading>iii) </heading>The multiple tube dilution method is an appropriate method for enumerating coliform bacteria and E.Coli because they ferment lactose while they are multiplying to produce a gas. This gas can be used to detect their presence at a series of dilutions. <heading>iv) </heading>The membrane filtration method is recommended as the most suitable to determine the number of bacteria in water containing an estimated 10 6 cfu/ml. <figure/><list>Place a filter paper pad in a sterile Petri dish and pour 2-3 ml of nutrient medium over the pad. Leave to stand for a few minutes before pouring off the excess.Assemble a filter holder by attaching base to filter flask, being careful to maintain sterility.With sterile tweezers place a filter membrane on the support disc and attach the funnel.Pour 20ml of sterile diluent to the funnel followed by 1ml of the sample and then make up to 50ml with sterile diluent.Attach the filter to the water trap flask. Open the air bleed and switch on the vacuum.When the membrane surface is dry open the air bleed to release the vacuum, and then switch the vacuum off.Remove the membrane filter with sterile tweezers and place on the nutrient agar plate with a rolling action to prevent air bubbles becoming trapped.</list>