<heading>Introduction</heading>The purpose of the experiment was to synthesis manganese (II) phthalocyanine, and to use pyridine to investigate its oxygen binding properties. Manganese (II) phthalocyanine is a metal derivative belonging to the phthalocyanines, which are themselves a naturally occurring subgroup of the porphyrins. Manganese is an important element in nature, for animals as it utilises the vitamin B 1, plus is an essential trace element required by plants. A shortage of manganese in a plant becomes evident relatively early as a lack of chlorophyll the photosynethetic pigment present in plants, which results in yellow or grey streaks appearing on its leaves. Manganese is vital for photosynethesis as it activates some of the enzymes involved in the oxidation of carbohydrates e.g. oxalosuccinic decarboxylase Manganese (II) phthalocyanine consists of manganese in a planar environment of four nitrogen atoms in a square planar arrangement. It can be easily prepared and as such has been used as a model compound in studies to investigate manganese's role in photosynthesis, oxygen transport and activation. Metalloporphyrins are important naturally occurring compounds, two such compounds are Chlorophyll, the green colouring photosynthetic pigment containing magnesium found in plants, and heme the red coloured pigment containing iron vital for the uptake and transport of oxygen around animals. <heading>Hazard assessment</heading>This could be regarded as a relatively high-risk experiment as caution should be taken when using a variety of the chemicals being used, the risks associated with them are as follows: - Corrosive- Pyridine, Toxic- Phthalonitrile, and the following should take place in a fume cupboard- Soxhlet extraction, and handling pyridine where extreme caution should be taken and protective gloves worn. <heading>Experimental</heading><heading>Preparation of manganese (II) phthalocyanine, [MnPc]</heading>To a 250mL round bottom flask 4 g's (4.0110g) of powdered manganese (II) acetate tetrahydrate, 9g's (9.255g) of phthalonitrile, 20mL of 1,2-propanediol and lastly 0.5g (0.5184g) of hydroquinone was added. A magnetic stirrer was placed inside and this was connected to a reflux condenser, this was then heated in an oil bath under reflux for 45 minutes. Once this time period was over the mixture was allowed to cool and the black precipitate produced was filtered off under suction. A part of this was put aside (enough to fill about a quarter of the Soxhlet thimble) with the rest being washed with five 25mL portions of hot ethanol; this was then dried in an oven at 100C. Reactions taking place-  FORMULA  <heading>Purification using a Soxhlet extractor</heading>A Soxhlet apparatus was set up with the flask containing 150mL of n-butanol and 3 or 4 antibumping granules, and the thimble filled with the set aside crude black precipitated product. The apparatus should have been left at reflux at this point until the washings had no more brown coloration, but during the practical our product seemed to escape from the thimble and block up the glass tubing in the apparatus. This meant that the apparatus had to be disconnected so that the blockage could be removed but during this time our product must have become part of the impurities and as a consequence was washed away, and so after the apparatus had been reconnected and the supposed extraction was complete we had no pure product left in the thimble to continue the experiment with. The only explanation, which could be given for this, was that the thimble had a hole inside it, as this type of blockage is apparently a very rare coincidence under normal conditions. In order to complete the practical we used some of another groups successfully purified black product, which was dried thoroughly on filter paper and transferred to a watch glass which was placed inside an oven at 100 C in order to effectively dry the product. <heading>Reaction of MnPc dissolved in pyridine dissolved in oxygen. </heading>The reactions that occurred were followed using a UV-visible spectrometer. To a clean dry 1cm optical glass cell ca. 1mg of purified MnPc was added, this was then quickly stoppered so that a little pyridine is forced out and so meaning that no air is trapped inside the cell, the visible field region spectrum was then recorded. The stopper was then loosened and by use of a pipette a small amount of solution was removed causing an air bubble to be admitted, this was then re-stoppered and shaken when the spectrum was recorded again. This measurement was repeated at 10-minute intervals over the next two hours. Lastly the solution was removed from the cell and heated until boiling, this was then allowed to cool and again the spectrum was recorded. <heading>Phthalocyanines and porphyrins</heading>Manganese (II) phthalocyanine is a metal derivative belonging to the phthalocyanines, which are themselves a naturally occurring subgroup of the porphyrins. Phthalocyanines are heterolytic macrocycles consisting of four coplanar nitrogen atoms and a conjugated -system. Porphyrins that are more difficult to synthesis compared to phthalocyanines consist of the same structure as phthalocyanines but with the N bridging replaced by CH bridging, and they can be described as alkyl-substituted derivatives of porphin. Both Phthalocyanines and porphyrins are highly sort after and investigated as both molecules exhibit great structural variety, have the ability to coordinate, a large diversity of complex forms, and unusual structures and properties. Porphyrin also has potential to become the base of many catalysts in many major industrial and chemical processes. Manganese specifically has a remarkable thermal stability and has the ability to be sublimed at high temperatures. <figure/><figure/><figure/><heading>Reaction of pyridine and UV spectra interpretation</heading>When the manganese (II) phthalocyanine is first dissolved in pyridine with no Oxygen present, the first complex forms in which two pyridine ligands are attached to the original square planar [Mn(Pc)] complex. When Oxygen is introduced to the mixture in the second part of the procedure the second complex is firstly produced where one of the pyridine ligands is replaced by a hydroxyl (OH) ligand. This complex is then slowly replaced by the third complex, which consists of two [Mn (Pc)] complexes with one pyridine ligand attached together via an Oxygen atom. <figure/>When a pyridine solution containing the third complex is boiled, the solution is rapidly converted to one that again consists of the second complex, and when this is cooled this is then reconverted back into a solution containing the third complex. The second complex is green and has a characteristic absorption band at 716 nm and the last complex is blue and has a characteristic absorption band at 620 nm on a UV spectrum. By consideration of how pyridine reactions with the various variations of the [Mn (Pc)] complex, the UV spectra produced may be predicted to change in the following way, when Oxygen is introduced the absorption band in the 716nm range which is characteristic of the second complex should initially increase as the conc. of this complex has increased, but as time progresses this peak should decrease in height as this complex is being replaced by the third, meaning that the height of the absorption band at 620nm should increase as this represents the conc. of the third complex. But in reality the produced UV spectra did not possess this crossover point, where the conc. and so the height of the second complexes absorption band in the 716nm range is overtaken by the conc. and so height of the third complexes absorption band in the 620nm range of the spectra. As on this spectrum the conc. and so height of both of the absorption bands representing both of these species increases as time progresses. <figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  This is a square planar complex, which has ligands along the x and y-axes. Mn has an oxidation state of +2 and so has five valence electrons in the 3d orbital (d 5). The complex is low spin complex like the majority of square planar complexes as they have a very high-energy dx 2 - y 2 orbital which because of this is empty. <figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  