<heading>Introduction</heading>The object of the experiment was to synthesise diphenylsilanediol, and then to convert this compound into octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane. Polymers such as diphenylsilanediol, a type based on the Silcon-oxygen linkage, are the only major commercial polymers possessing an inorganic backbone. They are prepared by hydrolysing an organo-dichlorosilane, which is followed by the spontaneous condensation of the produced silanediol involoving the elimination of a water molecule. This long-chain polymer is commonly referred to as silicone but its correct chemical nomenclature is "polysiloxane". When the reaction is carried out at low conc. it is kinetically more favourable for two ends of the same chain to react together than with two different molecules, which results in the formation of cyclopolysiloxanes. During this experiment the intermediate silanediol (Ph 2Si (OH)2) is isolated, this is possible because of the stability of diaryl compounds relative to their respective dialkyl 's. Condensation of the diphenylsilanediol can occur in both acidic and basic environments, but this experiment was conducted under basic conditions using a basic Sodium Hydroxide catalyst. Compounds with the general formula R2CO behave very differently to that of their corresponding organsilicon compounds, most obviously in their bonding and therefore their structures. P-P bonding is common in Carbon chemistry but this becomes less apparent as you go down the group, because p-orbitals become larger and more diffused meaning that the overlap between them will become weaker. This is shown by the relative enthalpies of the C to O and Si to O bonds, as C=O has a bond enthalpy of 806 Kjmol-1, which is significantly larger than that for the C-O bond 359Kjmol-1. The opposite can be said for Si, as the Si=O bond enthalpy 642Kjmol-1 is greatly bigger than that for the Si-O bond 466Kjmol-1. Silicon and other heavier elements in the group possess vacant d-orbitals, silicon has a vacant 3d orbital which allows d-d bonding to occur, this partial -bonding allows Silicon to form stable planar structures unlike Carbon, e.g.  FORMULA  Carbon based compounds of this type usually adopt a monomeric structure compared to Silicon compounds who prefer polymeric or cyclic structures, as Silicon is larger and so can more easily become four coordinate and there is less -bonding in Silicon structures. <heading>Hazard assessment</heading>This could be regarded as a relatively high-risk experiment as caution should be taken when using a variety of the chemicals being used, the risks associated with them are as follows: - Highly flammable- Toulene, t-amyl alcohol (2-methyl-2-butanol), and ethanol. Corrosive- Diphenyldichlorosilane and 10% (w/v) aqueous sodium hydroxide. In addition to this as an extra precaution all parts of the experiment should be conducted in the fume cupboard. <heading>Experimental </heading><heading>Preparation of diphenylsilanediol</heading>Firstly a mixture containing 10mL of Toulene, 25mL t-amyl alcohol and 100mL of water was prepared, inside a 500mL conical flask. This mixture was cooled to 10C inside an ice bath, with vigorous magnetic stirring. To this mixture a sol of 20mL diphenyldichlorosilane in 10 mL Toulene was added dropwise by use of a polythene Pasteur pipette. The addition took place over a time span of about 15 minutes, with the temperature of the mixture maintained between 10 and 15C using an ice bath if required. The reaction mixture was stirred for a further 10 minutes after which time the resulting crystalline solid was filtered off using a Buchner funnel, the white solid was then washed with 100 mL water and then twice more with 5% Sodium Hydrogen Carbonate sol (5.0656g in 100mL distilled water), 50 mL each time, and lastly with 100 mL of water. Air was continued to be pulled through the Buchner funnel for a further 30-60minutes or until the crystals were dry and free flowing when stirred with a spatula. At which point the yield, melting point and IR of the produced product were measured.  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Preparation of octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane</heading>5 g's (4.9668g) of diphenylsilanediol was added to 50 mL of 95% ethanol inside a 100 mL "Quickfit" conical flask, and to this a sol of Sodium Hydroxide made from 0.5 g's (0.5032g) of Sodium Hydroxide and 1 mL of water was added with stirring. A reflux condenser was added to this flask and the mixture was heated under reflux using an oil bath and magnetic stirring for an hour, after which time the flask was removed and the sol was allowed to cool until crystallisation of the product was completed. These crystals were then filtered off and allowed to dry under filtration. This solid product was then dissolved using the minimum volume of Toulene heated on a water bath to 70C, followed by the addition of ethanol until crystals started to form. When this occurred it was reheated to take the crystals back into the sol, and cooled using an ice bath until crystallisation was complete, the resulting product formed fine, needle-like crystals. At which point the yield, melting point and IR of the product was measured.  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Percentage yield- diphenylsilanediol</heading> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Percentage yield- Octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane</heading> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Diphenylsilanediol IR spectra</heading>The three characteristic peaks responsible for the nujol are present, one at 2910.6cm -1, which is close to that produced by a pure nujol spectra at 2924cm -1, the second peak at 1464.9cm -1 which is again close to that produced in a pure nujol spectra at 1462cm -1 and the third and last peak at 1377.3cm -1 is also present and virtually identical to that from a pure spectra at 1377cm -1. Si-O peaks as you would expect are also visible in the area ~1000cm -1, there are also C-H and C-C arenes peaks apparent in the ~1500-1600cm -1 and ~3030-3080cm -1 regions respectively. These bonds are present in the R phenyl side chains. Also present is the very broad and characteristic O-H stretch which has become blended with the first nujol peak but is still within the range for O-H ~ 3000-3400cm -1, this is the distinguishing feature between the diphenylsilanediol and octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane molecule, and because this is present and absent on the octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane spectra this provides evidence that the condensation reaction has taken place. <heading>Octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane IR spectra</heading>Again, the three characteristic nujol peaks are present, the first at 2923.9cm -1, which is virtual identical to that produced by a pure nujol spectra at 2924cm -1, the second at 1462.3cm -1 which is again consistent to a pure nujol spectra at 1462cm -1 and the third and last peak at 1377.5cm -1 is also present and close to that in a pure spectra at 1377cm -1. Also, are the expected Si-O peaks within the ~1000cm -1 region, and those responsible for the C-C and C-H bonds at ~3030-3080cm -1 and ~1500-1600cm -1 respectively. But as said before the distinguishing feature between the two compounds the broad O-H stretch is not apparent. <heading>Octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane 13C NMR Spectra</heading>When analysing 13C NMR spectra there is only one piece of information made available to you and that is chemical shift. This occurs because different Carbons resonate (and so appear as peaks on the spectrum) at slightly different values of the applied external magnetic field (B o) depending on their precise chemical environment. There are four different Carbon environments in the Octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane in this is shown in the Carbon NMR spectra, as four peaks are visible. All four appear in the aromatic region of the spectra, which again coincides with the compounds structure. <heading>Octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane 1H NMR Spectra</heading>When analysing 1H NMR spectra two additional points should be noted; the relative heights of the integrals indicates the relative numbers of protons present in each chemical environment, and their peaks splitting, which gives information on the relationships of groups of protons to one another. <heading>Octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane mass spectra</heading> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <table/> FORMULA  Therefore from this fragmentation pattern I can deduce that the weakest type of bond in this compound is the Si-C (Si-R) bond as this bond was broken to produce the fragments with the most dominant peaks. A possible method for the conversion of the cyclic siloxane into a linear polysiloxane of high molecular weight might be to attack with a base. The base could attack the relatively weak, polar and so therefore reactive Si-O bond. This polarity is caused by the difference in electronegativity of the Oxygen (3.5) compared to the Silicon (1.8) atom; this causes Oxygen to have a greater pull on the electrons creating a polar bond. 