<heading>Introduction</heading>Ferrocene, otherwise known as bis(cyclopentadienyl)iron (II), was discovered in 1951 and since then there has been a vast increase in the amount of complexes containing aromatic ligands such as the cyclopentadienyl anion that are bound to a metal. The termed aromaticity is best described using Huckels rules for aromaticity, which are that a considered molecule is aromatic if it is flat (planar), cyclic, and has a continuous overlap of p-orbitals around the ring. This system is stabilised (aromatic) if it contains 4n + 2 electrons, but is destabilised (anti-aromatic) if it contains 4n electrons. The common feature of bonding in these complexes is that of donation of electrons from ligand - orbitals to the metal and to a lesser extent back-donation from metal d-orbitals into anti-bonding orbitals of the ligand. Because of its structure Ferrocene reacts in such a way that resembles benzene and because of this it is sometimes referred to as inorganic benzene. During this experiment Ferrocene will be acetylated with the products being separated by two types of Chromatography TLC and column, and will finally be reduced to a Ferrocecyl alcohol. Ferrocene does obey the 18 electron rule as both of the C 2H 5 rings donate five electrons and the Iron also has eight valence electrons which it can donate two from its 4s orbital and six from its 3d orbital. <heading>Hazard Assessment </heading>This could be regarded as a relatively high-risk experiment as caution should be taken when using a variety of the chemicals being used, the risks associated with them are as follows: - Highly flammable chemicals - Toulene, diethyl ether (ether), ethyl acetate, petroleum ether (60-80 petroleum), sodium borohydride, methanol, and hexane, Corrosive Chemicals - Acetic anhydride, phosphoric acid and iodine, lastly Toxic Chemicals- Iodine. <heading>Experimental</heading><heading>Acetylation of Ferrocene</heading>A conical flask (50mL) was fitted with a Calcium Chloride guard tube, which was temporarily removed for the addition of the following materials, 1.5 g (1.5011g) of Ferrocene, and 5mL / 5.25g of acetic anhydride.1mL of conc. Phosphoric acid (85%) was then added drop wise by use of a pipette, whilst the flask was being swirled. The guard tube was refitted and the flask was left to stand in a boiling water bath for 20 minutes. During this period every 5 minutes the flask was removed and swirled gently, after which it was placed back inside the bath. 20g of crushed ice was placed inside a tall beaker, which the reaction mixture was poured over, when the ice had melted the mixture was neutralised using solid Sodium Hydrogen Carbonate until CO 2 evolution had stopped indicating the neutralisation was complete. The mixture was cooled inside an ice bath for 30 minutes, after which time it was dried by filtration under suction, and the solid was washed with water until the filtrate appeared a very pale orange colour. The solid was then dried for a further 15 minutes. <heading>Isolation of 1-acetylferrocene by Chromatography</heading>Thin layer Chromatography was then carried out on the sample, which I have described in more detail later on. This was followed by Column Chromatography, which is also described in more detail later on, after which the solvent was removed completely from the solutions separated during the column chromatography using the rotary evaporator, the solutions were then weighted.  FORMULA  The melting point of each of the samples was then measured and it's Infra red spectrum measured.  FORMULA  <heading>Reduction of 1-acetylferrocene to 1-ferrocenenylethanol</heading>Firstly, a bottle of acetylferrocene was collected from the stores, next inside a 25 mL conical flask 0.32g (0.3237g plus an extra 0.1557g as the reaction mixture had not turned yellow and such had not been reduced sufficiently) of Sodium Borohydride was dissolved in 5mL of water, to this whilst stirring in one addition a solution of 0.55g (0.5545g) 1-acetylferrocene in 5mL of Methanol was also added. This solution was stirred for a further 3 hours on a magnetic stirrer, after which time the solid was filtered off by suction on a small glass sinter, the flask was rinsed out with water, and the product washed with 2 x 5mL of water, and dried by suction for a further 30 minutes, this was then placed inside a dessicator for the next 2 hours. The solid was then recrystallised by dissolving in the minimum volume of boiling Hexane on a water bath, the solution was then allowed to cool. The crystals were then filtered and dried by suction at the pump. The melting point and Infra red spectrum of the product was then measured.  FORMULA  Phosphoric acid acts as a catalyst in this reaction, as it generates the CH 3CO+ electrophile, which can then attack the Ferrocene molecules aromatic rings.  FORMULA  Only a trace of the diacetylated product is produced as this is relatively unstable compare to the monoacetylated product and so is rapidly reconverted. <heading>Percentage yield- </heading><heading>1-Acetylferrocene</heading> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Ferrocene</heading> FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Elemental analysis</heading>That found after column Chromatography had been performed:  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  These results are relatively close and so are therefore consistent with that given for the compound at this stage. That found after the experiment was completed:  FORMULA  Structure of the compound at the end of the experiment-  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Ferrocene 1H NMR spectra</heading>When analysing NMR spectra two important points should be noted; the relative heights of the integrals indicates the relative numbers of protons present in each chemical environment, and where the peaks at slightly different values of the applied external magnetic field depending on their precise chemical environment There is only one peak in the spectra of the Ferrocene at 4.15ppm as there is only one Hydrogen environment in this compound, resulting in all ten Hydrogen's in the compound having the same chemical shift. <heading>1-Acetylferrocene 1H NMR spectra</heading>The peak at 2.32 corresponds to the three Hydrogens making up the CH3C=O group attached to the Ferrocene. The peak at 4.13 corresponds to the five Hydrogens making up the lower aromatic ring of the Ferrocene, these protons resonate a slightly lower magnetic field, 4.13 compare to 4.15, as the C-H bonds have become polarised because of the electronegative Oxygen atom attached to the same Carbon, this causes electron density in the vicinity of the H to be reduced, decreasing the shielding factor causing the peak to move downfield. This effect is also apparent with the other two peaks in the spectra which each represent two Hydrogen's, the more deshielded peak at 4.69 corresponds to the two Hydrogen's attached to the two nearest Carbons to the electronegative Oxygen, these feel more of a deshielding effect from the Oxygen, compared to the Hydrogen's responsible for the 4.42 peak, which still feel the effect but not as greater extent. Chromatography is a widely used technique for separating mixtures as it is often inexpensive and can be used to generate both qualitative as well as quantitative information. The simplest method is thin layer chromatography, which requires the use of TLC plates (in this case a silica based aluminium strip of paper) that act as the stationary phase, capillary dropping tubes and bottles. Firstly a solution is prepared, involving in this case dissolving a little of the product prepared earlier in the experiment (10mg) in toulene (1mL). A pencil line is drawn near the bottom of the TLC plate (0.5mm) as to not damage the silica, and by use of the capillary dropping tubes a conc. drop is placed onto the centre of the line. This plate acts as the stationary phase and is placed inside a bottle, a solvent is then added below the spot, this solvent acts the mobile phase and is absorbed onto the stationary phase. As the level of the solvent rises the materials in the spot also begin to travel upward, their rate depending on how strongly they adhere onto the stationary phase, there is a continuous extraction-taking place between the plate and the solvent. The solutes attracted more strongly to the plate rather than the solvent move the fastest. When the solvent has risen nearly to the top of the plate its level (solvent front) is marked again with a pencil. This procedure was repeated using five different solvents 1) Petroleum ether (60-80), 2) Toulene, 3) Diethylether, 4) A mixture of 10% ethylacetate and 90% petroleum ether (60-80), and 5) Ethyl acetate. The spots of material were located more clearly by placing them inside a bottle filled with iodine vapour the spots were then ringed. Each material can be identified quantitatively by calculating its Rf value (retention factor) the time it spends in each phase: -  FORMULA  The more strongly the solute is adhered to the stationary phase, the longer it will take to travel up the plate and so the larger its Rf value will be It was then determined which spot was Ferrocene, achieved by dissolving 5mg of Ferrocene in 1mL Toulene. A slide was then spotted with this sol. And eluted with the solvent which previously gave the best separation (mixture of 10% ethylacetate and 90% petroleum ether (60-80). The Rf value of Ferrocene was measured, which was then used to determine which spot was ferrocene on the slides. Column Chromatography was also used in this experiment, which involves many of the same concepts as TLC. The stationary phase used were small particles of Silica, or another substance such as alumina, what is not very reactive and has a specially prepared surface to help increase their ability to absorb solvents. The silica gel column is prepared by placing a small amount of glass wool at the bottom of the burette followed by some sand, then a prepared slurry containing the silica and the preferred solvent found earlier is added, followed by a small amount of sample and lastly more of the solvent. As soon as the solvent has been soaked in more is added. The solutes travel slowly down the column and are eluted at the bottom (Ferrocene and 1-acetylferrocene are collected seperatly). If the mobile phase is less polar than the stationary phase, the less polar solutes will be eluted first and the more polar ones last. <heading>Calculated Rf values</heading><list>1)  FORMULA 2)  FORMULA 3)  FORMULA 4)  FORMULA  FORMULA 5)  FORMULA </list> FORMULA  The reduction of 1-acetylferocene into 1-ferrocenylethanol involves the addition of a Hydride in this case Sodium Borohydride to the carbonyl group. During this reaction the Hydrogen atom, as well as the pair of electrons from the B-H bond are transferred to the Carbon atom of the Carbonyl group. The oxyanion produced in the first step can help to stabilise the electron-deficient BH 3 molecule by adding to its now empty p-orbital with a H+. This produces a tetravalent Boron anion, which can therefore react again further with another aldehyde. Europium like other lanthanoids act as electron donors and interact with the Oxygen atom in the 1-Ferrocenylethanol creating Diastereoisomers, both R and S, these will both be detected in the NMR resulting in two sets of peaks being produced. 