<heading>Introduction</heading>Palladium when in its +2 oxidation state is electrophilic and so can attack aromatic rings to form aryl-palladium complexes. For this process to occur with high regioselectivity it has to be directed using a donor group previously placed on the ring. This group coordinates to the palladium and forces palladation to occur orthro to the donor group, this is referred to as orthro-metallation. <heading>Experimental</heading><heading>Ortho-palladation of N, N-dimethylbenzylamine</heading>Palladium (II) chloride (0.35g), N, N-dimethylbenzylamine (0.61 cm 3, 0.55g) 1 and methanol (20 cm 3) were all placed inside a 50 cm 3 round-bottomed flask, onto which a condenser and thermometer were fitted, the mixture was then heated to 60 C by use of a water bath and electrically stirred for three hours using a magnetic stirrer. (The solution appeared a brown colour for the whole duration but a solid precipitate formed at the bottom of the flask that was initially brown but became lighter as time progressed changing from brown to orange / brown and then to a green / yellow colour.) After this time the reaction mixture was cooled back to room temperature and the solid product was filtered off (green solid), and washed with two portions of methanol (20 cm 3) and then dried on the filter. The material was then stirred in dichloromethane (50 cm 3) for a total of 25 minutes (green solution). A Celite filter was then set up; this was achieved by placing a 1-1.5 cm layer of Celite inside a glass sphincter this layer was then compacted to ensure that no gaps were present by washing some DCM through the filter. The solution was then filtered through this Celite and washed with an additional portion of dichloromethane (50cm 3). Hexane (70cm 3) was then added to the filtrate and the resulting solution (bright yellow) was then reduced to about half its volume on the rotary evaporator. This reduction was carried out very slowly and carefully, as dichloromethane is very volatile having a b.p of only 35 C, once all the dichloromethane had been evaporated off and the less solution contained only the solid and the less volatile hexane, the product was then filtered (bright yellow solid). The solid was then washed with two portions of diethyl ether (30 cm 3) and dried under vacuum after which its yield was obtained. <heading>Percentage yield: Compound A </heading> FORMULA  <heading>Compound A IR spectra</heading>The three characteristic peaks responsible for the nujol are present, the first at 2900cm -1, which is close to that produced by a pure nujol spectra at 2924cm -1, the second peak at 1464cm -1 which is again close to that produced in a pure nujol spectra at 1462cm -1 and the third and last peak at 1377m -1 is also present and identical to that shown in a pure spectra at 1377cm -1. The spectrum also contained the expected alkane C-H and C-C bonds within their predicted areas of ~ 2850-2960cm -1 and ~750-1100cm -1. Also present and visible unlike in the other two spectra are peaks caused by the C=C arene bonds present in the region ~1500-1600cm -1. Lastly also visible are peaks due to the C-N and C-H arene bonds at ~1180-1360cm -1 and 3030-3080cm -1. <heading>Complex A 1H NMR Spectra</heading>When analysing 1H NMR spectra there are three pieces of information made available to you, which are chemical shift, the relative heights of the integrals and the peaks splitting. Chemical shift occurs because different Hydrogen's resonate (and so appear as peaks on the spectrum) at slightly different values of the applied external magnetic field (B o) depending on their precise chemical environment. The integral height indicates the relative numbers of protons present in each chemical environment, and peak splitting provides information on the relationships of groups of protons to one another. There are three different proton environments in complex A, and this is shown in the 1H NMR spectra, as three relevant peaks areas are visible. <table/>The spectrum contains two peaks within the electronegative the doublet found at 2.8 ppm has an integral of three which shows that this peak represents the hydrogen's making up the four methyl groups. The singlet peak found at 3.9 ppm represents the four protons that make up the methylene groups shown by its integral of one. The methyl peak is more downfield compared to the methylene as the methyl groups are more affected by the chlorine's electronegativity, which deshields the protons and so their peak appears more downfield. There are also peaks within the aromatic region and their integral of two shows that they represent eight aromatic protons, which is consistent with the structure. The spectrum isn't completely consistent with the structure at first but on closer inspection these inconsistencies can be explained, it would be expected that both the peak representing the methyl and methylene protons would appear as singlets because all of these groups have the same environment, but the methyl peak appears as a doublet. Two singlet peaks would be present if the structure was planar, but the appearance of the doublet means that the methyl protons must project above and below the [PdCl 2] plane where they will be in different environments. This causes them to encounter slightly different magnetic effects meaning they will resonate at different values of the applied magnetic field (B o) from each other and so appear as a doublet. . <heading>Conversion of compound A to a bridged imidato (1-) complex</heading>Compound A (0.25g) along with 4, 5-dichlorophthalimide (0.20g) were placed inside a conical flask (100cm 3) and stirred with a mixture of methanol (25cm 3) and dichloromethane (25cm 3), with triethylamine (1cm 3) also being added to the stirred mixture. The flask was then stoppered and stirred at room temperature for a total of three hours. After which time the dichloromethane solvent was removed on the rotary evaporator this left a suspension of yellow crystals in methanol. The crystals were then filtered off, washed with methanol (2 x 30cm 3 portions), and dried under vacuum after which time the yield of the product (bright yellow fine powder) was obtained (0.25g). <heading>Percentage yield: Compound B</heading> FORMULA  <heading>Compound B IR spectra</heading>The three characteristic peaks responsible for the nujol are present as before, one at 2923.04cm -1, the second peak at 1459.47cm -1 and the third and last peak at 1377.89cm -1. The spectrum also contained the expected alkane C-H and C-C peaks in the ~2850-2960 cm -1 and ~750-1100 cm -1 regions respectively. Also present are peaks in the area ~1680-1750 cm -1caused by C=O bonds, these are the major distinguishing feature between complex A and B and because they are present on this spectra and absent on complex A's spectra, this provides evidence that the desired conversion has taken place. Peaks corresponding to the C-Cl and C-N groups are present within their expected areas ~600-800 cm -1 and ~1180-1360 cm -1 respectively. But the expected arene C=C and C-H peaks normally found within the ~1500-1600cm -1 and ~3030-3080cm -1 ranges are not clearly apparent. The C=C arene peaks may be in the spectra but as they are often weak they may be covered by the C=O peaks which appear in the same area of the spectrum. <heading>Complex B 1H NMR Spectra</heading>This methyl and methylene resonances in this spectra are different to those found within spectra of the other two complexes, this is because there are various structures that B could adopt, but all of these except one can be eliminated using the 1H NMR spectra. The methylene protons appear as an A B quartet between 3.2 ppm and 3.6 ppm and the methyl protons are clearly in two different environments appearing as doublets at 1.9 ppm and 2.9 ppm. If complex B had a planar imidato (1- ) ligand structure the methylene and methyl protons would be equivalent appearing as a pair of singlets having an intensity ratio of 1:3. The N-bridged structure option involving a tetrahedral bridging N, in which the structure is coplanar, would again produce the same spectra. This means that the structure must contain an asymmetric - NCO- bridging system this generally forms a U-shaped structure, where both the methyl and aromatic protons are no longer equivalent. One methyl group on each of the ligands is now directed inwards and so inside the aromatic area of the structure, aromaticity is a property of the free circulation of electrons in a -system that creates a ring current. This ring current produces an induced field along with that created by the circulation of -electrons within a double bond that reinforces B o causing deshielding of this methyl peak compared to the other. This effect also causes the resonances of the methylene protons, which you would expect to be equivalent and so appear as singlets but instead appear as multiple peaks. <heading>Conversion of compound B to a terminal imidato (1-) complex</heading>Compound B (0.15g) was dissolved in chloroform (40cm 3) inside a conical flask (100cm 3). Triphenylphosphine (0.09g) was then added whilst the mixture was being stirred, (the solution changed from a light yellow to a much lighter colour on stirring). Hexane (40cm 3) was then added slowly and the solution was reduced to a volume of about 15cm 3 on the rotary evaporator. Crystallisation was not evident at this point so the solution was placed in an ice bath for ~30 minutes. The product was then filtered off and washed with hexane (~20 cm 3) and dried under vacuum, after which the yield was obtained. <heading>Percentage yield: Compound C</heading> FORMULA  <heading>Compound C IR spectra</heading>Once again the three characteristic peaks responsible for the nujol are present, one at 2926.83cm -1, the second peak at 1461.60cm -1 and the third and last peak at 1376.82cm -1. The spectrum also contained the expected alkane C-H and C-C peaks in the ~2850-2960 cm -1 and ~750-1100 cm -1 region respectively. Also present are the C-N and C-Cl peaks visible within their respective ranges of ~1180-1360 cm -1 and ~600-800 cm -1. But the expected arene C=C and C-H peaks as in the previous spectrum that are normally found within the ~1500-1600cm -1 and ~3030-3080cm -1 regions are not clearly apparent. The C=C arene peaks may be in the spectra but as they are often weak they may be covered by the stronger C=O peaks which appear in the same area of the spectrum. There is also a phosphine peak within the area of ~750-1400cm -3, which is the major distinguishing feature of this complex to the previous two, and its presence provides evidence that the second conversion has been successfully achieved. The carbonyl region in this spectra is different to that produced by complex B, complex C contains only one type of carbonyl bond in its structure and so would be expected to produce only one type of vibration at a certain frequency, this is consistent with the spectra as only one major peak is visible at 1649.75 cm -1. Complex B on the other hand has two different carbonyl environments and so is expected to vibrate at two different frequencies; this is consistent with the spectra as two different peaks are visible at 1626.35 and 1737.07 cm -1. <heading>Complex C 1H NMR Spectra</heading>The narrow splitting apparent in the spectra of complex C is caused by the presence of phosphorus in the structure, which is also a spin active nucleus. Protons (+) have a spin of ½ as do neutrons (no charge) and if an atom has either an odd number of protons and an even number of neutrons or the opposite then it will produce an NMR signal. 31P has fifteen protons and sixteen neutrons and so has a spin active nucleus of I = ½. An alternative structure for complex C could be to have the mononucleating ligands trans to each other as opposed to cis, and the polynucleating ligand coming out of the plane of the paper. Bases are categorised into two types hard and soft, bases referred to as hard have a high electronegativity and when they become attached to a central metal atom retain their valence electron. This keeps the positive charge on the metal atom high which makes the structure a hard acid. Alternatively if a soft base so called as it has a low electronegativity becomes attached to the metal atom it gives up it valence electrons decreasing the positive charge on the metal, which makes the structure a weak acid. It has been shown that two soft ligands trans to each other have a destabilising effect on each other when attached to a soft metal centre such as platinum and so make the structure unstable. Therefore this means that the structure initially proposed would be the most stable, as the soft ligands are cis to each other. 