<abstract>In 1913 Niels Bohr released his initial model of the atom, as time has passed numerous flaws have arisen in this model. However, it is still hailed as a success and is found in many school and university textbooks. This paper will review what exactly the Bohr model and its flaws are, what its successes are, and are these successes despite or, because of its flaws. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The word 'Atom' comes from the ancient Greek word 'Atomos' meaning not divisible. An atom is defined as 'the smallest unit of a chemical element that can exist'. However in the late 19 th century, it was found to be a larger structure of smaller components. These components would lead Bohr to his model of the atom. <fnote>'Atom' MS Encarta 2004 </fnote>In the 17 th century, Isaac Newton was studying the nature of light, he imagined light to be a tiny stream of particles, or corpuscles as they were known. Around the same time a Dutch scientist called Christiaan Huygens believed that light was a wave. This turned into something of a debate, until around 1800 when Thomas Young, carried out his famous double-slit experiment, from this point the wave theory was favoured for nearly 200 years. Back to the atom, in the early 19 th century, John Dalton, a chemist was the first to attempt to quantify atoms and molecules, in terms of their proportions, for example, H 2O. <heading>Into The Atom</heading>In 1897, a British physicist named J.J. Thomson was exploring how cathode rays were affected by passing between electrically charged plates. He discovered that the rays were attracted to the positively charged plate. Thomson also indirectly calculated the charge/mass ratio and found that it was over 1000 times smaller than that of an atom! He concluded that the cathode rays must be lots of tiny particles of matter far smaller the atoms with a negative charge. These would later become known as electrons. There was a problem; atoms are neutral, which led to the first model of the atom. Thomson imagined the atom as a positive pudding with negative plums spread evenly inside it. This would later be found to be incorrect. In 1898, a previous associate of Thomson began research into radioactivity, this was a New Zealander called Ernest Rutherford. Rutherford found two types of radiation in radioactive decay, he named these Alpha)andBeta),and then later a third was found and namedGamma). Rutherford soon found Beta radiation to be electrons; alpha radiation was something rather different, it has a mass four times that of hydrogen and a charge double that of the electron but positive. In 1909 colleagues of Rutherford, Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden carried out an experiment where a beam of alpha particles was directed at a thin metal foil. The results from this saw most of the electrons passing through the foil but they were scattered. But some of the particles were reflected back! From this Rutherford concluded that, if most of the particles were passing through the foil then the 'plum pudding' model must be wrong. As the Alpha particles were moving with great speed they could brush past the electrons passing through. The particles that got reflected must meet a tiny concentrated positive centre, as the alpha particles are too positive they are repelled back. In 1911, Rutherford produced a new model of the atom. However there was an immediate problem with Rutherford's model. If the negative charge was on the outside why didn't it attract towards the nucleus and hence collapse, emitting light in the process. This was not the case. Even if the particles were orbiting they should still emit radiation as they change velocity. Around the same time a German scientist, Max Plank, was investigating the unification of electrodynamics and thermodynamics, in particular he was studying blackbody radiation, there were already two known equations to explain two parts of the radiation, but they were independent of each other. Plank accidentally, using a bit of mathematical trick, joined the two equations, but now the equation had no physical basis. Later Plank noticed that the equation could make sense if he used Boltzmann's idea that the second law of thermodynamics was based on a statistical probability. However, Plank had been brought up on and believed strongly in classical determinism, Boltzmann's probability model was far from this and so he shunned the idea, around this time he also realised he had made a mistake in his working. As a result he was left with excess bits of energy that had to be explained. He interpreted this idea; that electric oscillators in the atom could only absorb and emit discrete packets of energy of certain sizes later called 'quanta' and was given by the equation; <fnote>the radiation emitted by a blackbody (which is an idealised object that perfectly absorbs and emits all radiation that strikes it's surface) </fnote><fnote>That is; the entropy or the disorder of a closed system must always increase. </fnote> FORMULA  Where E is the energy of the quanta, v is the frequency of quanta and h is a constant, now known as the Plank constant. In 1899, Einstein was the first person to take any big interest in the work of Plank. He applied Plank's equation to electromagnetic radiation to explain the photoelectric effect; he said the light comes in discrete packets, now called photons. Einstein worked on these ideas of a quantum theory of radiation until 1911, when he drew his attention to relativity. Also as a result of Einstein's idea that light behaved as particles, the debate of whether light was a wave or a particle was back to the forefront of science. It would be a young scientist who had been working alongside Rutherford in Manchester that would take the next step, his name was Niels Bohr. <fnote>"The liberation of electrons from a substance exposed to electromagnetic radiation", 'Photoelectric effect', Dictionary of Physics, Oxford University Press Ed. 2004. </fnote><heading>A New Model for the Atom</heading>Niels Bohr was born in 1885 in Demark, and finished his doctorate in 1911, and moved to Manchester, where he began to form his new model of the atom. Bohr was a scientist of the new age and used an unorthodox method of mix-matching ideas to suit particular behaviour of atoms in certain situations. In 1912, Einstein's view of light behaving like particles was still the topic of much debate. Bohr took Einstein's quantum view of light and applied to Rutherford's model of the atom. If light could only come in certain quanta of energy, it couldn't collapse in on itself. Orbits were stable because of fixed energy levels (Fig. 1). <figure/>Bohr released his initial model of atom in 1913. This model was flawed; it didn't explain why the behaviour occurred. The model also failed to explain wave-particle duality. Refinements were needed; Bohr continued to work in his patchy fashion. Bohr then began to study the atomic structure of hydrogen, the simplest atom. When Rutherford constructed his model of the atom he only used two quantities mass and charge, from these no length unit can be derived. Bohr used Plank's constant, h, to get an idea of the length of an atom. His estimate was in the region 10 -10m, this value fitted with that required for the scattering experiment of 1909, by Rutherford and his colleagues. Bohr went on to explain why an atom doesn't have to continuously radiate energy as it orbits the nucleus, but it can emit a whole quantum of energy, or a photon. As a result of this emission the electron would jump to a lower quantum state (or level). The Bohr model allowed for more spectral lines than were observed in the spectra of atoms, and so Bohr added rules forbidding certain quantum jumps between levels, again without any real justification, this is generally seen as poor scientific practice, but for the time being it seemed to work. In 1916 Einstein introduced probability into the atom, and was added to the Bohr model to describe the real behaviour of atoms. He later dismissed these ideas stating that 'God does not play dice'. This probability would later be found as the underpinning of quantum theory. Einstein linked radioactive decay and electron emission, using Boltzmann's equations for collections of atoms. These statistical equations modified Bohr's model to explain why some spectral lines were more probable than others, due the probability that some quantum jumps are more likely than others. But again couldn't explain why this was so but Einstein hoped some underlying reason would be found in the future. Still to date no explanation has been found. This meant that everything did just happen by chance and events occurred at no particular time and more so no particular reason. The probability of an event can be quantified, but even so there is still no telling when an event will occur. This was the end of classical determinism. <fnote>This is the doctrine that state everything has cause and as a result of that cause an effect will follow. </fnote>It was around 1926 that Bohr's model reached its final form, where he introduced the concept of shells, the first with two electrons, the second with eight etc. This later successfully predicted Hafnium, but once more he didn't explain why there were specific numbers of electrons in each shell. Within three years of this the Bohr model would be almost abolished by physicists, but for chemists it was and still is an ideal tool to discover and explain the structure and interactions of substances. In the 1930's, the results an X-ray diffraction experiment could only be explained by uniting both wave and particle theories of radiation, this was the birth of wave-particle duality. A big breakthrough came when it was shown that all particles, not just photons and electrons, could be expressed as waves and vice versa. "It isn't just Bohr's atom with its electron 'orbits' is a false picture; all pictures are false, and there is no physical analogy that we can make to understand what goes on inside atoms. Atoms behave like atoms nothing else." <fnote>This was shown mainly by DeBroglies' Equation h/p where p is the momentum of a particle, h is Plank's constant and  is the wavelength. </fnote><fnote>'A Break with the Past', In search of Schrodinger's cat, J. Gribbin p92 </fnote><heading>Conclusion </heading>The Bohr model had multiple flaws, and the reason for this is because atoms can't be displayed as a model. Atoms are so incredibly small its no wonder the model is very rough. Also classical ideas can't be combined with quantum ideas to explain the behaviour of atoms because atoms are quantum objects. However, the Bohr model has clearly been a success; it has given us the periodic table among other things. Most importantly it has provided a bridge by which a grasp of the quantum can be made, before making the leap; and this is because of its flaws. 