There have been many different theories about the origins of the universe, however the most commonly regarded theory is that of the big bang and the expanding universe. In this report I will show evidence to confirm the theory of the big bang. The universe it described as "everything there is all matter and all energy, with an infinite amount of space". The age of the universe is predicted to be around 15 x 10 14 years; this is derived by dividing one by Hubble's constant. Hubble's constant is the current expansion rate of the universe and is derived from the speed of recession of stars from a certain distance away. The universe is made up of numerous galaxies, which are clusters of stars, gas, dust and matter. However, most of the universe is made up of nothing; this is known as dark matter. The furthest galaxy that is known to us within the universe is 1.2 x 10 25 m away; however, is more likely that there are galaxies further away, that we have not seen yet because they are so for away that the light from them has not had the time to reach us. Much of the universe was formed within the first few hundred seconds after the big bang. Nothing is known of what occurred after the first 10 -43 seconds of the big bang because the amount of energy at the time means that Einstein's theory of relativity cannot be used. This time is known as Planck's time and the temperature of the universe at this time was 10 23 degrees Kelvin. All that is known at this time is that all four forces in the universe (gravity, electromagnetic and the strong and weak nuclear forces) were all together. However, 10 -35 seconds after the big bang the gravitational force escapes from the other forces as does the strong force after 10 -10 seconds and they are all separated after just 10 -5 seconds. After this amount of time the universe had cooled a sufficient amount for small matter such as quarks, leptons and photons, to form. These had previously just been demolished by the high amounts of energy. It is 300 seconds after the big bang, when a pivotal moment of the universe occurs. At this time the universe has cooled enough for the quarks to join together to form mesons and baryons. This matter, along with its subsequent anti-matter naturally annihilates each other during collisions leaving nothing behind. This would mean the end of the universe, however, somehow there is still some matter left and this means that there must have been more matter than anti-matter in the first place. The answer to this conundrum is that during the big bang, particles called X Particles where formed. These particles turn anti-matter in to matter, however they do not do the reverse. Not much is known about these particles but without them the universe would not exist today. John D. Barrow said of X particles in his Origin of the Universe, "The X particle seemed to be a godsend, unlike ant other elementary particle, it could change matter into antimatter". After 5 x 10 12 seconds the protons and neutrons formed by the quarks, joined together to form simple light nuclei such as Helium and Hydrogen which still form much of the universe today. From the time these nuclei had formed to today, all matter had clustered together to form numerous stars and galaxies that form the universe as we know it. There is lots of evidence for the big bang theory and the expanding universe and new types of evidence are being discovered all the time. The main sources of evidence are Red shift and the Doppler Effect, Background microwave radiation, Dark matter and Olber's Paradox, however there is much more. The Doppler Effect is the effect on the wavelength of things as they move towards or away from you. As the item moves away from you the wavelength of the light emitted from it is shifted to the red side of the spectrum; in other words, its wavelength increases due to the expansion of the light that occurs, this is known as Red shift. When the item moves towards you it compresses its wavelength, shifting it to the blue end of the spectrum, this is known as Blue shift. The Doppler Effect can be seen on the pitch of ambulance sirens as they move towards and away from you; when an ambulance moves towards you the sound waves are compressed so the pitch of the siren is much higher. The idea of Red shift was first observed by Milton Humason who was a janitor and lab engineer for such great physicists as Edwin Hubble. Humason observed that the light reaching earth from distant galaxies had been slightly shifted towards the red side of the spectrum. However, Humason did not act on his findings and it wasn't until Hubble did some research of his own that the idea of Red shift was proved. Hubble studied the wavelength of light reaching earth from numerous distant galaxies and noted that they were all red shifted. This meant that all the galaxies were moving away from ours, however perhaps more interesting was the fact that the further away a galaxy was, the more its light waves had been red shifted. This means that all galaxies are moving away with their speed of recession proportional to their separation distance. This quantity is known as Hubble's constant which is around, 75 Km -1 Mpp 3 and it is this amount that can estimate the age of the universe and predict its future fate. With all the galaxies moving away in proportion to their distance of separation, Hubble concluded that the universe must be expanding and indeed at one point in time the whole universe must have all been together. This is known as initial singularity and is quoted by John D. Barrow on page 37 of his Origin of the Universe as "all mass in the universe is compressed into a state of infinite density". All of the galaxies were moving apart much like spots on an inflating balloon, with all galaxies receding from each other, showing that the universe is expanding in all directions. The effect of red shift was measured recently, by investigating the oxygen arriving at earth from the NGC 7319 galaxy. The oxygen spectral line was 513 mm which is shifted by 12 mm to the rest wavelength on earth. The equation for measuring the amount of red shift is:  FORMULA  Background microwave radiation, or blackbody radiation as it is known, was discovered accidentally by two communication workers at the Bell Laboraties. The employees, Penzias and Wilson, were using a giant horn instrument to measure the communication levels in different directions. However, they found sound interference in all directions; this interference was the same in every direction during day and night to a factor of one in one thousand. Therefore, Penzias and Wilson deduced that this must be background radiation that has come from outside the earth's atmosphere; and must be left over from the big bang when it was produced by the universe's high temperatures in a much denser isothermal atmosphere and had an original temperature of greater than 10 28 degrees Kelvin. Since then it has red shifted over to the microwave part of the electromagnetic spectrum, due to the universes expansion and its temperature has reduced to 2.7 K which is just above absolute zero. This is due to the expansion of the universe meaning the temperature is now spread over a much greater area and lots of energy has been used up for the expansion in the form of heat. This blackbody radiation can be seen on television screens when they are not tuned and research into the fluctuation of blackbody radiation over the earth's service by NASA's COBE satellite has confirmed scientist's theory of the shape of the universe to a accuracy of 70%. It is believed that matter makes up around just 5% of the mass of the universe and the rest is made up of dark matter. However, nobody actually knows what dark matter is and it was only discovered when scientists realised that the stars in the sky were accelerating at a rate faster than predicted due to the gravitational pull of the other stars. Therefore, there must be something that is pulling these stars and this has been called dark matter, even though it has never been discovered. An atromenour called Fritz Zwicky did an experiment in 1933 in which he predicted the mass of all the galaxies in the universe by calculating the light intensity that they release. However, when he did the experiment again he discovered that the new mass was 400 times the original mass he had predicted; this is known as "the missing mass problem". In fact it was the dark matter that made up this extra mass. This dark matter that makes up most of the mass of the universe but cannot be seen must have been produced at the origin of the universe by a giant big bang. If there is an infinite number of stars in the universe so that all areas of the universe are within the angular area of a star's light emission, why is the whole universe is not as bright as the surface of the sun and during the night why is the sky dark? This phenomenon is known as Olber's paradox. Olber deduced two explanations for this; the first one is that the universe is expanding and therefore the light from distant stars is red shifted into obscurity, and the second is that due to the universe's expansion, distant stars are too far away for their light to have reached us. This second explanation is less likely as it will mean that the stars have receded at a speed greater than that of light. This could be explained by a period of accelerated expansion of the universe during Planck's time. Other evidence to back up the theory of the big bang and the expanding universe is the abundance of helium in the universe. In fact it is predicted that helium could make up to 25% of the universe's total mass. This is far too much for the stars in the universe to produce in the time scale they have, therefore it must have been produced quickly after the big bang when the temperature of the universe was similar to that inside a star today. This would mean that an increased amount of nuclear fission could occur, turning hydrogen molecules into helium. Isotopes such as deuterium also provide evidence for the big bang theory, as it is a very old gas that is constantly moving through the universe and entering our galaxy. However there is nothing to form deuterium, therefore it must have been produced when temperatures and energy levels where much higher. It is estimated that most of the deuterium in the atmosphere was produced within the first two minutes after the big bang. This is new evidence shown in an article by Lee Siegel in the year 2000 and this shows that more evidence for the big bang is still being found. Further evidence is the ripples in the distribution of neutrinos that where formed when the universe was still very young. Neutrinos have a minimal mass and change and are therefore very difficult to research, however the research into the distribution of neutrinos has found ripples that match scientist's predictions about the standard model of the universe and the big bang. In conclusion the universe is thought to have originated 15 x10 14 years ago due to the big bang, a high energy explosion which has since made the universe expand rapidly. There are many different types of evidence that confirm the theory of the big bang and expanding universe. The first major piece of evidence and probably the most significant is that of red shift; this proves that all galaxies are moving away from each other in proportion to their separation distance. Therefore, these galaxies at one point in time must have been together and have since expanded due to a big bang that provided infinite amounts of energy. However, if this was true there would have to be some isothermal evidence left behind from the big bang. This was discovered by chance by two communication workers in the form of blackbody radiation. This background radiation was the same in all directions day and night and must therefore be from outside the earth's atmosphere and had also been red shifted to the microwave end of the electromagnetic spectrum. The temperature of the blackbody radiation had cooled significantly since the beginning of the universe, as the expansion means the heat is spread over a much wider region. Further evidence for the big bang comes from the amount of dark matter in the universe and Olber's paradox, in addition to the large amounts of helium and isotopes such as deuterium and the ripples in the distribution of neutrinos. There are now three possible outcomes for the universe depending on the mass within it; if the mass is great enough then the universe will contract, however, if it isn't then the universe will continue to expand, the final option is that the mass is of a critical value so that the universe stays in equilibrium. Nobody knows what the state of the universe is going to be as its mass is so close to the required critical value and it is for this reason that our universe has survived for so long and been able to provide life. 