There are two main theories about the elementary particle build up of the universe, and both are considered by scientists to be so accurate that when they discover otherwise these results are dispelled. These two theories are those of Quantum mechanics and Einstein's Theory of Relativity (TOR). However, there was thought to be a problem with each of these theories, that problem is that the two theories cannot coincide with each others existence. The reason for this is that the theory of Quantum Mechanics works on minute particles with minimal masses, whereas Einstein's Theory Of Relativity works on a galactic scale of size and mass, such as galaxy clusters. However, the problem occurs in places such as black holes which have a giant mass clumped together within an area smaller than a grain of sand, but according to scientific understanding at the time, this could not be possible and the two theories could not work together. A similar scenario occurred at the beginning of the universe. In addition, the violent undulations of quantum mechanics would destroy the smoothly curving geometrical space, used in the TOR. This phenomenon had scientists baffled as each of the theories had such great evidence, however a possible answer may have been found; that of the string theory. The connection between Quantum Mechanics and the TOR was the main reasoning behind the introduction of string theory, because the string theory softens the quantum undulations by smearing out the short distance properties of space. However, it was first thought of in 1968 by a scientist called Gabrielle Veneziano at CERN, who believed that string theory could describe the strong nuclear force. The main idea of string theory is that all matter is not made up of elementary particles called quarks but of strings instead, "We would find that each particle is not point like, but instead consists of a tiny one dimensional loop. Like an infinitely thin rubber band, each particle contains a vibrating, oscillating, dancing element that physicists have named a string" (1). These strings have not been discovered as they are of ultramicroscopic length - it is believed that they can be no longer than 10 -33 cm (this is known as Planck's length as it cannot be measured) and have effectively zero thickness. This size is far too small for modern day microscopes and therefore these strings appear to be point like. There are two types of strings; open ones and closed ones which have joined together at the ends, "Two strings can join together to form a single string, in the case of open strings they simply join at the ends, in the case of closed strings it is like the two legs joining on a pair of trousers. Similarly a single piece of string can divide into two." (2). <figure/>This image, taken form Stephen Hawking's A Brief History of Time, shows the world sheet (displacement of the string) for open and closed strings. <figure/>This image taken from Brian Greene's Elegant Universe shows how all matter is made up of strings. It is this approach of describing matter in its most fundamental form "that resolves the tension between general relativity and quantum mechanics. In fact the superstring theory shows more; within this new framework general relativity and quantum mechanics require one another for the theory to make sense" (3).This is because "all matter and all forces are proposed to arise from one basic ingredient; oscillating strings." (4) It is the different oscillations within the strings that produce the framework for different particles of different masses and force charges, much like the varying notes produced by the vibrational patterns of a violin string. The energy of the particle depends on the amplitude and wavelength of the oscillation; the greater the amplitude and wavelength of the vibration, the higher energy the particle will have, and this means that it will also have a greater mass. Because the string theory provides particles of differing masses it means the gravitational forces of these particles also differs, and therefore the string theory can affect the gravitational force for all matter. One problem of this theory is that due to the large amounts of energy induced during these oscillations (Planck's energy), there would be no small elementary matter such as quarks being formed. This conundrum was answered by quantum mechanics, which showed that when strings are at rest they are still vibrating - this jittering has a negative energy. It is this that cancels out much of the vibrational energy allowing for particles of zeroing masses, and hence allowing the string theory to be the answer to the gravitational force. This means that the string theory may provide the answer to the graviton and ultimately the holy grail of the Grand Unified Theory in which all forces (Gravity, Electromagnetic and the weak and strong nuclear forces) are linked together. The idea of the string theory was started in 1968 by the scientist Gabriele Veneziano, who, whilst working at CERN observed that some properties of the strong nuclear force were similar to a mathematical theory from two hundred years earlier called the "Euler beta function". In 1970, Nambo, Nielsen and Suuskind explained that this could only be the case if one modelled elementary particles as vibrating one dimensional strings, which are small enough to show up as a point. Hence the idea of the string theory was born as an attempt to describe the nuclear strong force. However, in the mid-seventies the popularity of the string theory waned as it was inconsistent with some observations at high energy, unlike the more favourable quantum mechanics. Some scientists however, continued to believe in the theory; "the mathematical structure of string theory was so beautiful and had so many miraculous properties that it had to be pointing towards something deep." (5) Then, in 1974, the big break through occurred when Schwarz and others observed that the vibrational patterns within strings showed the messenger-like properties of the graviton (the particle messenger of the gravitational force). This was huge as it showed that "string theory is not just a theory of the strong force, it is a quantum theory that includes gravity as well" (6). This was further confirmed in 1984 when Greene and Schwarz resolved subtle difficulties within the string theory, showing it could encompass all four of the forces. This was the first superstring string revolution as the world of physics got excited due to the promise of a Grand unified Theory that could lead to a Theory of Everything. However, yet again there was waned interest in string theory, because, due to the fact nobody actually knows whether the theory is correct or not, only approximate equations can be used and therefore only approximate results can be found. It was this inaccuracy that hindered the development of string theory. This was until the now famous lecture by Edward Witten, one of the leading string theorists at the University of Southern California in 1995. The problems of string theory arising from the inaccuracies were that five different string theories had been thought of, each of which provided different properties for the universe. Another problem was that the string theory only seemed to work if there were either ten or twenty six dimensions compared to the known four of space and time. It was during this lecture that these questions were answered with the introduction of the M-theory. The M-theory draws all five string theories into one: this theory has eleven dimensions, ten for space including one for drawing all five other theories together, and one for time. It also mergers the TOR and electromagnetism. The M-theory is made up of two dimensional vibrating membranes as well as three dimensional blobs (3 branes) and other ingredients, however scientists knowledge of it is still minimal and this is why it is called the M-theory: shortened from Mysterious. Another discovery of the string theory at this time was that of the Superstring theory. Before this there was only the basonic string theory, which had two problems as it didn't allow for particles with a non-integer spin, such as the fermion, and also, when looking at patterns for a certain particle called the Tachyon, the mass when squared gave a negative number. This was resolved when Schwartz and other scientists showed that all fermionic patterns have a basonic partner, this is known as supersymmetry. This started the supersymmetry string theory, or for short, the superstring theory. This new theory also eradicated the problem of the Tachyon particle. String theory has been able to develop our understanding of the evolution of the universe as it enables us to work out things such as how much entropy there is within black holes. It has also brought up the question of whether the beginning of the universe was started with a big bang. There are two new theories that have arisen about the origin of the universe due to the discovery of the string theory, these are the continuous universe model and the Ekpyrotic model. The continuous universe theory is that the universe goes through a constant cycle of expanding and contracting, this means at time T=-5 seconds the universe may have been contracting at the same rate to which it was expanding at time T=5 seconds. This means that "the big bang may not have been the origin of the universe but simply a violent transition from accelerating to decelerating" (7). The beauty of this model is that it needs a period of extended acceleration in order for it to occur, and hence answers the problem of the standard inflationary theory. The idea behind the continuous universe theory is that in the beginning of the universe there was hardly anything, just widely dispersed chaotic gas and matter. However, then the forces of nature increased, gradually pulling all matter together. Some areas claimed more matter at the expense of others though, leading to the density within these areas becoming so great that black holes started to form. This broke up matter within the universe and inside the black holes there was a space and time role reversal, where "the centre of the black hole is not a point in space but an instant in time" (8). Inside the black hole it would become hotter and denser until it reached the maximum density allowed by the string theory, at this moment the black hole would start contracting and this is what the big bang was. The Ekpyrotic model states that our universe is just one of many D-Branes that float within a greater dimension; occasionally these D-Branes exert an attractive force on each other and collide. The theory is that the big bang could have been a collision between our D-Brane and another. The D-Branes are constantly expanding and contracting, whether or not they are being attracted by other D-Branes. This explains the extended and current expansion of the universe. 