<abstract><heading>Abstract: </heading>Over the past few hundred years, even more so during the last century, our conceptual knowledge of the universe has been revolutionised by the notions of space and time. There was an era when Newton's theory of Physics seemed reasonably watertight in explaining the underlying questions of the natural world, but these ideas have since been superseded. We now have Einstein's theory of General Relativity to describe gravitational behaviour on the macro scale, and various interpretations of Quantum Mechanics to illustrate interactive phenomena on the micro scale, however the advance of Physics at this fundamental level is yet still hindered by one major undertaking: the unification of the very big with the very small into one theory - a 'theory of everything.' This paper looks at the reasons why the incorporation of gravity into an electromagnetic and nuclear force-containing theory is such a difficulty, and how the dilemma may one day be resolved, with a theory of Quantum Gravity. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Newtonian Mechanics has proved to be a very effective tool for approximating the non-relativistic motion of a large object through gravitational interaction with its surroundings. By this I mean that commonly-encountered events such as throwing a ball or launching a rocket into space - events where object velocities take a value much less than that of the speed of light - can be very accurately described by this classical set of physical laws. In many situations however, a Newtonian approximation is simply not good enough. To explain the motion of objects near very large masses, for example the orbit of bodies around stars or galaxies, we require a new set of rules, a classical theory of gravity which goes by the name of General Relativity. In this blend of Special Relativity and Newton's law of universal gravitation, gravity is not seen as being due to a force, but is rather a curvature of the fabric of space-time itself due to the presence of matter. Objects respond to gravity by following the curved paths of space-time (geodesics, described by metrics and tensor calculus) around massive objects. <figure/>Similarly, Quantum Mechanics, which arose out of the failure of classical mechanics at the sub-atomic level, is a necessity when describing small-scale events such as the motion of an electron around the atom, a behaviour which cannot be explained by a gravitational law. At this present moment in time, theoretical physics is suffering from a major problem. The attempt to fuse General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics has posed great difficulties in that each theory is confined to its own framework needed to explain certain phenomena, but contradicts the basis of the other as it does so. The foundations for this predicament lie deep in the heart of both the assumptions the theories make about observation and reality and the intrinsic definitions of matter, space and time themselves. <fnote>Smolin, L. Three Roads to Quantum Gravity Phoenix, Orion Books Ltd. 2001, p4 </fnote>We will now embark on a journey through the formalism of the much sought after theory of Quantum Gravity. While many believe that the unification of two such deeply established and widely accepted theories is something far beyond the scope of human capability, others hold faith in the possibility, adamant that the quantisation of gravity, the Holy Grail of Physics, is within the grasp of science. There are currently two contenders for the crown: String Theory and Loop Quantum Gravity. The former is the latest effort to unify the four existent forces in the universe, electromagnetic, gravitational, and the strong and weak nuclear forces, whereas the latter is a direct harmonisation of General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics, and both will be discussed in this paper. There is also an alternative option, the third route to Quantum Gravity, which will not be discussed due to the fact that thus far it is simply a blurry collection of speculations (namely Twistor Theory, non-commutative gemometry and Supergravity), which has not yet convinced the scientific community. What I will say however, is that it is a path which rejects General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics in an attempt to provide new answers from fundamental, philosophical principles. <heading>The Need for a Quantum Theory of Gravity</heading>It could be argued that the many years spent attempting to unify all forces of nature into a single theory could be better spent elsewhere, after all, we do have separate theories that enable us to describe natural phenomena, albeit on the cosmic scale or on the quantum scale. So is there actually a physical necessity for a theory of everything? The answer to this question is yes. Black holes arise in General Relativity, a classical theory, but in order to fully understand them, quantum effects must be taken into account as they undergo a runaway gravitational collapse, resulting in a singularity at their centre. We also need a quantum theory of gravity to explain the thermodynamics of black holes, specifically black hole entropy. It is theorised that at extremely high energies (around the Planck energy scale E p ~10 19 GeV), all four forces are indistinguishable from each other. Therefore in order to understand the first few moments after the big bang where such high energies existed, it is vital we have an explanation of gravity on such a scale. Besides, a unified framework of all interactions is, after all, the Physics community's most prestigious prize. <heading>General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics</heading>The Standard Model of particle physics describes the fundamental building blocks of which the world is made, along with the forces with which these particles interact. There was a time when atoms were thought to be the most basic components of matter, but we now know that even atoms are made up of smaller particles still; electrons, protons and neutrons. Electrons are thought to be elementary particles, but we can take protons and neutrons a stage further with the discovery that they are composed of elementary-type quarks. The limit of what we can see is established by technology, for we cannot see what is beyond the highest power and detection sensitivity of our tools. Presently the limit is placed on the size of quarks which we have been able to witness using large particle accelerators, but this raises many questions: Are electrons and quarks really the smallest possible entities, or are they also made up of smaller particles? Is there a smallest possible quantity? Likewise, is there a smallest possible unit of space, and even time? Before these questions can be answered, a conclusion must first be made as to what space and time actually are. General Relativity states that space and time are not only 'smooth' and 'continuous', but are also inherently interlinked in what we now call four-dimensional space-time, which is dynamic and therefore considered a background-independent theory. What is meant by this background independence is that the defining equations of a theory are required to be independent of the actual shape of the space-time and the value of various fields within the space-time. Time is simply a measure of change in the network of relationships that describes space, and neither space nor time has any existence outside the system of evolving relationships that comprises the universe. <fnote> URL  </fnote><fnote>Smolin, 2001, p24 </fnote>In Newton's theory, space and time are assumed to have an absolute meaning. They are infinitely divisible and every bit of space or time is the same as every other bit, existing in a dynamical structure. The theory is background-dependent, in that it relies on the presence of a fixed, unchanging background, an absolute space and time that is used only as a reference frame. Quantum Mechanics is also dependent on a fixed background structure. It is constructed on Newtonian, that is to say Euclidean, geometry hence it describes phenomena according to an absolute space and time, but embedded in its physics is an inherent quantisation of certain observable properties such as angular momentum and total bound energy of a system. <fnote> URL  </fnote>It then becomes apparent that the reconciliation between General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics would include an aspect of quantisation within the framework of background-independent space-time, and this leads to the postulation that space-time itself should be quantised at the very smallest scales. This quantisation is thought to take place on an extremely small scale, the Planck scale, which corresponds to incredibly small units of distance and time (or equivalently extremely large energies), as given in Figure 2. <table/><heading>String Theory</heading>String Theory is the latest in a series of attempts to unify gravitation with the other three forces of nature: Electromagnetism, and the strong and weak nuclear forces. Like the Standard Model, String Theory is a theory based around a model of elementary particles, however these particles are not zero-dimensional point-like particles; they are in fact, as the name of the theory suggests, strings, which have length (of energy of the Planck length, lp ~10 -33 cm) but no other dimension. These strings vibrate at resonant specific frequencies, with each frequency mode representative of a particle, thus a certain oscillation pattern would correspond to a particular elementary particle (i.e. an electron) and when the mode changes, the behaviour of the string would relate to a different elementary particle of different mass (i.e. a quark). Therefore, the particles are now pictured as waves travelling down the string, sweeping out a 'world sheet' (the string's history in space-time, recorded as the string sweeps out a surface) as it does so. <figure/>There are several branches of string theory, which are categorised according to whether or not the strings are required to be open or closed loops, and whether or not the theory incorporates fermions (elementary matter particles). Bosonic string theory is an unsuccessful route which includes bosons but excludes fermions from its description, which means it is solely a force theory. Furthermore, the theory only appears to be consistent in 26 space-time dimensions and in its list of string excitation modes there exists the tachyon, a particle with imaginary mass which travels at a speed greater than the speed of light. So-called Superstring theories do away with the tachyon and include fermions in their particle spectrum by introducing a special kind of symmetry known as supersymmetry, which relates a force-transmitting boson to every corresponding fermion, and are consistent in 10 space-time dimensions. The extra dimensions are accounted for by assuming them to be compact, such that they are unobservable, in a concept dubbed 'compactification.' So where does gravity fit in to superstring theory? For a closed string there exists a spectrum of oscillations which contains a particle possessing two units of spin and zero mass. Such a particle had not previously been hypothesised by other theories so this was originally seen as a major drawback for the theory. However, according to General Relativity, the gravitational force is mediated by the graviton, a particle with zero mass and two units of spin, so we can now see how the previously untheorised particle has been accounted for in superstring theory. Furthermore, superstring theory makes sense of the interaction of two gravitons, whereas infinite gravitational forces are obtained when trying to apply the rules of Quantum Field Theory to General Relativity. We can therefore see how String Theory seems to have answered - if not in full then partly - the question of quantum gravity. <heading>Loop Quantum Gravity</heading>Loop Quantum Gravity (LQG) is a direct attempt to reconcile General Relativity with Quantum Mechanics, where quantum states of the geometry of space are constructed from the relationships between 'loops'. It differs from the String Theory effort in that it makes no modifications to the principles of the founding theories, but actually takes those principles and applies them to space and time. The outcome is a non-perturbative quantisation of space-time at the Planck scale, resulting in a smallest possible volume of space (roughly given by the cube of the Planck length, lp3 ~ 10 -99 cm 3), and a minimum unit of time (given by the Planck time, tp ~ 10 -43cm 3). Just as there is a discrete spectrum of energy levels that an electron in an atom can take, values of area and volume of space have to fall into some discrete series of numbers. The quantisation of space-time also means that gravity is quantised at the Planck scale, which is a triumph because it is thought that the quantisation of gravity can remedy the failure of the classical theory, thus hopefully allowing an understanding of the gravitational effects at arbitrarily short distances inside black holes, and ultimately the geometry of space-time, moments after the big bang. One of the most fascinating results to emerge from the theory of LQG is the discovery that loop states could be described by very elegant pictures called spin networks. A spin network is a state of quantum geometry made by combining loops, illustrated simply by a graph with edges labelled by integers corresponding to the values that the angular momentum of a particle can take according to Quantum Theory (equal to an integer multiplied by half of Planck's constant). <fnote>Smolin, 2001, p134 </fnote>The edges of these spin networks carry discrete units of area, and the area of a surface originates from the intersection between it and one edge of the spin network. A similar pattern is applied to quantify discrete units of volume; the volume (in Planck units) of a particular region is given by the number of nodes of a spin network within it. The result of a very large spin network when viewed on a grand scale is therefore a seemingly continuous quantum geometry of space, as required by the classical regime. <figure/>Furthermore, as a spin network evolves over time, a 'spin foam' over a manifold of one dimension higher than the dimensions of the corresponding spin network is mapped out, which can be viewed as an effective quantum history, a space-time at the Planck scale. This notion of spin foam can then be applied to the gravitational collapse of black holes, where a very large volume in a spin network evolves to a single volume over a spin foam manifold. <fnote> URL  </fnote><figure/>So we have seen then, that Loop Quantum Gravity, an elegant, background-independent theory which quantizes space-time, provides a consistent basis for a quantum theory of gravity. <heading>Strings or Loops? </heading>Both String Theory and Loop Quantum Gravity are strong candidates for a theory of Quantum Gravity, but is one 'better' than the other? Both theories seem to provide a fundamental basis which can describe gravity at the Planck scale whilst doing away with the renormalization problem, which states that treating the graviton simply as another particle field would result in gravitational interactions of infinite values which cannot be mathematically cancelled to yield finite results. However, both theories, of course, have their downfalls. It can be argued that LQG respects local Lorentz invariance, but violates the invariance on the global scale, whereas Lorentz invariance does not pose a problem for String Theory. Superstring Theory gives a description for particle scattering experiments, something which has not yet been achieved by LQG. Nevertheless it does seem as though String Theory has quite a few more setbacks than LQG: <fnote> URL  </fnote>The understanding of String Theory requires new fundamental principles; it predicts that space exists in nine or ten dimensions; unknown elementary particles are hypothesized due to the nature of the oscillations of the strings; it provides only a very limited explanation of the entropy of black holes; there are currently five different forms of string theory, which differ in terms of what type of strings they allow and how they implement supersymmetry. Without doubt the key disadvantage of String Theory is the fact that it has space-time as a background metric, i.e. it is a background-dependent theory which although may be a useful tool for approximation, cannot be a fundamental theory. A complete quantum theory of gravity requires a background-independent manifold, which LQG is able offer, and it is this key feature that puts LQG in pole position. <fnote> URL  </fnote>The problem with validating either theory, or any scientific theory for that matter, arises from the need to produce experimental evidence in accordance with the theory's predictions. Current technology has allowed us to probe matter at the sub-atomic level, allowing us to verify the existence of elementary particles like quarks and electrons. In confirming a quantum theory of gravity however, experiments and therefore measuring devices capable of exploring entities twenty orders of magnitude (10 20) smaller than the size of an atomic nucleus are a necessity, and many believe that the limit of technology will never extend to this scale. Even if it turns out that both String Theory and LQG cannot be verified as consistent quantum gravity theories, the visions that they give about the universe appear to be converging. It may therefore be that there is an underlying unity between the two theories which needs to be discovered in order to give the fundamental theory. It is predicted that we will have a consistent theory of Quantum Gravity within the next 15 years, 20 at most, but whether it takes a year, a decade or even a century, one thing is for certain; the deep mysteries of the universe are slowly beginning to unravel as human endeavour lives on. 