<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>Induction is the reasoning process by which general conclusions are drawn from particular instances or observations. As far as science is concerned, induction is the general method by which laws are formulated. Without it, we would have no law of gravitation allowing us to predict the future motion of all objects on the macro-scale, no laws of quantum mechanics enabling us to describe the sub-atomic world, in fact, we would have no laws at all. Induction is fine as a method, but its development over the years has given rise to much scepticism as to whether it can really be logically justified. This paper looks at the validity of induction as a means of finding the underlying truths about the natural world. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>I stated in the abstract that induction is the process of abstracting general conclusions or laws from specific observations. Logical deduction is another reasoning process, which is very closely linked with induction, however unlike induction, it works from the more general to the more specific. In other words, deduction takes a theoretical 'top-down' approach. Deduction is a systematic method that forms conclusions, which follow necessarily from the given premises (statements assumed to be true). To put things into perspective, the following are classic examples of logical induction and deduction: <heading>Induction</heading>In past experience, all swans have been white. Therefore, all future swans will be white, or the next observed swan will be white. <heading>Deduction</heading>All ravens are black. George is a raven. Therefore, George is black. Deductive reasoning is narrower in nature, and is concerned with testing or confirming hypotheses. To begin with, a theory is drawn up about the topic of interest, which in turn, is narrowed down into testable, more specific hypotheses. These are then narrowed down even further once observations are accumulated to address the hypotheses, which ultimately leads to the ability to test the hypotheses with exclusive data - a confirmation (or not) of the original theory. With inductive reasoning, the starting point is based on the observations, leading to detected regularities and patterns. Provisional hypotheses are then devised and explored, to finally develop general conclusions or theories. <heading>Epistemology</heading>There are five major contributors to the development of induction: <list>Aristotle (384 - 322 BC): Greek philosopher, scientist and mathematician.Francis Bacon (1561 - 1626): English lawyer, historian and philosopher.David Hume (1711 - 1776): Scottish philosopher.John Stuart Mill (1806 - 1873): English philosopher and economist.Karl Popper (1902 - 1994): Austrian/English philosopher.</list>Aristotle made important contributions by systematising deductive logic. He believed that the conclusion should follow from the premises, which is the requirement of deductive validity. According to Aristotle, if you have a major universal premise and a minor specific premise, it is possible to come up with a conclusion. For example, 'all humans are mortal (universal premise), and Socrates is human (minor specific premise), therefore Socrates is mortal (conclusion)'. <fnote> URL  </fnote>Epistemology is the theory of method or grounds of knowledge. Empiricism is the reliance on experience as the source of ideas and knowledge. It is the epistemological theory that genuine information about the world must be acquired by 'a posteriori' means, so that nothing can be thought without first being sensed. This is in contrast to a rationalist stance, where reason is relied upon as the only reliable source of human knowledge ('a priori'). A sentence, preposition, thought or judgement is 'a posteriori' (literally 'after') if its truth is dependent on how our actual experience (experiment and observation) turns out. On the contrary, a sentence, preposition, thought or judgement is 'a priori' if its truth is not dependent on how experience transpires. <fnote> URL  </fnote>Enter Francis Bacon. Bacon's major contribution to philosophy was his application of induction, i.e. the approach used by modern science, which is an empiricist approach. At the time, much of philosophy was deeply rooted in pure faith, being promoted by the church. Bacon believed that scientific knowledge could not be unearthed by traditional deductive logic, but what was really needed for the comprehension and control of nature was an inductive procedure. This procedure, however, differed from the original 'classic' induction of Aristotle. The classical method of induction consists of making generalisations from particular observations, and then working backward via deduction to arrive at individual proposals. For example, one might come to a conclusion from a certain number of observations that all new cars are shiny in appearance. Due to this piece of inductive inference, one may then be permitted (because the truth would be logically guaranteed in the premises) to deduce from this generalisation to transitional axioms, such as 'all new Nissans are shiny' or 'all new Volkswagens are shiny'. Looking critically at this approach one can see that a problem arises if the original generalisation turns out to be untrue, because then the intermediate axioms may also transpire to be untrue. Bacon therefore revised the method of induction so that one progresses from each individual axiom to the next, thoroughly investigating every single one through experiment and observation to a confirmation, in order that the final, most general axioms are the effective conclusion. Hence if you were to modify the 'new shiny car' inductive procedure so that it represented the Baconian method, the starting point would be to fully examine all new Nissans, Volkswagens etc, thus acquiring as much information as possible and ultimately a greater truth. Now, this method appears to involve a great, prolonged effort, but according to Bacon, this procedure, in time gives a much more sound catalogue of knowledge, as opposed to an unstable formation, that is flawed as soon as an opposing instance crops up. But is Bacon's improved method of induction really the way to go? It is quite obvious to see that the Baconian procedure doesn't necessarily lead to any general conclusions, and especially not to any scientific principles, that may be taken to be universally true. Furthermore, at what point does the explorer decide to stop observing and begin to construct the generalisations? How many observations are necessary - ten, one hundred, or even one thousand? The point to be made here is that unless the investigator goes right back to the beginning of time, to observe every single instance that has occurred, it is simply not acceptable to make any generalisations and take them to be true. <fnote> URL  </fnote>For example, what is the justification for either: Making generalisations about an entire class of objects, based on a limited number of observations of particular instances of that class of objects. Assuming that a sequence of events in the future will occur as they always have done in the past (known as the Law of the Uniformity of Nature - the assumption that the world exhibits enough regularity to warrant inductive reasoning). The Scottish philosopher David Hume pointed out that such uniformity is presupposed by all of our beliefs in matters of fact. A problem (or rather paradox) arises from this so called Uniformity of Nature, and is known simply as the 'problem of induction': <fnote> URL  Hume%20-%20Induction.doc </fnote>Argument 1 [Evidence]  FORMULA  [Presumption]  FORMULA  Problem 1 Argument 1 is invalid. To make it valid, we need an additional premise such as the Law of the Uniformity of Nature, i.e. 'the future will be like the past'. This gives a valid argument: Argument 2 [Evidence]  FORMULA  [Additional Premise]  FORMULA  [Presumption]  FORMULA  Problem 2 But how do I justify Uniformity of Nature? Uniformity of Nature is just a matter of fact, so it cannot be justified by reason; hence it must be justified by experience. But then I must appeal to an argument like Argument 1 or Argument 2 in order to justify it. However, an argument like Argument 1 will be invalid, whereas an argument like Argument 2 will depend on a premise like the Uniformity of Nature, and therefore it will go in a circle. In conclusion: Neither an argument like Argument 1, which is invalid, or Argument 2, which is circular, can provide a rational justification for beliefs about future matters of fact. But arguments like Argument 1 and Argument 2 are the only possible ways reasoning could justify beliefs about future matters of fact. There can be no valid logical arguments allowing us to establish <quote>that those instances, of which we have had no experience, resemble those, of which we have had experience. </quote><fnote>Popper 1989, p.42 </fnote>Also, <quote>An attempt to justify the practice of induction by an appeal to experience must lead to an infinite regress.</quote><fnote>Popper 1989, p.42 </fnote>As a result we can say that theories can never be inferred from observation statements, or rationally justified by them. It is for this reason that Hume regarded the inductive approach as logically invalid, because it relies upon the Law of the Uniformity of Nature, which, in turn, relies upon induction to prove its validity. In other words, you have to use induction to prove induction, which as we well know, is not allowed. The English philosopher John Stuart Mill elaborated on the philosophy of induction by trying to prove the truth of the Uniformity of Nature. However his efforts were in vain, as he came to the same conclusion as Hume - you have to use induction to prove induction. Mill's attempts on the other hand were based around the principle of causation; the relationship between causes and effects. An event or state of affairs, 'A', is a cause of an event, 'B', if 'A' is a reason that brings about the effect 'B'. The problem with causation is that it is not possible to know precisely when a cause begins or ends (if at all), or whether it is solely due to the single cause that the effect is brought about. It is also important to point out that because we do not and will not ever know enough information about causes, we simply cannot relate a cause and effect that has occurred in the past, to a past cause and its corresponding effect in the future. To sum up, 'causes and effects are not real (or at least not knowable), but imagined by our mind to make sense of the observation that 'A' often occurs together with, or slightly before 'B'. All we can observe are correlations, not causations." It is due to this simple fact that the theory of the Uniformity of Nature cannot be proved to be true. <fnote> URL  </fnote><heading>The Advance of Science</heading>The term 'inductive logic' is, in my opinion, quite unsuitable. This is because the validity of inductive reasoning is not dependent on the established rules of formal logic, which is in fact, deductive. Now, I stated earlier, that a deductive conclusion follows necessarily from the premises. To elaborate on that, looking at the example on the first page, about George the raven: <quote>If we believe that all ravens are black and that George is a raven, then we simply must believe that George is black. The conclusion of a logical deduction follows with certainty from the premises. </quote><fnote>Gillies 1993, p.8 </fnote>Here we can see that with logical deduction, there is no inference involved. If we have stated that all ravens are black, then all ravens are black. There simply cannot be an instance where, for example, a white raven is observed. This leads me to say that science cannot possibly advance via deductive reasoning, but likewise, truths cannot be brought to light via inductive reasoning. Let us now clear the way for perhaps the greatest philosopher of science since Hume - the Austrian/English Sir Karl Popper. Popper realised that science advances, not by the way of inductive generalisations, but in fact by deductive falsification, through a process of 'conjectures' (guesses) and 'refutations' (disprovals). <quote>It is imagination and creativity, not induction, that generates real scientific theories, which is how Einstein could study the universe with no more than a piece of chalk.</quote><fnote> URL  </fnote><quote>Experiment and observation test theories, not prove them.</quote><fnote> URL  </fnote>He also believed the solution to the problem of demarcation to be the key to explaining the underlying problems of the philosophy of science. <quote>I have discussed the problem of demarcation in some detail because I believe that its solution is the key to most of the fundamental problems of the philosophy of science. </quote><fnote>Popper 1989, p.42 </fnote>I will not go into too much detail about demarcation as I feel it does not have any effect on my final conclusion. It is concerned with drawing boundaries, or limits between science, and everything else (i.e. non-science). A particular adaptation of the problem involves constructing a boundary between science, and what is known as pseudo-science, where pseudo-science is something its supporters argue is science, but isn't actually science. In other words, it is a theory or methodology that resembles science, but is based on fallacious assumptions. The solution to the demarcation problem requires a criterion that something has to have, in order for it to be counted as scientific, and then showing how pseudo-science fails to meet the criteria.  <fnote> URL  </fnote>According to Popper, the purpose of science is not to show that hypotheses are true, but rather to attempt to show that they are false - to refute them. One begins with a theory, which is tested until an instant occurs which renders the theory false. This theory is then replaced by another theory, which accounts for the phenomena that falsified the prior theory, and so on, to achieve a greater explanatory power. For example, Aristotelian mechanics explained the observations of objects in everyday situations, but was falsified by Galileo's experiments, which, in turn, were replaced by Newtonian mechanics. The phenomena noted by Galileo (and others) were then accounted for in Newtonian mechanics. Although this may seem like the correct path to choose, Popper's falsification principle has its downfalls. For example, Popper himself realised that the test of falsification cannot be applied to everything, furthermore it is not clear how the principle of falsification itself could be subject to a falsifying test; if the principle can then be known to be true, then there must be some means of verification for certain things after all.  <fnote> URL  </fnote>To many it also seems that falsification is far too negative, after all, we are on a quest to find out what is true, not just what is false. Popper believed not only that we cannot know that a theory is ever true, but also that any given theory is unlikely to be true. However, even if two theories are false, one can be considered to be 'better' than the other in that it may be closer to the truth, or in other words, by having a greater verisimilitude. Now a hypothesis that has withstood a considerable amount of testing is said to be well-corroborated, and it is here that Popper made a grave mistake. He believed that it is reasonable to favour a well-corroborated theory over a poorly-corroborated theory, but the inference from good corroboration to high verisimilitude is inductive. Thus, an anti-inductivist, like Popper, has no just cause to prefer a well-corroborated theory over a poorly-corroborated theory. <fnote> URL  </fnote><heading>The Truth</heading>Much of this paper, it may seem, is concerned with exploring how science advances and not necessarily how real truths about the natural world are uncovered. This is basically because I believe it is impossible to know the truth. As Hume pointed out, our experience is limited, and there is in fact no logical or even probabilistic connection between say, the number of times the sun has risen, and whether it will rise tomorrow. The entire problem with induction is concerned with time; we cannot predict with certainty what will happen in time to come - the future is free to generate or allow to happen whatever it chooses. Mankind only lives according to inductively inferred laws because there isn't really anything else that it can live by. Things are the way they are, and that's the way they will stay - as they are. If, for example, everyone were too afraid to get in a car to drive to the shops for fear of gravity disappearing, the world would be in a right mess. <quote>The principle of induction is unreservedly accepted by the whole of science and... no man can seriously doubt the principle in everyday life either. </quote><fnote>Gillies 1993, p.10 </fnote>The only way the real truths could be known would be if we understood how time interacts with everything. Unfortunately, this is something we will never be able to access, and in my opinion, is quite a fitting end to a truly mysterious beginning. 