<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>As technology improves, so too do the capabilities of space and interplanetary travel. One of the main reasons we attempt to travel to outer worlds is fundamentally to see what is out there, to try and gain knowledge and understanding of universal phenomena, and to endeavour to find habitable planets similar to Earth. So far we have been able to explore neighbouring planets without much difficulty but due to such massive distances, outer planets such as Uranus, Neptune and Pluto have not yet had a detailed dedicated study. This is about to change. </abstract><heading>Mission Rationale</heading>Its all very well wanting to travel to a relatively unknown destination but the fact of the matter is that it is going to cost an awful lot of money. When looking at the total expenditure of an interplanetary mission, the following are some of the factors that must be taken into consideration: the launch (not even looking at the cost of probe construction) costs around 100 million US dollars - talking in terms of American currency as that is most probably where the probe will be constructed and launched; there is the monthly salary of each crew member; the assembly of the launch base, then there is the construction of the probe itself, including all power sources, systems and fuel. An example of a total mission cost is that of NASA's Voyager 2. From its official approval in 1972 right up to its encounter with Neptune in 1989, the sum calculated to 865 million dollars [ref.1]. Furthermore, as the Voyager mission continues it's journey, so too does the increase in mission expenses. So why do we want to go there? The main reason for interplanetary exploration is to find out if there are other inhabitable globes, like the Earth, existent in the solar neighbourhood. This will inevitably lead to the answering of the forever-asked question "is there life on other planets?". Other reasons are to explore the formation and evolution of the Solar System, and also to chart our destiny in the Solar System. Now this is all well and good, but previous studies have determined that the planet Uranus is a gas giant. With its gaseous composition and large distance from the Sun (19.2AU), there is absolutely no way human life could be sustained on Uranus. The reason for travel to this far away location is based around the various properties that the planet possesses, and the fact that Uranus, as of yet, has not had a dedicated study. The Voyager 2 flyby produced some very interesting results, with an abundance of previously unknown information. However because that mission was only really designed to visit Jupiter and Saturn, not a great deal of thought was given to the eventual encounters of the outer planets Uranus and Neptune, and therefore the spacecraft had to gather as much information as possible before it flew past on its way to the edge of the Solar System. A probe put into orbit around the huge planet would allow an intensive study, which would produce many more beneficial results. What would be the main areas of study? Uranus is distinguished by its bizarre axis inclination of almost 98 - it has effectively been tipped on it's side, and this phenomena leads to dramatic seasons lasting about 21 years [ref.2]. It is thought that this is the result of a collision with another celestial body, taking place during the early stages of the Solar System formation. A detailed study of the planet could reveal evidence either reinforcing or invalidating this idea. Uranus possesses a magnetic field roughly comparable in intensity to that of the Earth, however due to the orientation of its rotational axis, the magnetic field varies considerably from pole to pole. In actual fact, the magnetic field is offset by 60 to the axis of rotation, and a remarkable consequence of the rotation is that the field's geomagnetic tail, the magnetotail, is twisted into an effective corkscrew shape behind the planet [ref.3]. <figure/>As we know, Saturn is circled by very wide, very bright rings. Uranus too boasts rings but conversely, they are extremely narrow and dark. A reason for this may come from the intense radiation belts that Uranus owns. The radiation is such that any methane trapped in the icy ring surfaces would very quickly darken (over a period of about 100,000 years), as a result of irradiation [ref.3]. This might also be the case for the planet's natural satellites. On the subject of moons, Uranus has fifteen of them. Before the Voyager mission, the number of known moons owned by the planet stood at five, but that rapidly increased to fifteen thanks to the flyby's successful observations. It is very possible that there are even more moons orbiting the giant, as the largest of the current fifteen is only 150km in diameter. Some of the larger moons show some evidence of geologic activity, which led to valleys, canyons and flows of icy material. Other regions of investigation would be the planet's internal structure, as would its atmosphere, comprising of mostly hydrogen (84%), 14% helium and 2% methane. It is the absorption of red light by the methane which give Uranus its powerful blue-green colour we see today. <heading>Onboard the Probe</heading>There are five main areas that must be considered when thinking about what to put onboard the spacecraft: spacecraft systems; propulsion; communications; space instrumentation; power. The idea is that the maximum number of systems is sent into space, for maximum data recording, with as small as possible total mass when it comes to launch. As standard, the orbiter will contain appropriate back up systems which will include fault protection or automatic reboot processes if a failure or loss of contact with Earth arises. There will be various systems aboard the probe used for obtaining the planetary data, namely interferometers, spectrometers, a photopolarimeter, a magnetometer, and several subsystems for particle examination. An interferometer, spectrometer and radiometer system will be used to determine the presence of various elements and compounds in the planet's atmosphere and rings by studying their atomic absorption spectrums. These systems will work in the regions of ultraviolet through to infrared, and as the system is also a very advanced thermometer, it will detect heat distribution to help model the planet's atmospheric dynamics [ref.5]. A light-sensing photopolarimeter together with a magnetometer will study atmospheric properties, surface texture and composition, ring properties such as density and particle size, along with the strength and direction of Uranus' eccentric magnetic field. A plasma subsystem will be used to measure interactions of the solar wind with the planetary magnetic field and interplanetary plasma resonance. Dust and charged particle detectors will collect information about the environment, and composition and distribution of interplanetary medium. There will also be a radio detection subsystem consisting of maybe two 10m antennae to sense planet-generated radio signals. These systems will be accompanied by a wide and narrow camera imaging system to produce direct images of Uranus in the ultraviolet and visible parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. There will be a data recording system in the form of perhaps a 100MB tape (rather than modern solid state memories due to its reliability), so that later playback can be carried out. The recorded information will then be transmitted back to Earth via a communications system, through which messages from Earth to the probe will also be transmitted. This system must take into account various important factors, for example, due to the orbiter's limited power and large distance away from Earth, transmission and sensing must be accurate, with various multiplexing. A spacecraft might require between 300W and 2.5KW over many years to power all of its onboard systems, needless to say, it will have a very low transmission power (about 20W) [ref.6], and therefore, the high transmission power will come from the Earth. A solution to the low power transmission is to have large receiving stations on Earth, and directional microwaves to focus the signals at a very precise point. The probe will have a high-gain and low-gain antennae, maybe 5m in diameter to send and receive data, which in addition, will have very highly sensitive amplifiers, narrow band-pass and phase locking to reject noise. The high-gain antennae will provide primary communications as high signal direction and high data rates are achievable. At the expanse of gain is the high angle coverage low-gain antennae, which will be used for initial contact and in the event of any problems. Revisiting the idea of saving power, the spacecraft's transponder will operate on the 'Ka' band. Many probes use 'S' and 'X' band transponders (transferring signals in the range of 2 and 5GHz), but the Ka band transponder functions on frequencies of around 20GHz, thus requiring less power due to higher directional capability. Another very useful advantage is that signals sent at this frequency are less susceptible to poor ground station conditions. The spacecraft will be powered by photovoltaic cells (solar panels) out to the orbit of Mars and then by Radioisotope Thermal Generators (RTGs) for the remainder if its voyage to Uranus. The reason for this is that the Sun's intensity falls off as inverse distance squared, hence the amount of sunlight caught at Uranus is about one four-hundredth of that received on Earth, and therefore the amount of power achievable, if any, would be incredibly small. This is where RTGs come into play. RTGs use the fact that radioactive materials (such as plutonium) generate heat as they decay into non-radioactive materials [ref.7]. The heat is then converted into electricity via thermocouples in the thermoelectric effect, which is in turn used to power the probe. The radioactive source would be plutonium-238 in the form of PuO 2, plutonium dioxide - an inert and insoluble ceramic substance - rather than neat plutonium with a solid design so as to increase safety in the possible event of an explosion. Three RTGs would provide power to the orbiter, each containing roughly 11kg of PuO 2 fuel, and generating about 300W from 400W of heat, hence an efficiency of around 75%. <figure/><figure/>Another very important feature that the probe will possess is an autonomous navigation system which will provide pointing control of the spacecraft during all mission phases, and attitude knowledge relative to fixed reference frames, also with backup control and safe mode [ref.9]. <heading>Propulsion and Trajectory </heading>This brings me on to the planning of the route the probe will take in order to get to Uranus. In calculating the route that the spacecraft will take, a number of things must be taken into consideration. In general, we want to get to the destination in the quickest time possible, with the least amount of energy, ie propulsion fuel, used. The Hohmann Transfer Orbit (named after the German engineer Walter Hohmann) is based around Kepler's Laws and is the path which has the lowest energy requirement (with regards to propulsion) to reach the orbit of the target planet from the orbit of our planet. It describes the path in which the spacecraft would leave the Earth at a tangential angle to its orbit, and would arrive at an angle tangential to the orbit of the destination planet. This orbit would have its perihelion, the closest point in an orbit to the Sun, at the launch point (Earth) and its aphelion, the furthest point in an orbit from the Sun, at the orbit of the target planet [ref.10]. This type of trajectory is obtainable for any travel between two planets providing the required change in velocity - the spacecraft needs to speed up to get into the transfer orbit of a more distant planet - is achievable. Unfortunately, with the low thrust engines we have today, a change in velocity needed to enter a Uranian transfer is not attainable. So how did Voyager manage to do it? The Voyager mission very successfully used a natural planetary alignment to gain additional 'kicks' of propulsion, which enabled the space probe to reach the outer planets Uranus and Neptune. The extra velocity acquirements were obtained by a gravitationally assisted technique, in which the gravity produced by the gas giants speeds up the spacecraft as it flies by. The problem with this is that the natural alignment of the planets occurs only once every 175 years, but it still took Voyager 2 nine years to get to Uranus. I could possibly use ion engines to provide a continuous thrust over a long period of time but I am rather impatient and far too audacious to do it that way. <figure/>Enter the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR). This engine uses magnetic fields to guide superhot plasma out an engine nozzle producing an immense amount of thrust [ref.12]. Although only at a prototype stage, I have full confidence in NASA to have completed the design and testing ready for probe launch in around 2010. The engine works on three basic cells: the forward, the central and the aft cells. Hydrogen gas is injected into the forward cell and ionised to create a plasma, which is then passed into the central cell to be further heated with electromagnetic energy (radio waves), to hundreds of millions of degrees Celsius. The plasma then enters the aft cell where a magnetic nozzle converts the energy of the plasma into velocity of the jet exhaust [ref.13]. An incredibly strong magnetic field is also used to contain the plasma. <figure/>In rocket science, the fuel efficiency of a rocket engine is measured by its specific impulse, which refers to the units of thrust per the units of propellant consumed over time. The great thing about this fusion reaction engine is that it can generate a specific impulse of about 300 times greater than conventional chemical engines [ref.13]. This then means that the journey path is direct from Earth to Uranus and the voyage time is greatly reduced, thus lowering harmful exposure to radiation. It took Voyager 9 years to reach Uranus. With the proposed fusion-powered engines, that this would be dramatically reduced to something around 3 or 4 years. Also, with the large delta-v capabilities of the engines, the launch would not be so drastically affected by launch windows. Once the Uranus orbiter has reached its planet, it would go into orbit for many years, continuing to send back data until its power supply runs out. <heading>Manned Missions to the Outer Solar System? </heading>Expeditions to far away planets are essential if we are to broaden our knowledge of Solar System and hence planetary formation and evolution. Man has already exceeded itself by sending spacecraft into space to explore and capture images of the beautiful celestial bodies, however, we will always endeavour to push science to even further limits. Thanks to the introduction of powerful fusion engines, proposals of sending man to distant space have been initiated, so maybe one day we will experience first hand views of the magnificent worlds the Solar System boasts. It is ambitious, but nevertheless I believe it's possible. 