<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>If one was to ask a person chosen at random the following question: "what does the Solar System look like, and how does it act?", I am sure the answer they would give is: "it has nine planets, all moving around the Sun in separate orbits, each orbit increasing in radius from the Sun", or words to that effect. It can be suggested (although I have no proof) that every person in the world views the Solar System as a Sun-centred system, otherwise known as a 'heliocentric' system. However, many hundreds of years ago, a Solar System which put the Earth at its heart (geocentric) was the preferred model. This paper looks at the history and the relative science between the two models of the system in which we live. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The structure of this paper will be such that each model will be explored individually, including the history (ie the origin) of the system, then a critical comparison of the two systems will be made. Included in the comparison will be pros and cons, for example why the model works, how it is better than the other (if it actually is), what problems were encountered when formulating the models, and how the problems were overcome. I will start by looking at the geocentric Solar System, as it was the first model to be proposed. <heading>The Geocentric Solar System (the Ptolemaic System)</heading>Although the first ideas of an ordered universal system came from the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle, who lived around 384-322 B.C., the first thoroughly developed geocentric model of the Solar System came in about 200 A.D., from Claudius Ptolemy, an Alexandrian Greek. The fundamental idea that the Earth is placed in the centre of the universal system (or the 'cosmos' as it was known in ancient times) came from Aristotle's philosophical views, put forward in his books (titled On the Heavens and Physics). These views forced the cosmos to be regulated by the concept of place, as opposed to space. In this manner, the cosmos was divided into two specific regions, the earthly region (also known as the sublunary region ie 'below the moon') and the heavens. The earthly region was a region whereby things lived in a living and dying world, ie things were born, grew and matured while living, then died after a period of time [ref.1]. This division consisted of substances made up of the four primary elements: earth, water, air and fire, of which, earth and water had a natural tendency to fall towards the centre. Moreover, because air and fire did not seem to 'gravitate', and fire rose through the air, the complete model of the Earth looked like this: a sphere of earth, surrounded by a sphere of water, a sphere of air and finally a sphere of fire. It was thought that the sphere of fire was the cause of the charred markings on the Moon [ref.2]. In contrast to the sublunary region existed the heavens. This 'place' did not consist of the previous four elements but in fact a fifth element, the quintessence. This substance was not in any way changeable (ie its properties could not be altered to produce a different element). The heavenly bodies were defined as being parts of spherical shells which were fixed tightly around each other, and each shell had a specific rotation which determined the motion - a perfectly circular motion - of the heavenly body it encapsulated. The heavenly bodies were as follows: Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and a sphere of fixed stars around the outside (after the fixed stars came the 'prime mover' which accounted for all the motions contained in the cosmos). It is to be known that the ancient cosmos was finite in extent, beyond the prime mover existed nothing, not even empty space [ref.1]. <figure/>Aristotle's views, however, were challenged by astronomy, the most notable being the fact that the heavenly bodies did not move with perfect circular motions. On the contrary, the motions of the bodies appeared to vary quite substantially. With regards to the planets, their motions seemed rather peculiar, as a motion where speeding up, slowing down and even reversing was displayed. This is known as retrograde motion, and is explained below. <figure/>Another major problem with Aristotle's system was that observations showed that the heavenly bodies (Venus, Mars and Jupiter in particular) demonstrated a variation of brightness. This suggested that the distance between the Earth and the planet varied, and that the planetary sphere was not circular. Even though Aristotle attempted to overcome this difficulty, his models and calculations always put the Earth at the very centre of the spheres, which meant that the distance between a heavenly body and the Earth never varied. Since the heavens were deemed perfect, circular and immutable, Aristotle's system could not give an explanation for the varying brightness [ref.1]. Enter Claudius Ptolemy, a second century A.D. Alexandrian Greek. He put together all the efforts of the people that formed the geocentric model, added his own mathematical creations and constructed a system that successfully explained the observed motions of the surrounding bodies ie the planets. Ptolemy incorporated small circles called epicycles into his geocentric model that were centred on the large circular orbits [ref.5]. It was the inclusion of epicycles that made possible the explanation of the observed planetary retrograde motion. Instead of planets slowing down and reversing their motion, the planets were travelling in an apparently opposite direction on the epicycle. <figure/><heading>The Heliocentric Solar System (the Copernican Model)</heading>Once again, the idea that the Sun was at the centre of the Solar System originated from a Greek philosopher, Aristarchus of Samos (around 300 B.C.) but it really did not have enough support to survive under Aristotle's influence. In fact, it wasn't until about 1800 years later that the heliocentric model was revived, by a man called Nicholas Copernicus, a Polish astronomer (1473-1543). Copernicus disliked the geocentric system because he found it too complex and for philosophical reasons felt that the relatively tiny Earth should be in motion about the gigantic, radiating Sun. The Ptolemaic model had versions which contained maybe three or four levels of epicycles [ref.2], and by placing the Sun at the centre, Copernicus realised that some levels of the epicycles could be eliminated. I say some of the epicycles were removed but not all of them, as Copernicus still retained circular motion in his model and therefore had to construct his system from circles upon and within circles [ref.7]. The beauty of the Copernican model is that it too accounts for the observed retrograde motion, but in a clearer, more charming way. The explanation for retrograde motion is simple, such that planets with smaller orbits have a faster motion, and the apparent backwards motion is simply what is observed when a planet with a smaller orbit overtakes' a planet with a larger orbit. It must be noted however, that although a cleaner conception of the model of the Solar System, the Copernican model did not explain all of the elements of planetary motion without epicycles, it simply replaced some of the epicycles with the orbital motion of the Earth [ref.8]. It does not predict the positions of the planets with any higher degree of accuracy than the Ptolemaic model therefore it is really no 'better' than the Ptolemaic model, but due to the Occam's Razor principle, the simplest answer is usually deemed the correct answer. <figure/><heading>Tycho, Kepler and Galileo </heading>Tycho Brahe (Danish astronomer, 1546-1601) was one of the most adept astronomers the world has ever seen. He proposed a model which maintained Copernicus' best ideas and results, but did not include a moving Earth. This was because Tycho did not accept Copernicus' heliocentric and rotating Earth view, but acknowledged that it was mathematically simpler than the Ptolemaic model. Tycho suggested that all the planets except Earth orbit the Sun, while the Sun orbits the Earth, so in a sense the Sun orbits the Earth while dragging the rest of the planets with it. Nothing really became of this model, but nevertheless Tycho was recognised for the quality of his observations, not the quality of his model [ref.10]. Tycho's top pupil Johannes Kepler (1571-1630, later recognised as the German astronomer and mathematician) was the first person to really study the movements and positions of the planets in fine detail. Instead of making his own observations, he used those of Tycho, and because of the exceptional accuracy of Tycho's data, Kepler was able to derive what later became known as Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion. The most profound of Kepler's three laws was his first, that the planets travel in elliptical paths, with the Sun at one focus of the ellipse, and his third, that the square of the planet's orbit is equal to the cube of its mean distance from the Sun [ref.10]. This opened new eyes as far as the Copernican model was concerned. To further reinforce the concept of a heliocentric Solar System, an Italian astronomer and philosopher, namely Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) observed phases on the planet Venus, much like those exhibited by our Moon. Furthermore, he discovered that Venus seemed to increase and decrease in size as its distance from the Earth changes accordingly [ref.11]. To really hit the nail on the head, by looking through his telescope (the first telescope the world had ever seen) Galileo discovered that there were moons orbiting Jupiter. The earlier idea that everything had to orbit the Earth was then quickly thrown out of the window. <heading>The Modern View of the Solar System</heading>Several centuries ago there was a hot dispute over whether the Solar System is geocentric or heliocentric. As technology and understanding improves, so too does the evidence for the heliocentric model, however in discussing the relative scientific merits of both models, we are referring to advantages and disadvantages in terms of empirical evidence. The evidence for a heliocentric model can come from Galileo's observations alone, however, there is much more evidence in its favour. As well as Kepler's contributions, Isaac Newton (1643-1727) formulated his laws of motion and gravitation. These laws implied that an object with a smaller mass (ie the Earth) cannot be the centre of orbit for an object with a larger mass (ie the Sun), as the two objects orbit a common centre of gravity, which lies to the centre of the object with the greater mass [ref.11]. Hence, geocentricism is not consistent. In the opinion of many, stellar parallax is the strongest evidence for a heliocentric model. The parallax effect is the effect seen as the Earth orbit's the Sun. Stars appear to change position with respect to the more distant background stars, because they are seen from a different perspective. It was because of the parallax effect that Tycho went against the heliocentric view, in actual fact, he argued that there was no parallax effect. He was correct in a sense that his data contained no evidence for a parallactic effect but it was only because of the relatively poor instrumentation and the immense distances to the stars that it could not be observed [ref.11]. It was however still there. <figure/>This leads me to the relative advantages and disadvantages of the two models. Although at the time, the Ptolemaic and the Copernican system were equally as good at predicting planetary positions, they both had their flaws. It wasn't until the Keplerian model was introduced that the contrast in success between the geocentric and heliocentric models was made clear. The Keplerian heliocentric model accounted for the seasons that we experience on Earth. The elliptical orbits with the Sun at one focus of the ellipse means that the planet will be at different distances from the Sun, therefore the temperature on Earth will increase and decrease for periods of time. The heliocentric model predicts the relative motion of the Earth ie with respect to its rotational and orbital motion. The rotational motion easily explains the Earth's diurnal motion [ref.13], and the orbital motion gives an explanation for the apparent retrograde motion of the other planets. Is I previously stated, the Sun-centred model explains the observed parallax effect, which was something the geocentric model couldn't possibly do with there being no Earthly motion. Referring back to the retrograde motion of other planets, the geocentric model can account for this, but only by incorporating complex epicycles which we know can't exist. In the epicycles, the planets aren't actually orbiting anything, and we know this can't happen as there needs to be a mass to provide the gravitational pull to keep the planet in orbit. Once again, the heliocentric model explains the parallax effect, something which the geocentric model could not do with there being a stationary Earth. <heading>The Final Word: Heliocentricity</heading>Technology has come a long way since Galileo first pointed his telescope towards the sky, and instrumentation and finance has allowed space travel to discover what the Solar System is really like. But even without the powerful telescopes we have today, ground-based observations have been made that strongly favour the heliocentric model over the geocentric model, so much so that we even find the Earth-centred Solar System quite absurd. In the end, the only thing that kept the geocentric model alive for so long was the fact that these ideas had become deep-rooted in the medieval catholic church. This was the dominant intellectual and political force in Europe at the time [ref.5] and anyone who opposed the force was likely to be sentenced to death. 