<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>Our knowledge of the universe today has progressed exceptionally over the past few hundred years, even more so in the past few decades. We live in an extremely complex universe that has existed for billions of years. We cannot change the fact that the universe exists, but one can't help but wonder why it actually exists. We have been living in a world described by what is known as the Standard Model of particle physics, however this model excludes gravity - a fundamental force we experience in everyday life - from its description. So how do we account for gravity, as well as everything else? String theory is the latest in a series of attempts to answer this question. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The Standard Model of particle physics describes the fundamental building blocks of which the world is made, along with the forces with which these particles interact [ref.1.]. There was a time when atoms were thought to be the most basic components of matter. Yes, matter is composed of atoms but over the years, it has been found that atoms themselves are made up of electrons, protons and neutrons. Although electrons are elementary, protons and neutrons are composed of even smaller particles known as quarks. There are six types of quark (known as up, down, charm, strange, bottom and top), and six types of lepton (electron, muon, tauon, electron neutrino, muon neutrino and tau neutrino), that make up the basic building blocks, known as fermions. Fermions are the particles that make up matter, as only one fermion can occupy a certain space at a given time [ref.2.]. As well as matter, there are also four fundamental forces that exist in the universe. These forces are gravity, electromagnetism, strong nuclear and weak nuclear. Like matter, forces consist of particles but in contrast, these particles can share the same space as other particles [ref.2.]. These particles are known as bosons, and they, together with fermions, are the most basic particles forming the universe. Bosons are particles which effectively carry the force produced by the four forces. Each force has its own force-carrying particle associated with it: Gravity has the graviton, electromagnetic has the photon, strong nuclear has the gluon, and weak nuclear has the W+, W- and Z bosons. As stated in the abstract, we have been living in a world governed primarily by the Standard Model, and this model has proved very precise. However, it has been said that the model is somewhat incomplete, as it does not incorporate gravity, probably the most well known force. This is because the exchange of gravitons has been and still is very difficult to describe microscopically, and it is therefore assumed. We have a classical theory corresponding to gravitational interactions, it is Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, but formulating a quantum theory of gravity has been a major problem in theoretical physics [ref.1.]. This prompted physicists throughout the world to come up with another idea, a complete theory that, in principle, underlies and unifies all physical phenomena. <heading>Enter String Theory </heading>String Theory is a theory that does include gravity, and like the Standard Model, it is based around a model of elementary particles. The idea is simple. Instead of the universe consisting of tiny, point-like particles, it consists of strings. A point-like particle has only the ability to move in different directions. But if we consider a particle as a piece of string, we can predict that it has the ability to do what normal particles can't: oscillate [ref.1.]. How this relates to the explanation of particles I will explain later. Particles in string theories have a length but no other dimension [ref.3.], like an infinitely thin piece of string for example. The string could have two ends so is simply a line or it could be joined to make a loop, as shown in Figure 1. <figure/>Going back to the prediction of oscillations in the string tells us how the string can be represented as a particle. A string can have an infinite number of oscillation modes, which can be described as excitation modes. Like on a guitar, a different musical note is produced depending on its oscillation frequency. Therefore a certain oscillation pattern would correspond to a certain elementary particle (ie an electron), and then when the mode changes, the behaviour of the string would correspond to a different elementary particle of a different mass (ie a photon or a quark etc.). Therefore, the particles are now pictured as waves travelling down the string. A string in this case is described as occupying a line in space at each moment in time [ref.3]. This is represented by what is known as the world-sheet (ie the string's history in space-time is recorded as the string sweeps out a surface [ref.5.]). Any point on the world-sheet is described by a number indicating the time, and a number indicating the point on the string. Another characteristic of strings is their ability to split, as shown in Figure 2. A string can divide into two separate strings, relating to the scattering or emission of one particle by another. Similarly, there strings can join again, representing the absorption of one particle by another. <figure/><heading>But is the simple String Theory the answer? </heading>Although String Theory seemed to be the way of correlating a quantum theory of gravity with the three other forces, it still encountered problems. The theory needed a particle with a mass of zero, and spin of two units. The only particle fitting this description is the graviton, which does not experience the strong nuclear force. Also, close examination showed String Theory was only consistent in twenty six dimensions, and that in its list of excitations, a tachyon existed, whose mass was imaginary and travelled at a speed greater than that of light [ref.6.]. Due to the Uncertainty Principle in quantum mechanics, the minimum energy of a localised system tends to be non-vanishing, and the presence of this non-vanishing energy in a quantum system can determine the presence of a tachyon [ref.4.]. In String Theory, the tachyon appears as an excitation with a negative energy. Following on from this, it seemed like a string without a tachyon could be created if a quantum system was discovered where the 'zero-point energy' vanished. This is where the theory of supersymmetry comes into play. Supersymmetry implies that fermions and bosons come in pairs with equal masses, but it also includes quantum systems where zero-point energies occur [ref.4.]. In 1980, John Schwarz and Michael Green combined supersymmetry with String Theory, to form a new type of theory - the Superstring Theory. Not only does the Superstring Theory dispose of the tachyon, but it maintains and even betters the previous String Theory. Superstring Theory operates on all the basic ideas of String Theory (ie excitation modes of the string determining the elementary particle, but with extra degrees of freedom [ref.4.]), and thanks to supersymmetry, it reduces the amount of required dimensions for the theory to be consistent in, to ten dimensions (as opposed to the previous twenty six). However the most important feature of this theory is that it maintains the presence of the graviton particle. <heading>Is Superstring Theory the unification of physics? </heading>As of yet, is has not been possible to perform an experiment that will verify the Superstring Theory. Due to the small distances and such great energies involved in proving Superstring Theory, it seems unlikely that there ever will be such an experiment capable of probing into strings. The theory of superstrings is consistent in ten dimensions, whereas we live in a world as we know it, consisting of four dimensions (three space and one time). So what accounts for the remaining six dimensions? Maybe there is no complete unified model, and we are chasing after something that doesn't exist. The theory of strings is just one step further towards a complete unified model of physics, but until we find it, we will just have to be content with individual theories, describing different parts of the universe. 