<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>If you were to ask a person what an atom looks like, be it a teenager studying physics or chemistry, or an adult that has an averagely sound knowledge of basic science, I am certain the vast majority will give this answer: an atom looks like a round thing with a nucleus in the middle and electrons whizzing round the outside in certain orbits. This picture of the atom is known as the Bohr model, and is widely taught in schools and colleges. There is however a problem with the model: it is not completely correct. The Bohr model of the atom has been very successful but why, considering it is only approximately correct? </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The Bohr model is generally the first model of the atom taught to students. Although the model has its problems (discussed later), it is the first atomic picture that students will come across and thus it will be the model that sticks out. It is used to introduce students to the idea of quantisation of energy in atoms, or in other words, the concept of energy levels. It is an easy model to understand (ie it is an easy picture to visualise), and can therefore be used to explain various atomic processes and some useful concepts in electricity [ref.1]. It is because of this that I believe the Bohr model of the atom has been successful despite its flaws. <heading>The Bohr Model</heading>The theory of the Bohr model was developed in the early twentieth century, around 1915. The first experiments used to acquire this atomic picture were those conducted in 1910 by Lord Ernest Rutherford, an English scientist. In his experiments, relatively large charged alpha particles were shot against a thin sheet of gold foil. What Rutherford found was that the majority of the alpha particles passed through the foil, while some were deflected. These results allowed Rutherford to conclude that each atom consisted of mostly empty space, but had a positively charged dense central region, a mass, which would not let the alpha particles pass through [ref.2]. The Danish physicist Niels Bohr then began to work with Rutherford, in Rutherford's laboratory in Manchester. There he learned about the successes and problems with Rutherford's model of the atom, and provided the fundamental ideas for what later became known as the Bohr Theory of Atomic Constitution [ref.3]. So let's take a look at the model (known as the Bohr model but should really be the Rutherford-Bohr model) in a bit more detail. It is seen as a type of planetary model, as the electrons orbit the central nucleus much like the planets in the Solar System orbit the Sun. However, the electrons are not restricted to a plane as approximately true for the planets [ref.4]. The nucleus consists of a combination of equal numbers of protons and neutrons (but not for hydrogen, an atom that consists only of one proton and one electron). The Bohr model and the planetary model are similar in a sense that electrons orbit the nucleus, but Bohr pictured the orbits as circles, positioned at increasing distances from the nucleus. The following diagrams clearly show the difference between the two similar models. Figure 1 Figure 2 <figure/><figure/>The force keeping the planets in orbit is that produced by the Sun's gravity. Much like the Solar System, the negatively charged electrons are kept in orbit by the coulomb attraction with the positively charged nucleus. The difference is that the strength of the force between the nucleus and the electrons is much greater than the gravitational force, and the coulomb interaction can be either positive or negative whereas gravity always takes a positive value. <heading>Quantisation of Energy</heading>As one can see in Figure 1, the electron orbits are definite orbits. Each orbit represents an energy level, where the energy of the particles in the Bohr atom is restricted to discrete values. This means the energy is quantised, and electrons cannot exist in between the orbits [ref.4]. The closer to the nucleus the orbit is (ie the smaller the radius), the lower the amount of energy it has, and the lowest energy state is known as the ground state. This is the most stable state. Each successive energy state or orbit after the ground state is termed the first excited state, then the second excited state etc. because if energy is added, an electron can be excited to jump to a higher energy level, or orbit, further away from the nucleus [ref.4]. At some stage, however, the electron jumps back to the lower energy level and emits energy in the form of perhaps X-rays, visible light or another form of electromagnetic energy. The magnitude of the energy given off is equal to the difference in energy of the two orbits between which the electron is jumping [ref.6]. As the electrons are accelerating around the nucleus due to coulomb interaction, they should emit electromagnetic radiation due to established laws of electromagnetism. Therefore in emitting light, the electron continuously loses energy and should spiral into the nucleus, hence, electrons shouldn't really exist. This model influences physicists to believe that Maxwell's laws of electromagnetism do not exist on an atomic scale [ref.3]. What the Bohr model does do, however, is explains the emission spectra produced by the hydrogen atom, which allowed physicists to accept Bohr's model. When the atoms are excited due to collisions with other atoms, they give electromagnetic radiation (photons) with different frequencies depending on the orbits that the electron has jumped between. <heading>Problems with the Bohr Model</heading>Although the Bohr model was very successful in explaining atomic structure, it does have a couple of serious flaws. As I stated earlier, the model does not obey Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, as the electrons in the allowed orbits do not emit radiation even though they accelerate in the system, something Bohr could not explain. The second problem is that the spectral lines do not show harmonics (ie lines where the frequency is double, triple etc. the fundamental frequency) [ref.7]. Furthermore, the model could not predict the line spectrum of any atom containing more than one electron, for example helium, which has two electrons. This meant that Bohr had to evolve his model around the following assumptions [ref.6]: Electrons can move only in certain quantised energy orbits. Only certain electron orbits are stable, where they do not give off electromagnetic radiation. The laws of classical mechanics do not apply to the electrons when making the jump between different orbits. Electromagnetic radiation of a certain frequency is emitted by the atom when an electron jumps from a higher to a lower energy level. The frequency of the emitted photon is determined by the difference between the energy levels (ie E i - E f = hf where E i and E f are the initial and final energies, f is the frequency of the photon and h is Planck's constant of proportionality). The size of the allowed orbits is determined by a condition imposed on the electron's orbital angular momentum. It is given by the equation L = nh / 2 where L is the orbital angular momentum, and n is the quantum number ie 1,2,3 etc. For example, the ground state, the most stable state has the quantum number n = 1, the first excited state has quantum number n = 2 and so on. The problem with the assumptions is that they are only assumptions and Bohr had no physical proof to base them on. <heading>Both a Success and a Failure</heading>Bohr had come up with a model that incorporated the classical ideas of famous scientists such as Einstein, Planck and Rutherford, and ideas from quantum mechanics, that successfully predicted the emission spectra for atoms containing one electron [ref1]. The model is incomplete in that it cannot predict emission spectra and energy levels for atoms with more than one electron, and it cannot be used to explain molecular bonding. The fact that the Bohr model had flaws encouraged physicists to devise a model that would correct these flaws. Erwin Schrdinger, an Austrian physicist, replaced Bohr's orbital model with a very accurate probability cloud model using quantum mechanics. His model solved problems that Bohr's couldn't, and also gave scientists a better understanding of the electron and how it behaves in chemical reactions [ref.2]. However, the Schrdinger model is so much more mathematically complex, and correct results can often be obtained with much less hassle by using the Bohr model. Because the model is solid and such good aid to understanding, I feel the flaws can be ignored until a much more advanced level of physics has been reached. 