<heading>Introduction</heading>The World Resources Institute report, Weight of Nations (2000), forecasts that over the next 50 years the world's population may increase by 50%, global economic activity may increase by 500% and global energy consumption and manufacturing activity may rise to three times the current levels. Sustainable development is therefore becoming more vital to the current and future generations. The object of this task is to research an existing product and to redesign it with the aim of achieving a reduced environmental impact. <heading>The Product</heading>The product to be redesigned is a bookcase. It was decided that although the life cycle of wooden furniture is not as detrimental to the environment as many other products/materials (in terms of eco-indicator score), there is still a potential to optimise the design of such products in terms of material use and efficiency. <heading>Social Purposes</heading>The most obvious social purpose for a bookcase is its use as a means of book storage. But if it were just for storing books then there exist many alternative means to store books. Perhaps the reason why the bookcase is a popular means for storing books is that it also allows the display of books. A bookcase therefore has two major social functions: 1) Storing books and 2) Displaying books. <heading>Functional Units</heading>For the given social purposes, it is quite difficult to provide a functional unit of assessment for the display of books because of the subjectivity of this aspect of the product. People come with different tastes and hold different opinions when it comes to aesthetics. As for book storage, assuming the redesign to be of a product rather than a service, then it seems that an appropriate unit of assessment would be the amount of book storage per shelf per year. <heading>System Boundaries</heading>The time boundary for the product redesign will be from a baseline product of 1990. In space, the assessment will consider only the area of Europe. For the production and supply boundaries, the Inspection of the bookcase shows that the main components are made from one material: timber (oak), which has been cut into shape. Other components are the stainless steel screws and the PVA glue for bonding the components together. With the exception of the screws, (which although are relatively small), these components are small compared with the main components and will not be included in the assessment. Similarly, the finishing, machining, bending, assembly, and packaging operations are much less energy intensive than the main production processes and will not be included in the assessment (except for the cardboard package material).Transport of the chair includes trucking from the factory to the port, sea freight and trucking from the docks to the warehouse/store. In use, allowance is made for delivery by van to the home but amounts of water, electricity, and cleaner consumed in cleaning and maintenance are considered to be negligible. <heading>Datschefski Analysis</heading>In calculating the relative environmental impact of the different materials of the product, a typical bookcase of mass 50kg is assumed. The stainless steel screws for this purpose typically weigh 10 grams each. It is assumed that the bookcase contains 6 shelves each requiring 4 screws (2 screws for each side), therefore requiring a total of 6 x 4 = 24 screws. Thus, the total mass of screws is 0.24kg: <table/>It can be seen that the material with most environmental impact is the wood used to make the bookcase and therein lies the redesign priority. In redesigning, there are a number of alternative design solutions to consider: <list>Different materials eco-friendlierDifferent physical design more efficient use of materials / using less materialsAlternative means of achieving social purposes redesign of service</list>Regarding the latter option, it seems quite difficult to redesign the service of storing books without deviating from the social purposes. As stated above, the social purposes are storing as well as displaying books and both would have to be considered as design constraints making this no easy task. As for different materials, reinforced plastic is compared with the original material in the table below. It can be see that the suggested material is approximately 5x more detrimental to the environment than the original material. The solution seems therefore to lie not in using an alternative material but in the eco-optimisation of the original product to use less material. <table/>In redesigning the physical product, our aim could be to reduce the material usage in the final product by about 40%. The most effective way to do this without impacting the original structure and therefore the social purposes and functional units seems to be the removal of material from the surface area of the shelves. By redesigning the shelves, the aesthetic changes will be very minimal since the main surface area of the shelf is not as easily visible as the rest of the structure of the bookcase, especially when the shelves are loaded with books. An approximate redesign is shown below: <figure/>Whilst reducing the amount of wood needed to manufacture the shelves accounts for most of the material optimisation, other components of the product can also undergo this process. The vertical and horizontal components of the bookcase can be reduced in material by producing hollow sections on the inner sides, as illustrated below. <figure/>If our objective was to reduce material usage in shelves by 50% and other components by 35%, we would have therefore achieved an overall reduction in material use of 49%. The relevant values are tabulated below. <table/><heading>Product scoring</heading><figure/>Scoring the redesigned bookcase using the +/-4 scoring system, it can be seen that an improvement in material efficiency is made relative to the original bookcase. A score of +2 for efficiency is therefore given. Since the same material is used then the cyclicity remains unchanged. Other categories such as whether the material has improved in terms of renewable energy, safety and social impact have not changed for the same reason that the material used and the production processes remain essentially the same. <heading>Life Cycle Analysis</heading>After completing the Datschefski approximation analysis and identifying redesign priorities, it is possible to consider the environmental impact of the redesign solution in more depth using the life cycle analysis. As the definition of the system boundary highlighted, processes whose environmental impact is considered negligible, relative to the overall contributors in that regard, are not included in our analysis. For the disposal stage of the products life, it is assumed that the cardboard and steel screws are disposed of as household waste where approximately 1/3 of the materials are recycled and the rest is municipal waste (see Ecoindicator 95 Manual for Engineers). There was no indicator (using Ecoindicator 95 Manual for Engineers) found for the main material, but it is quite obvious that wood recycling would have resulted in the greatest (negative) value for that category thus reducing the overall score. This would also reduce the overall difference between the relative scores for the two categories, since for the redesigned product the mass (25.35kg) is lower and when multiplying by the negative indicator would result in a lower (negative) value therefore affecting the difference between the overall scores in the two tables below. It is therefore evident that this missing data is essential although not decisive for the given mass (i.e. had the given mass been larger, the difference would become smaller and smaller etc). It can also be seen in Table B that secondary steel was preferred in the redesign since this has a much lower environmental impact than stainless steel. The effect was also quite significant. The redesigned product also requires a processing stage (i.e. for shelves and hollow sections), but no indicator was available. This impact of this stage in production will obviously increase the score but is not considered decisive. Estimates of transport distances based on typical distances from industrial areas to ports were also included as an assumption. Moreover, the cardboard assumed for the original product was omitted in the redesign as its relative environmental impact was also quite high. The redesign assumes that instead of delivering these products unassembled and therefore in cardboard boxes, the new product could instead be assembled by the manufacturers or dealers and delivered intact so that there is no need for cardboard packaging. There are obvious financial implications both for the customer and manufacturer dealer but these considerations are beyond the scope of the current analysis. <table/><table/><heading>Conclusions</heading>Comparing the overall scores for the original and redesigned product, it can be seen from the tables that the redesigned bookcase is 59% more environmentally efficient. Moreover, the overall wood used in the new product is 51% of that used in the original product, which is a 49% reduction of material use. The product was redesigned with minimal impact upon the original design. The aesthetics are essentially the same so that the functional unit for the second social purpose is met. Since the product was only optimised in terms of material use then we have also retained the functional unit for storage capacity. It is also import to mention that the redesign is theoretically valid but more detailed analysis may reveal that in order to retain the structural integrity of the shelves, for example, then for a given material of specific young's modulus and thickness, only a certain amount of material can be removed - so that there is some threshold. This also applies to the main frame of the bookcase, so that in order to retain rigidity only a certain amount of material can be removed for a specific material. The implication of this is that our product may be found to be less or even more efficient than the above estimates, although the theory still enables the environmental optimisation of a product to some degree. Other factors which will affect the accuracy of the assessment are assumptions that were made prior to analysis. This exercise has demonstrated that by using creativity, it is possible to redesign existing products and reduce their environmental impact substantially. The most obvious solutions are to use alternative materials (eco-friendlier), use less materials or to completely redesign the service while paying attention to the social purposes and functional units. The tool used, such as the Datschefski Analysis enable crude estimates very easily which can then be analysed in more detail using the Life Cycle Analysis. Although it can be difficult to escape making assumptions when using the LCA, this is because it is a relatively new concept and as with all concepts it may become more refined and an even more powerful tool in the future. In the meantime, the LCA is a useful tool which can assist law makers to formulate environmental legislation in order to help manufacturers analyse their processes and improve their products, and perhaps enable consumers to make more informed choices. 