<heading>1. Objectives</heading>To study the velocity profiles for both laminar and turbulent flows through a pipe and identify the characteristics of each flow. <heading>2. Experiment</heading>In order to measure the pressure drop between two points along the pipe later in the experiment, the Reynolds number is required in relevant calculations. The properties of the working fluid must also be known as a pre-requisite for experimental analysis. The first step was therefore to establish values for the density and viscosity of the working fluid, which was oil in the current experiment. <heading>2.1 Part A </heading>In order to measure the density of the fluid a sample can be weighed using a density bottle whose volume is also noted. The procedure was to first measure the weight of the empty density bottle and then to measure the weight of the bottle filled with oil of volume 50ml (i.e. the capacity of the bottle). The difference between the two values is therefore the mass of oil.  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Substituting these into the above equation therefore yields a value for the density of 866 kg m -3. (see appendix 6.1) In measuring the viscosity of the working fluid the following relationship is used:  FORMULA  Where τ is the shear force per unit area (or drag) and du/dy is the shear rate. The procedure was to use a Ferranti viscometer to take measurements at different speed settings to enable a number of values to be obtained for τ so that a mean value for viscosity can be calculated. Readings were recorded for the five speed settings and the corresponding τ value is then calculated from:  FORMULA  The shear rates are obtained from given values for the corresponding speed settings: <table/>The values for viscosity can then be obtained. These are tabulated below: <table/>It can be observed from the table above that the readings for speed setting 1 and 2 are recorded as '100+'. This is due to the limited scale of the Ferranti viscometer used so that at these speeds reading of beyond 100 could not be recorded. The results for the viscosity therefore yield a mean value of μ = 0.0195 Pa s <heading>2.2 Part B</heading>To determine the experimental velocity profiles for the laminar and turbulent flows in the pipe, some data is required so that empirical results can be interpreted graphically for analysis (see results). The experimental procedure for obtaining this data is the use of a pitot-static tube to measure the distances across the diameter of the pipe from a nominal point outside and the corresponding head differences are then noted for points two points, S and T, on the pipe. The head differences are obtained by reading the central manometer pipes for S and T, the scale for which is in millimetres. The apparatus used also enabled the measuring of mass flow rates. In the current experiment the procedure was to note the time taken for a quantity of oil to fill a tank. Three measurements were taken for a mass of 50lb so that a mean value for time (in seconds) could be calculated. This method was carried out for both laminar and turbulent flows. (see appendix 6.1 for calculations) <heading>2.3 Part C</heading>The pressure drop between two points along the pipe can be measured experimentally and compared with theoretical values for the corresponding laminar and turbulent values. Two points 15 and 17 at a distance of 1524mm apart were therefore selected and the head difference (in mm) from the central manometer block between them measured. <heading>3. Results</heading>The experimental data was collected and tabulated for both the pressure and velocity variations across pipe diameter. Before plotting the velocity variations for the two flow profiles the pressure difference against the distance across the pipe diameter is first plotted so that the symmetrical centre of the variation representing the centre of the pipe can be identified and used as the centre mark when plotting the velocity variations. The symmetrical centre is highlighted in table 3.1 and indicated by an arrow on the graph. <heading>3.1 Pressure Variation - Laminar Profile</heading><table/><figure/>The same process as before is applied to the turbulent flow. Again, the symmetrical centre is highlighted in bold and indicated by an arrow on the graph. <heading>3.2 Pressure Variation - Turbulent Profile </heading><table/><figure/>Once the point for the centre of the pipe is identified this is taken as zero and the positive and negative radius (9.385mm) on either side gives the positions of the side walls of the pipe. The empirical and theoretical values can then be plotted against the radius from the given relationships for laminar and turbulent flows:  FORMULA  Empirical Velocity  FORMULA  Empirical Laminar Velocity  FORMULA  Theoretical Laminar Velocity <heading>3.3 Velocity Variation - Laminar Profile</heading><table/><figure/><heading>3.4 Velocity Variation - Turbulent Profile </heading><table/><figure/><heading>3.5 Pressure Drop Between Two Points</heading>The table below shows the pressure drops between points 15-17 along the pipe. (see appendix 6.2 for calculations) <table/><heading>4. Discussion</heading><heading>4.1 Pressure-Distance Variation</heading>For laminar flow, the pressure variation across distance along pipe diameter (graph 3.1) the relationship between the head difference and distance is parabolic so that it increases gradually from the walls of the pipe up to the centre of the flow. For the turbulent flow the profile is flatter, as would be expected. However, there is a noticeable inconsistency for the laminar profile near the centre of flow. This is most likely due to human error during experimentation where perhaps the reading of the head on the central manometer block was taken prematurely. Other than that, the experimental results seem to exhibit reasonable outcomes for the flow profiles. For laminar flow, the shear forces due to the pipe wall are greatest at the boundaries. These forces affect every layer of the flow but gradually reduce towards the centreline of the pipe/flow. Although the layers are slowed down by the retarding force, the volume flow must remain constant by virtue of the principle of continuity. Thus, as the outer layers slow down, the flow near the middle must increase, giving the velocity profile characterising laminar flow (fig. 4.1.1). However, the parabolic shape of the laminar flow is also the result of the lower Reynolds number. This can be interpreted as the ratio of the inertial forces over the viscous forces. So that when the viscous forces are dominant (slow flow thus low Re) the fluid particles are in line and moving relative to each other thus there are shear stresses between them. When this happens, adjacent particles have different velocities. <figure/><figure/>For the turbulent flow, the velocity profile is flatter since the fluid particles are shoved about and constantly changing position so that their axial velocities do not change much when moving around the cross-section. <heading>4.2 Velocity-Radius Variation</heading>For the velocity profiles, the velocity of flow varies from zero at the walls to a maximum along the centreline of the pipe. A notable feature for both velocity variations is that the empirical velocity, unlike the theoretical velocity, does not start at zero. In reality this is not possible since the fluid flow is almost stationary at the boundary layer due to the retarding frictional force. This is therefore due to the experimental procedure where measurements did not start precisely at the boundary layer of the pipe but at some nominal point outside, so that there is no corresponding velocity recorded at  FORMULA  (i.e. boundaries). This is also evidenced by looking at range for which measurements were taken. It can be seen that this range for laminar flow (20.32 - 3.05 = 17.27mm) is less than the actual diameter range (18.77mm). Therefore it is reasonable to assert that the boundaries were not measured. Another, more important, feature is that the empirical velocities are generally of a higher magnitude than the theoretical values, for both laminar and turbulent profiles. This is impossible(?) in real flow since umax = 2 um for laminar flow and umax = 1.22um for turbulent flow. It can be seen that the corresponding maximum empirical velocities for both flows are beyond their ultimate values. The reasons for the errors in the empirical velocities can be found by referring to the relationship on which these calculations are based. The following equation was used:  FORMULA  It can be seen that according to this relationship the velocity is proportional to the variables  h and ρHG. For the mercury manometers, the value for density of 13540 kg m -3 at 20°C. Therefore, one possible contributor to the high velocity values calculated is the assumption of the temperature conditions during the experiment. Where a temperature t<20°C might result in a larger density and vice verse, contributing, however trivially, to the error in the calculated values for velocity. The more important variable is the head difference h, which is evidently an approximation. It can be seen from tables 3.3 and 3.4 that a value for head greater than zero is assumed for the head difference at 9.385mm (i.e. the boundary). This is the reason for v>0 at that point. The same reasoning applies to the rest of the calculated empirical velocity, which are all dependent upon exaggerated values for head difference. Thus, the erroneous empirical values for the variation of velocity with radius boil down to the aforementioned assumption that h ≠ 0 at the boundary (and the ensuing errors), and perhaps also the consequences of starting measurements at a point outside the pipe walls rather than from the actual boundary. <heading>4.3 Pressure-Drop</heading>Since the fluid is viscous, energy is lost during flow because of friction. This loss of energy manifests itself as a pressure loss between two points. This pressure difference is due to energy lost by the fluid when overcoming shear stress at the walls. The head difference between two points on the pipe, 15 and 17 at a distance 1524mm apart, were measured for laminar and turbulent flows and the relevant calculations made (see appendix 6.2). The results in table 3.5 show that the empirical values are of a higher magnitude than theoretical values. In this case, none of the equations used are free from error since they both rely on subjective variables. Subjective refers to the fact that in both equations there exist variables that were initially obtained by experimentation, thus both are influenced by human error at some stage and the corresponding errors are carried forward. However, the main factor to account for the difference between the two results for each flow is perhaps the variable h. this is because the relationship for theoretical pressure difference depends mainly on h (values for densities are consistent in both equations):  FORMULA  As previously explained, observation was used to aid judgement when reading the central manometer for h, thus human errors are quite possible. It is also noticeable that the pressure drop along the same distance for turbulent flow is approximately 5x that of the laminar flow (see table 3.5). This is quite a significant difference suggesting that energy losses are dramatically higher for turbulent fluid flows. This finding then appears to imply that the shear forces between the fluid and the surface are much greater for turbulent than laminar flows. <heading>5. Conclusion </heading>In accordance with the objectives, this experiment has enabled familiarization with the basic features identifying the different types of flow. It can be seen that whilst laminar flow is almost orderly, turbulent flow is so disordered that several models attempt to describe its velocity profile. It is evident from results that the Re regulates whether flow is laminar or turbulent. In particular, the Re indicates that where the inertial forces (numerator) dominate then there is turbulent flow. On the other hand, where the viscous forces (denominator) are relatively great then Re tends to a lower value and therefore laminar flow. The last experiment showed that the turbulent flow resulted in much larger energy losses between the fluid and surface. The implication of this is that shear forces between fluid and surface are proportional to the speed of flow(?). The effects of this in engineering application can perhaps be demonstrated by a turbulent flow of air over an aircraft wing, where there will exist large shear forces when air of Re>4000 is involved. It is obvious that such forces are detrimental to an aircraft wing (would case wear) and it seems impossible to affect the nature (i.e. Re etc.) of air in the case of an aircraft. But a possible solution would appear to lie in reducing the coefficient of friction of the aircraft wing(?) - ie smoothing the surface. Finally, this experiment also illustrated how quantities such as mass flow rate and density are measured experimentally and from first principles. In general, the experiment has also demonstrated the need for meticulous experimental technique in order to minimise human errors which seem almost inevitable. But as in all experiments, it appears that empirical results will never absolutely equal theoretical results as there are always variables in the real world which are not encompassed in theoretical relationships - theoretical equations are static relationships whereas the real world is dynamic in that conditions are constantly changing. 