<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This essay attempts to answer the above question through a combination of research methods - printed, online, and televised, and explores the meanings and subtleties of Open Source Software, Open Source Hardware, and Open Data Standards. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The Abstract to this essay presents a question that is particularly relevant in today's computing world, and is changing the face of the law, business, the software industry (and it's business models) and society as a whole. The following investigation attempts to uncover the meanings of the words 'open' and 'free' and the ideas and implications behind them using a number of resources. Some are legal authorities such as government publications and law textbooks, others are items of news in the popular media, and others are technical journals and documents. Through a combination of research methods, it is hoped that the features, differences, and meanings of these different uses of 'Open' in Information Technology, and how standards and patents affect them. This report is divided, on the pages following, into three distinct sections, each dealing with one of the three uses of 'Open' - Open Source Software, Open Source Hardware, and Open Data Standards. <heading>Open Source Software</heading>The phrase 'Open Source' is not one that is particularly new or unique to the 21 st century. For many years, the term Open Source has been used to refer to the practice of disclosing or 'opening' the source of any particular product - and the movement toward making software - so long jealously guarded by many of it's biggest producers and profiteers - open by disclosing it's original source code has been gaining momentum for years, spurred on by the 1984 Free Software Movement [1]. The Movement, lead by Massachusetts Institute of Technology student and programmer Richard Matthew Stallman, was intended to further production of software the was free from the restrictions many commercial software houses were placing on their products by hiding their source code from end users and preventing modification or change through prohibitive licensing agreements - something which came of age when platform portability (that is, the ability to make programs that could be moved from one piece of hardware to another) became a reality. To this day, many misunderstand the meaning and spirit of Stallman's campaign. The Free Software Movement, begun with the GNU project (a UNIX-like open-source operating system), sought to promote software that was 'free' as in 'free speech' and not 'free beer'. Stallman wanted to see software produced that was 'free' from restrictive licences agreements and protected from modification of its source code - not necessarily free from cost. As such, his campaign was not anti-commercialist or anti-capitalist. The fact that so many pieces of Open Source software are provided free of cost often leads people to confuse the term with 'Free Beer' and lead people to believe Open Source means no cost. The freedom guaranteed by an Open Source licence is the freedom to run and use the software for any purpose, to adapt, modify and improve the program by editing its source code, and the freedom to redistribute copies (providing criteria regarding copyright and acknowledgements are met). Another common misconception about Open Source software is that the author has chosen to waive their copyright. Under UK law, section 1 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, a computer program is defined as a property right under the category of an original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work. This copyright is acquired in the UK automatically by the author once it has been recorded (the source code written electronically by its author) [12]. Section 178 of the Act defines this 'writing' as '...any form of notation or code, whether by hand or otherwise and regardless of the method by which, or medium in or on which, it is recorded' [3]. The copyright on a piece of software gives the owner the right to publish, reproduce, rent or sell copies of their work, whilst prohibiting others from doing so without express permission of the author. Open Source software licensing provides an alternative to the traditionally restrictive and protectionist licences used by many commercial software produces. The GNU General Public Licence (GPL), for instance, provides clauses for protecting the copyright protections afforded by the law to the author whilst allowing them to distribute their work as Open Source, by making the requirement that any modified versions of a piece of software that a redistributed are credited with the owner's original copyright notice. This is accomplished mainly through clauses 1 and 2 of the GPL, which require modifiers/redistributors to, under section 1, '...conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice' and under section 2, 'cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any change' [2]. As such, patents, copyrights, and the right of an author and, indeed, contributor to a particular software project can be protected and acknowledged throughout the evolution of a particular program. Open Source Software has, to a large extent, given rise to the 'Open' revolution that is changing all areas of technology, business, and life. The principles and spirit of the Open movement is changing the world and business is being forced to change they way the operate - large organisations which for so long had a virtual monopoly in a particular software market are being made to re-think before customers turn to the cheaper, better developed, and less restrictive Open Source competition. <heading>Open Source Hardware</heading>In the section previous to this, the features and characteristics of Open Source software are discussed, along with the impact of the Open Source movement and its aims and how it affects copyright laws, patenting, and software design culture. The Open Source movement has grown beyond furthering changes to the way software ownership, modification and distribution is viewed and now affects many other areas of computing and indeed society. One such area of involvement of the Open Source movement is computer hardware - so called 'Open Source Hardware'. It was brought partly into the public light through UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan's article petitioning the hardware industry to co-operate to bring more affordable technology to developing countries [4]. Open Source Hardware is computer hardware designed and manufactured along the same guiding principles as Open Source Software. Again, rather than adopt the traditional view of hardware design, whereby organisations protect and keep secret their designs with the hope of achieving a competitive advantage over their rivals by being the first to a new technology or by improving on a particular technology, Open Source Hardware advocates the sharing of schematics, hardware designs, and device drivers to achieve progression through co-operation and mutual research and learning. Hardware cannot be 'open' in the same sense as software can due to microcomputer components being fixed in a solid-state. Rather, Open Source Hardware tends to be defined as the availability of information on using the hardware (publishing interface information and driver specifics), the availability of the hardware design (schematics, design documents), and the availability of design software (the ability to create software to interface directly with, and modify the behaviour of, hardware through software tools) [6]. As with Open Source Software, many leaps towards standardising development of Open Source Hardware have been made by various co-operatives, including the GNU project (mentioned earlier) Open Hardware (OH) [5]. Even commercial organisations such as Sun Microsystems are adopting Open Source methods in producing hardware - the OpenSPARC project is producing a new-breed of Sun processor based on the principles of Open Source Hardware - the UltraSPARC T1. Essentially, the chip is a large program that has been compiled into a physical logic board, and Sun is opening up the source code of this processor to open up development to the public. This is a stark contrast to their older methods, and the methods of most other microchip designers - whereby the development process is conducted entirely in-house and using protected trade secrets. This revolutionary new business model is, Sun hope, going to increase revenue by creating new markets for their processors which, they believe, will be better for the open contribution and rapid development afforded by such methodology. Again, the issue of copyrights and patenting is of particular interest - and must be examined differently compared to software. A piece of hardware cannot be copied or distributed in the same was as software - and as such, a piece of hardware can be copyrighted and still be considered 'open' provided its designs (and, if the circuits designed using a programming language to define them, its source code) is published along with it, and other users empowered to make changes provided they credit and acknowledge the work, patent or copyright of the original author and subsequent contributors. Richard Stallman himself supports, in theory, the possibility of copyrighting a 'compiled' (that is, physical) piece of hardware provided the designs are free (though he believes patenting to be opposed to the ideals of Open Source Hardware) [7]. <heading>Open Data Standards</heading>Under the previous two headings, two uses of the word 'Open' in relation to technology have been used - that of Open Source Hardware and Open Source Software - and by now a significant understanding of the Open Source Movement, its background, goals and future can be attained. This section is concerned with Open Data Standards. For a long period of history, organisations adopted in-house proprietary standards for communications between their information systems. Over time, with the rise of networking (and particularly the Internet, a catalyst for so much of the development in standardisation), partner companies and peer organisations began to develop common sets of standards to allow their systems to 'talk' to one another across network links. Over time, even these standards became obsolete - as they created problems when organisations needed to interface with the systems of new partners, and, in the age of the Web, directly with customers. Standardisation became global through the efforts of international standardisation (largely through the ISO - International Organisation for Standardisation [8], and the IEEE - Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers [9]). These organisations are responsible for many standards that have become de facto - for instance, the TCP/IP standards governing inter-network communication, and the IEEE's 802.11 wireless standards that have become a necessity - no developer would break away from using these standards as they are so widely used, it would be foolhardy to try to compete with them. Open Data Standards differ from proprietary or national/international standards in that they are not fixed and protected from modification - they are, like everything that is Open - freely available both in terms of their free use, source, and freedom to adapt and change. Possibly the most successful Open Data Standard is Extensible Mark-up Language (XML), of which Hypertext Mark-up Language (the worldwide standard programming language for web pages) is derived from. It is freely available, modifiable, fully documented, and forms a global community of contributors and editors working to improve it and shape to fit more and more applications. XML, like all Open Data Standards, is not protected by a patent or owned by any parent organisation - it's development, documentation, change control, and evolution are typically managed by 'working groups' of contributors - one such being the international World Wide Web Consortium [10] - a group heavily involved in developing Open technical and data standards. Open Data Standards also allow us to define another type of freedom - freedom of data. For a long time, proprietary data formats, such as Microsoft's Word .doc format have locked-in data in a binary format that can only be read and edited by software using Microsoft technology - meaning that third-parities require a licence from Microsoft. These licences are often highly restrictive and costly. Open Data Standards like XML use simple text and a logical, open structure to govern their format, typically using tags (such as <surname>Matthews</surname>) to separate sections of data. And because these standards are Open, they are completely vendor-neutral and adoptable, for free or a low cost, by and software producer. They free data from being trapped in formats only readable by specific software packages on specific platforms, and don't require expensive or restrictive licences from commercial organisations. In this sense, these documents and files are again set 'free'. <heading>Conclusion</heading>In conclusion of this essay, a brief account of what has been learnt from its writing, and the assignment as a whole, is given. From someone who has spent several years studying the use of Information Technology to further competitive advantage in business, the idea of sharing ideas, computer code, and resources with customers, peers, and indeed, competitors seemed a baffling concept. How an organisation could profit from making their standards, software and hardware designs public was a mystery. After studying this topic in greater depth, this Author has come to understand this. Richard Stallman uses an interesting analogy - that of a legal professional. A lawyer's 'product' is public - the law is freely available to anyone - and nothing about a lawyer's work is secret or proprietary. Yet they still profit greatly from their work - this is because the value they contribute is that of their craft - it is their ability to interpret the law, use and market their services, in a way that is tailored to their needs. Open Source means that organisations can profit in a similar way, and it is changing the face of business and technology forever. Products like OpenOffice [11] show how organisations such as Sun have changed to survive in a world where Open is becoming a must - and competitors sticking to the old methods and trying to monopolise and profit from protectionism and secrecy in their products will soon find that the world, and their customers, has passed them by. 