The role of promotion in the modern world cannot be overestimated due to the great variety of goods, consumers are faced with. Also in agriculture promotional techniques prove to play an important role through having impact on consumers' choices and causing changes in life standards of agricultural products' suppliers. It has been noticed that consumers are willing to pay more for a product of a certified quality and made with use of a special recipe and procedure. This trend of choosing high quality, original food products is being actively encouraged by the European Union by carrying out goals of the Quality Policy as well as allocating money to the promotional campaigns. Poland, being member state of the EU, seeks to use of the available tools in order to communicate to the world the abundance of its traditional products of agriculture. <fnote>Regional and Traditional Products. Retrieved 5 December 2005, from  URL  </fnote>This essay is aimed at presenting a critical review of policy that Poland has adopted in terms of promoting its traditional products of agriculture. The objectives of this policy have been specified in a document entitled "Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products", accepted by the Council of Ministers on 4 January 2005. In spite of the relatively short period of operating, the instruments of this policy have already brought some positive effects, but undoubtedly more should still be done to ensure its long term success. <fnote>Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products, November 2004.Retreived 5 December 2005, from  URL  </fnote>The strategy consists of seven objectives: <list>1. Creating consistent policy of promoting traditional products2. Identification of products3. Increasing awareness of consumers4. Preparing producers for registration of designations and names at Community level5. Creating opportunities for producers to be granted derogations from the veterinary and sanitary requirements in manufacture of traditional kinds of food6. Diversification of employment in rural areas and rural development7. Propagating culture and tradition.</list>The above mentioned objectives seem to be determined in a fairly realistic but as well rather general manner which should be useful in making reasonable adjustments, when such necessity arises. Significant value of this set appears to have a fact that the authors (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development) sought to comprise quite wide spectrum of issues related to traditionally made agricultural products. Analysing these objectives, it may be argued that the strategy's aim is not only to promote knowledge about the traditional products, encourage their bigger consumption, ensure means of legal protection of their production but it also takes into account seemingly not connected issue of national heritage. Definition of the traditional product is nowhere to be found in the content of the strategy document (which can be considered a major drawback) but there is a reference to another crucial document - law of 17 December 2004 on registration and legal protection of designations and indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs. Article 47 of the said law states that traditional products are "agricultural products and foodstuffs, listed in Annex I to the Treaty Establishing the European Community, in annexes to regulations no 2081/92 and in annex to the regulation no 2082/92 as well as spirit drinks, listed in the Council Regulation (EC) no 1576/89 of 29 May 1989 laying down general rules on the definition, description and presentation of spirit drinks, whose quality or exceptional features and properties result from using traditional methods of manufacture, i.e. those that have been employed for at least twenty five years". Such definition makes it clear what range of products and what kind of qualities entitle a producer to apply for legal protection for their produce- protection in the form of designations of origin, geographical indications and certificates of specific character. <fnote>Official Journal of Laws no 10, position 68, 2005. </fnote>It can be stated that establishing the "Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products" and passing the law on registration and legal protection of designations and indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs is a good way of fulfilling the objective of creating coherent and consistent state policy of promoting traditional products. Both these documents, being complementary and explanatory, fall within the framework of the EU quality policy as well as are means of achieving sustainable rural development and realising goals of second pillar of the European Union. It seems extremely important that the state itself underlines its interest in supporting producers of traditional specialities and eagerness to inform others (not only its nationals but also all members of the whole European Community) about those national treasures. Naturally, all individual initiatives of propagating such knowledge are welcome, but they usually work on a smaller scale, so without any doubt Polish authorities can and want to use their position to let this information reach more and more people. The policy makers emphasise the importance of going through the whole European procedure (starting at national level) in order for a product to acquire a status of PDO (Protected Designation of Origin), PGI (Protected Geographical Indication) and TSG (Traditional Speciality Guaranteed). Only then can the producer be assured that other products aiming at taking benefit from the original's reputation and passing themselves off as the genuine, will be detected in order to ensure interests of both producers and consumers.  <fnote>Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products, p.4. </fnote><fnote>Quality products catch the eye: PDO, PGI and TSG. Retrieved 9 December 2005, from  URL  </fnote>Second objective set in the Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products is identification of products which proved to be quite useful and easy to achieve. Knowledge about special products manufactured in local communities did not use to go beyond given region and it is a well known fact that there is a great number of specialities in all Polish regions. Policy makers noticed lack of a widely available database gathering information about all these products. Therefore now a register has been set and published on the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development website, where identified traditional products are presented with short descriptions as well as pictures. Putting a product name on the List of Traditional Products provides it only with temporary legal protection on a national level (according to Article 35 of the law on registration and legal protection of designations and indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs). Marshal of the province (marszałek województwa) collects applications from producers and processors and verifies them, and if this process is successful Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development publishes on the official list. Local authorities obtain an important tool in the rural development and the possibility to honour producers of renowned products (e.g. in Podlaskie voivodship there is a plan to give awards to the best such producers). That way database can be of use to the retailers looking for interesting, original options as well as directly to consumers. <fnote>List of Traditional Products. Retrieved 9 December 2005, from  URL  </fnote>Consumers are in the centre of attention in the European Union which aspires to guarantee their right to information and education about products and services. Therefore, not surprisingly also authors of the Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products recognised significance of that issue and defined of the objectives as increasing awareness of the consumers. Edmund Szot argues that demand for traditional products which are usually more expensive than mass production, is not yet as big in Poland as other member states of the EU, but it should grow as Polish society becomes more affluent. Therefore it can be noticed that awareness concerning traditional specialities of consumers in Poland has been increased but it has not yet led to increase in demand but it is expected to result in it in the future. Consumers are one of the target groups of informational campaign launched be the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development on 10 October 2005 under the motto: "Originality under protection". The 2 year long campaign is realised in the framework of Common Agriculture Policy mechanism "Support for promotional and informational actions on the markets of chosen agricultural products. The budget is as high as 1 481 279 Euro. <fnote>Overview of The European Union's Activities: Consumers. Retrieved 8 December 2005, from  URL   </fnote><fnote>Szot E., Regional products: The Union protects originality, Rzeczpostpolita no 238 of 11.10.2005r. Retrieved 7 December 2005, from  URL  </fnote><fnote>The Beginning of Informational Campaign "Originality under Protection". Retrieved 9 December 2005, from  URL  ncementId=4007&ModulePositionId=1043b  </fnote>The campaign is in process now so it is too early to measure its success or failure. However it seems that optimistic forecast can be made for strong basis have been laid. Information is supposed to reach consumers to encourage them to buy products marked as regional or traditional. All the media should be used to communicate this message. Also show rooms and seminars are used to transmit the message about traditional products. However concerns are raised that Polish producers may not benefit from this campaign because products from the national List of Traditional Products do not enjoy full legal protection like the products that have already obtained status of PDO (Protected Designation of Origin), PGI (Protected Geographical Indication) and TSG (Traditional Speciality Guaranteed). None of Polish products has obtained that status yet. That is why policymakers in Poland set the objective of preparing producers for registration of designations and names at Community level. Placing product's name on the List of Traditional Products is supposed to be just a stage and farmers, processors are encouraged to follow the European procedure. This point of the Strategy does not appear to be very successful because applications concerning only seven products have been sent to the EC (i.e. two kinds of cheese, honey, four kinds of mead) whereas on the national list there are 52 positions. Existence of two lists can be regarded as quite confusing so the farmers must be informed what advantages come with obtaining European protection for their traditional produce. One reason for their weak response may be reluctance to form groups of producers (one of the requirements in the EU procedure) or fear of passing to others secrets of traditional products' recipes (argument unfounded since the EU ensures protection of such data). <fnote>Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products, p.6. </fnote>However this mistrustful and passive attitude may well be changed - thanks to opportunities of derogations from the veterinary and sanitary requirements in manufacture of traditional kinds of food, creation of which constitutes objective of Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products. Poland has been successful in reaching this objective by passing the law on registration and legal protection of designations and indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs and thus establishing system of national protection of traditionally manufactured products. Thanks to that fact producers have an opportunity to benefit form derogations under the Community law  and now they should show initiative in taking advantage of the possibilities laid for them. <fnote>see e.g. Commission Decision no 97/284 regarding the list of milk-based products for which member states are entitled to issue individual or general exemptions in accordance with article 8, paragraph 2 of Directive 92/46/EEC. </fnote>Policy of promoting traditional products also seeks to have impact on diversification and increasing commercial activity in rural areas. This objective, although very noble and far-sighted, may be too ambitious, as problem of over-employment in agriculture is too big to be solved just by realising the said strategy. However it should be emphasised that creating new work places thanks to more intensive manufacture of traditional products, even if limited to small, local areas, will surely positively affect rural communities in Poland. Developing market for traditional products from various regions will influence other activities like agrotourism, which is becoming more and more popular in Polish countryside. Its attractiveness can be enhanced through striving to achieve final strategy's objective which is propagation of culture and tradition. The process has already been started by launching the informational campaign in the media, but there is long road ahead. Other European nations have been promoting national culinary heritage for a long time, boosting their national pride as well as their budgets (e.g. Italian revenues from exporting such products amount to about 1 billion Euro). So more actions should be taken to inform consumers in Poland, but also in other EU countries, about this impressive national heritage of food. <fnote>Strategy for Identification and Promotion of Traditional Products, p.7. </fnote><fnote>Wilkin J.,(editor) Polish countryside 2025- Vision of Development, Warsaw 2005, p. 18. </fnote><fnote>Jasiński J., Rzytki M., Oscypek in Brussels, Rzeczpospolita No 40 of 17December 2005. Retrieved 9 December 2005, from  URL  </fnote>In conclusion, policy of identification and promotion of traditional products is an important step in assuring rural development in Poland and providing consumers with information and access to good quality, traditionally made products. The program, being fairly new, has already proved to be quite successful, laying down good legal basis and contributing to expansion of knowledge and interest in traditional produce. Provided it is continued (hopefully on an even grander scale) it should continue resulting in positive changes both in rural areas as well on consumers' tables. It is essential though that the producers themselves understand potential benefits the policy offers to them and actively use its tools. 