International trade involves various complex regulations, lack of which could lead to chaos and most probably unfair practices. The reality is quite abundant with situations where aspiration to achieve commercial success could easily result in other people (i.e. consumers) being worse-off. It could be illustrated for example by introduction of a new, potentially unhealthy (but also potentially profitable) product on the market, which is undoubtedly a circumstance that should be avoided in the name of public interest. It is considered that, especially with regard to safety in all its aspects, different measures should be taken to assure its appropriate standards, however it is arguable whether the same level of safety is satisfactory in countries across the globe, and indeed some of them seem to be more demanding in this respect than others. Sometimes measures they apply seem to be sound and necessary precautions against health hazards, but there are cases where their underlying motives appear to be rather disguised protectionist measures. The aim of this essay is to demonstrate the idea and operation of the precautionary principle in the framework of the SPS Agreement. It is necessary to underline that the principle may be found in other legal documents some of which will only be mentioned shortly in this paper. Food and agricultural products may constitute an important source of biological hazards to environment and humans. It is more significant in the light of expanding world economy, liberalisation of food trade and quick progress in food science and technology, as products are transported internationally and thus there is increased risk of spreading unwanted substances. It is generally accepted that importing country may impose regulatory requirements, which must be met by the exporting partner aiming at accessing a given market (Assuring Food Safety and Quality. Guidelines for Strengthening National Food Control Systems), hence it is essential that those rules are sufficiently clear and well defined. Precautionary measures used as an element of trade policy, may be imposed in order to ban or reduce inflow of goods that raise concerns in terms of protecting the public health and environment. It is hardly surprising that precautionary principle as such gives rise to controversy, since it involves discussion between groups representing conflicting interests - on one side profit-oriented companies and on the other - public good (Mbengue, Thomas, 2005). The precautionary principle is quite a problematic idea for many reasons, first being lack of generally accepted and authoritative definition, however some references in the WTO agreements as well as reports of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (consisting of Dispute Settlement Panel and Appellate Body) make it possible to analyse its nature (Majone, 2002) It should be noted though that the very concept was developed outside the framework of the World Trade Organisation, in the German socio-legal tradition. Translated from German Vorsorgeprinzip, it means that if the consequences of a given action are unknown (there is lack of scientific certainty or scientific consensus), but are judged to have some potential for major or irreversible negative consequences, then it is better to avoid that action with a view to protecting the environment or public health (Hardstaff, 2000).Ward (1999) draws attention to the fact that the principle places a high price on inaction. Decision making process should preferably be made on basis of verified, objective information but it seems to be quite rare as science often fails to provide unambiguous proofs. Put in a simple way, the precautionary principle offers some guidelines in situations where solvable problems have been already tackled. It is worth pointing out that at first it has been applied mainly in the field of environment which Hathcock (2000) expresses in the following way: "The precautionary principle was originally developed to provide risk managers with a tool for decision making on environmental threats form processes or substances that had not undergone safety evaluation or regulatory approval". However Mansour (2001) remarks that it should also be considered on the grounds of food safety policies, especially taking into account biosafety regulations. Such evolution of the idea of precaution should not come as a surprise as the concept of being rather "safe than sorry" and "looking before you leap" seems to be quite reasonable and has many proponents. Yet its critics argue that too much precaution may be counterproductive and unfounded fear of new products or new ingredients may have paralysing effects on progress; meaningful is the example of outbreak of cholera resulting from fear of chlorinated water (Malkin, Fumento, 1996). Another distinct example is attitude towards genetically modified foods (although in this case it is usually claimed that long term effects for health or environment are not yet known, as was the case in the previous example), production of which could, according to some experts, be salutary for many developing countries. Though European countries that would constitute a market for such products are reluctant to accept them as genetic engineering remains highly controversial, and thus it would be irrational for farmers from developing regions to use e.g. genetically enhanced crops which would be difficult or even impossible to sell (Morris, 2000). The big dilemma is whether the new technology praised by some scientists, is not going to show negative side-effects in the future (Pringle, 2003). Food safety, animal and plant health protection issues are addressed in the Agreement on Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS), concluded as part of the Uruguay Round in 1995. As Unnevehr and Roberts (2004) notice, SPS measures are presumed to act as potential impediments to trade, so the Agreement sets up a framework for dealing with disputes over application of those measures, so as the trade distortions are kept to a minimum. Dispute over the safety of beef treated with hormones (Official name: EC Measures Concerning Meat and Meat Products (Hormones), in which two opposing parties were the USA supported by Canada and the European Communities, led to shedding more light onto the precautionary principle. Conflict between the two parties began when EC imposed a ban on imports of beef from cows treated with hormones intended to enhance growth of cattle, allegedly for human health reasons. The EC claimed that consumption of hormone-laced beef would lead to cancer and hormonal disorders, but also that wastes of such beef would pose risk to freshwater systems (Mbengue, Thomas, 2005). The USA and Canada remained in the position that evidence of harmful effects on human health did not exist, and what is more, that the EU-origin beef treated with some types of hormones was being sold with no restrictions (or even labelling requirements) within the European Union (Ambrose, 1999/2000). It is important to remark that in the beef hormones dispute both the Panel and Appellate Body found that the precautionary principle was reflected in the SPS Agreement, however underlined that its application did not override specific provisions in the Agreement. The Appellate Body indicated parts of the Agreement, in which the notion of precaution was incorporated; these are: paragraph 6 of the Preamble, Article 3.3 and Article 5.7 of the SPS Agreement ( URL ). The first one was considered significant in relation to precaution as it promotes harmonisation of nationally set SPS measures with international standards, guidelines and recommendations, but at the same time it is not obligatory for member states to modify their sovereignty-determined adequate levels of protection. In other words, countries may impose higher standards (however they must fulfil certain other conditions). It is explicitly written in Article 3.3 which allows for the adoption of SPS measures that are more stringent than the measures based on the relevant international standards, but conditions it (amongst others) on providing scientific justification for such upgrade of requirements. Last but not least is Article 5.7 of the SPS Agreement, according to which member state is allowed to introduce a provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure when relevant scientific evidence is insufficient, basing its decision on available pertinent information. There is an obligation such member state must fulfil and which may be neither quick nor easy, i.e. it must seek to find additional information that would allow to assess the risk more objectively; furthermore the country must also seek to review the said measure within a reasonable period of time. It is worth noting that the EC did not actually invoke the precautionary principle reflected in Art. 5.7 in the beef hormones case because of its interim nature (Mbengue, Thomas, 2005). It was the EC's rather risky (judging from the benefit of the hindsight) strategy to permanently ban imports of hormone-treated beef, and not a successful one, since the WTO dispute resolution Panel ruled against the EC. The ruling included three objections towards the EC: 1) more permissive international standards for some of the hormones, 2) measure not based on a risk assessment, 3) violation of the non-discrimination requirement of the Art.5.5 of the SPS Agreement. The Appellate Body endorsed the findings of the Panel and also added that the EC produced scientific evidence that was too general, so did not address specifically enough the issue at hand. Moreover the issue of "theoretical uncertainty" as a result of the fact that "science can never provide absolute certainty that a given substance will never have adverse health effects" should not be understood as risk to be assessed under Art.5.1 of the SPS Agreement ( Majone, 2002). Although no definition was developed again, statement by the Appellate Body: "the precautionary principle indeed finds reflection in Article 5.7 of the SPS Agreement" (Majone, 2002) cannot be overestimated. It must be added though that the principle was also said not to override the specific obligations of the Agreement. It is worthwhile mentioning in this context the importance, which the SPS Agreement attaches to the notion of scientific evidence and risk assessment exercise. They are traditionally based on quantitative results, but in the examined case the Appellate Body judged that qualitative methods were acceptable under certain circumstances (Mbengue, Thomas, 2005). This seems to give countries wider choice of tools to substantiate their thesis in situations where science fails to provide enough quantitative responses, but is sufficient to throw a doubt on safety of a given product. It is certainly very difficult for countries to make use of the precautionary principle, as it is often criticized for not being entirely "scientifically sound" as an instrument of decision-making process. This criticism is refuted by Hardstaff (2000) who claims that the precautionary principle is an important part of risk assessment and decision making and "sound science" and precautionary principle are not mutually exclusive. To support this statement he goes on to claim that risk assessment itself is based on a set of methodological as well as political assumptions whose nature may be unscientific and far from objective. This seems a reasonable observation, considering that results of risk assessment process are undoubtedly influenced by definition of hazards and accepted ways of measuring them. It is also argued that risk assessment may be as unpredictable as the precautionary principle, because different scientists conducting their research using various methodologies, are very likely not to come to the same conclusions. Science is a domain in which mainstream views coexist with and are often challenged by less popularized theories. In the Hormones case the Appellate Body recognized the importance of the latter, ruling that risk assessment process does not necessarily have to be based on the majority's view, because scientific uncertainty may well be indicated by the very existence of "other" divergent opinions (EC Measures, 1998 in: Mbengue, Thomas, 2005)). Morris (2000) argues that the state of scientific uncertainty is always going to be present with reference to environmental effects as well as other matters regarding the future. Still it is not acceptable in the legal framework of the SPS to simply affirm that a given precautionary measure needs to be taken just "in case" when there is not enough scientific evidence to be 100% sure of the potential negative consequence of remaining passive. It is very important to note that a country seems to be able to make use of the precautionary principle when the risk of materialization of hazards is probable (supported by evidence strong enough to establish presumption but not proof) (EC Measures, 1998 in: Mbengue, Thomas, 2005)) and it is not enough for it to be possible (being something that may or may not occur) . The former option establishes a higher threshold for using the principle and may eliminate hyper-cautious attempts of countries. It can be seen as a matter of making a choice between prevention and precaution, which may be regarded as a limiting case of prevention (Sandin,1999). De Sadeleer (2002) differentiates between the two using the criterion of "degree of uncertainty surrounding the probability of risk". According to this assumption the lower the uncertainty (hence the more confidence in the science), the more reasons there are to turn to prevention, but when scientific research has not resulted in providing sufficient amount of compelling evidence, there seems to be a justification for precautionary measures. Precautionary principle was also discussed in a recent case dealt with by the WTO Dispute Settlement Bodies, in which two opposing parties were the USA (the complainant) and Japan (the Respondent). In this dispute the US claimed that quarantine restrictions imposed by Japan on imports of American apples, that were described as necessary means of protection against fire blight, were in fact inconsistent with the law. Japan's strategy was to persuade the Body that risk of transmission of fire blight was a case of "unresolved scientific uncertainty" and that it should, as well as a case of "new scientific uncertainty", fall in the scope of Art. 5.7 of the SPS Agreement. In other words Japan defended imposition of the SPS measure on grounds that scientists' views were divided on the matter at hand, but the Panel and The Appellate Body rejected this argument, pointing out that: first of all application of Art. 5.7 is justified by the insufficiency of scientific evidence rather than scientific uncertainty (the two are not to be regarded as interchangeable) and secondly- relevant scientific evidence was not insufficient in the presented case (Mbengue, Thomas, 2005). The use and scope of the precautionary principle are, as mentioned earlier, made more difficult by the fact that there is no one generally accepted definition, and those that exist are sometimes quite contradictory. E.g. in terms of measures protecting the state of the environment, Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Development and the Environment (United Nations Environment Programme [UNEP], in: Hathcock, 2000) sanctions a precautionary approach under condition that there is a threat of "serious irreversible damage" to the environment and in such a situation a "lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation". Contrary to obligations enclosed in Art. 5.7 of the SPS Agreement, Principle 15 does not necessarily imply provisional nature of the precautionary measure and there is requirement to generate evidence to justify it (Hathcock, 2000). The European Union managed to combine both definitions in its 2000 Communication on the Precautionary Principle regarding food safety issues. (Schmidt, Bates, Archer, Schneider,2003). It should be mentioned that they are addressed as well in the context of the precautionray principle in The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety which is an international agreement - supplement to the Convention on Biological Diversity. This regulatory act integrates the precautionary principle with reference to the arising much controversy (Saunders, 2000) living modified organisms (broadly equivalent to genetically modified organisms), used as food or as seeds for environmental release. Article 10.6 and 11.8, state "Lack of scientific certainty due to insufficient relevant scientific information and knowledge regarding the extent of the potential adverse effects of an LMO on biodiversity, taking into account risks to human health, shall not prevent a Party of import from taking a decision, as appropriate, with regard to the import of the LMO in question, in order to avoid or minimize such potential adverse effects." Evident reference to Principle 15 can be noticed. The said Protocol is an important source of information on possible applications of the precautionary principle, and as it may be strongly predicted that genetic engineering will see significant progress made in the future, it is the more significant to be able to take certain precautions within the legal frames, so as not to let potential negative consequences of this new technology occur. Precautionary principle is an issue of great relevance in the modern world. Reflected in Article 5.7 of the SPS Agreement, it still lacks generally accepted definition which makes it open for extensive interpretation, that in the WTO framework is carried out by the Dispute Settlement Bodies. Although scientific research is constantly conducted in all areas of human activity, including production of food and agricultural products, it is rather common to encouter issues that are ambiguous, thus require further examination. In such cases- when relevant scientific information is not sufficient at a given point in time, SPS Agreement signatories may try to resort to the precautionary principle. As shown in the chosen case studies, it is not easy to prove that state of insufficient number of scientific answers to the problem at hand. Risk assessment seems to be a tricky and demanding exercise to carry out in a way that would be satisfactory for the Dispute Settlement Bodies. Risk and hazards may be perceived differntly in different systems, and hence the necessity to attempt the use of a precautionary measure is not judged identically by all the countries. In fact there are conflicting interests between countries that want to export, make profits and those that consider some goods not safe enough to be imported, but every action must be in line with the binding rules of law. It seems to be rational behaviour to take precautions when certain conditions occur, especially when people's health is at stake, therefore it seems necessary to examine further the issue of the precautionary principle, so that its use is clear and predictible, which will definitely contribute to more stability and correctness of trade relations. 