The program, WinCoot, was used to refine an experimentally derived electron map for crystallised lysozyme, (plus maltose), on to an existing lysozyme structure. WinCoot allows an electron map to be superimposed on to a structure to determine the position of errors in the model. Electron density is represented by a three-dimensional net structure, with blue representing electron density that was detected by the X-rays, green representing areas where electron density should have been located and red representing a definite absence of electron density. The lysozyme unit cell is tetragonal, two sides being equal and all angles being 90 o, the same shape as the native crystals originally grown for X-ray diffraction. As the unit cell shape for lysozyme plus maltose is identical to that of lysozyme alone, it is reasonable to assume that maltose is not affecting the crystal morphology. The active site of lysozyme (identified as a cleft containing two carboxylic acid groups) appears to be occupied by water molecules, no maltose is bound. Water molecules appear as small spheres of electron density, these spheres represent the oxygen atom of water as the hydrogen atoms are too small to be resolved by X-ray diffraction. <heading>Refinement of N-terminal Region</heading>This involves adjusting the model to fit the electron density map obtained from the X-ray diffraction procedure. Arginine 5 (of model); side chain is misplaced relative to electron density map, needs to be rotated to fit the map. Cysteine 6; forms a disulphide bond with Cys127. Bond length = 2.03 Å Methionine 12; side chain is misplaced relative to electron density map. Lysine 13 and Arginine 14; poor electron density in this region, probably due to the electron deficient nature of these positively charged amino acids (both have positively charged side chains) and due to the position of these residues within the protein - surface residues may exhibit poor electron density when compared to buried residues. Histidine 15 and Leucine 17 both have small regions of poor electron density. Asparagine 19; side chain is misplaced relative to electron density map. Arginine 21; side chain misplaced relative to electron density map. Glutamic Acid 23; wrong side chain (and therefore amino acid) present in model. Substitution of glutamate for tyrosine resolves problem, substitution done using 'Simple Mutate' option in WinCoot, followed adjustments in the 'Real Space Refine Zone'. An amino acid might be incorrectly assigned to a region of the electron density map if a certain region of the map is deficient in electron density in such a way that it causes an certain amino acid to appear as another. For example, if the hydroxyl group of a tyrosine residue appeared to be absent, due to the X-ray diffraction process, then this residue may appear to be a phenylalanine instead of a tyrosine. Errors such as this can be resolved, as the primary sequence of the protein will almost certainly be known, and hence, the correct amino acid for each position will be known. Serine 24; hydrogen bonded to a water molecule, bond length = 3.09Å. The same water molecule is also hydrogen bonded to Glysine 26, bond formed between a hydrogen atom of H 2O and the main chain Nitrogen atom of Glysine 26. Bond length = 3.17Å. These hydrogen bonds are putative, wherever a hydrogen bond donor and hydrogen bond acceptor are found within 2.5Å to 3.2Å of each other, it is assumed that a hydrogen bond is formed. In this case, the bond length of 3.17Å is within the range of hydrogen bond distances and hence it is assumed that one exists between this water molecule and Glysine 26. Tryptophan 28; this residue is large and hydrophobic and appears to be buried within the protein in a hydrophobic pocket. Three putative hydrogen bonds exist; between the side chain nitrogen of Trp 28 and Leucine 17 (bond length = 3.14Å), between the same Trp 28 nitrogen and tyrosine 23 (bond length = 3.15Å) and between the main chain nitrogen of Trp 28 and Leucine 25 (bond length = 3.08). Valine 29; misplaced side chain relative to electron density map. 