The effects of oestrogen are mediated through the intracellular oestrogen receptor (ER) of which there are two known forms, ERα and Erβ (bcr81). Both of these isoforms are ligand-dependent activators of transcription (transactivators) (lewin) and are members of the Nuclear Receptor Superfamily (ebi). The action of oestrogen and the ER, which is characteristic of members of this superfamily, involves the activation of the receptor by ligand binding, receptor dimerisation, binding of this complex to a specific DNA sequence and finally, regulation of gene expression though activation of transcription. The initial stage of oestrogen activated transcription involves the binding of oestrogen to the ER. Oestrogen, being lipophilic, can simply diffuse into the cell and bind to the ER within. This ligand binds to the ligand binding domain (LBD) on the ER, which is one of two specific binding domains on the ER, the other being the DNA binding domain (DBD). The LBD is a lipophilic pocket in the receptor that is totally isolated from the external environment (bcr80), binding of the ligand to the LBD induces conformational changes in the receptor that results in an increased affinity of the ER for DNA (lewin). Also at this stage, the multiple chaperone proteins that are associated with the unliganded ER dissociate. These proteins ensure the unliganded ER remains inactive in the absence of oestrogen and include the heat shock protein Hsp90 (beato). With the ER now active, and the activation factor 2 (AF-2) site available, the ER binds to the DNA. The ER/oestrogen complex binds to a specific sequence of DNA known as the oestrogen response element (ERE) (lewin). The ERE is a pallindromic DNA sequence consisting of two half sites, the sequence is TGRCC (beato), although some sources consider the half site to be TGACCT (lewin), the difference depending on the considered importance of the 6 th position. The activated ER recognises the ERE through one of two zinc finger complexes that are present in the ER's structure. The zinc fingers each consist of a zinc atom at the centre of a tetrahedron of cysteine residues. The proximal zinc finger (i.e. the finger nearest the target gene) is responsible for determining the sequence of the target DNA (lewin). Once the ER is bound to the DNA, the distal zinc finger mediates receptor dimerisation. It does this by determining the spacing between the two binding sites to which the ERs bind. The DNA bound ER dimer then activates transcription via a co-activating complex. The function of this complex is to bridge the gap between the ER and the transcriptional machinery. The ER co-activation complex includes the CBP/p300 component (cAMP response element binding protein), the function of this protein is to encourage transcription by acetylating the histones present in the chromatin (lewin). The process of chromatin modification is also known as HAT, or histone acetyl transferase activity. Another common co-activator is the SRC-1 (steroid receptor co-activator 1) (beato), this protein interacts with the exposed AF-2 site and increases transcriptional activity. A third important co-activator is the TFIID complex, which directly interacts with the core transcriptional apparatus located at the promoter. This multi protein transcription factor, consisting of the TATA box binding protein (TBP) and the TBP associated factor (TAF), interacts with RNA polymerase II at the promoter, activating transcription (beato). So it can be seen that transcription is activated in the presence of ligand bound ER through the activation of a multitude of co-activation proteins. In the absence of ligand bound ER there is no co-activator activation and so no transcription is initiated. 