Nitrogen is the most important nutrient influencing grass production, and its supply is largely under the farmer's control (Frame 2000). Naturally there are not enough nitrates in the soil to optimise plant growth, resulting in nitrates being applied to grasslands to achieve higher yields. The health concerns that have been linked with nitrates being leached from agricultural land in the last 30years have forced the Government and farmers to reduce nitrate leaching where possible. <heading>Why does it happen? </heading>Nitrate ions are the soluble form of nitrogen that is necessary for photosynthesis and protein development in the grass plant. Nitrates (NOзˉ) are negatively charged, and therefore cannot be absorbed by the negatively charged colloids found in most soils. Water percolating down through the soil easily removes nitrate ions, leaching them from the soil. <figure/>The diagram to the right represents the mass balance of nitrogen leaching from the soil. It shows that nitrogen leaching is not the only 'inefficiency' of this system. Most nitrates are in the top 20cm of the soil (2.41kgˉ¹), so that they are more easily accessible by the plant. However, being close to the surface makes it easier for the nutrients to be washed down the soil profile. The loss of nitrates through the soil is a concern for two main reasons: <list>A loss of nitrate from the soil, depletes the resources available to the grass,and the environmental problems caused by leaching.</list>The productivity of the grassland will suffer, firstly because of the loss of nitrogen, but also because the leaching of nitrogen from acidic sources (acid rain) accelerates the loss of important nutrient cations. There is a considerable cost of replacing the lost nitrates and nutrients. The main grass-growing period is between spring and early autumn (April to September), and it is essential that nitrates are available for this time, to enable the plant to grow, (produce a high yield). The nitrate is converted into ammonium ions in the plant, which combine with carbohydrate to synthesize amino acids, used to form proteins. Proteins are needed for growth. The environmental problems caused by nitrate leaching concern everybody, not just the farmer. Among the problems are: Issues that result from it entering groundwater - Agricultural land is responsible for 70% of nitrates in water supplies (DEFRA 04) Drinking water - there are significant problems that can arise when nitrates drain into water supplies and contaminate water intended for drinking. There is a cost to limit the affect of nitrates (cancers, 'blue baby syndrome'). The 1980 Drinking Water Directive sets a limit of 50 mg/l for nitrate in public water supplies. (DEFRA 03). Eutrophication - this occurs in surface waters (lakes, streams etc), and is damaging to ecosystems. The farmer must try to prevent nitrates leaching through the soil, to limit the economic and environmental costs that this would generate. The main sources of inputs/sources of soil nitrates are: <list>Organic Fertilisers - including Farm Yard Manure (FYM), slurry, sewage sludge and compostInorganic Fertilisers - Nitrogen based(Lightning)Legumes - fix and recycle NMineral Nitrogen</list><heading>Methods to reduce the Leaching of These Sources </heading><heading>Understand the level needed to be applied - </heading>Grassland systems involve the production of slurries and manures, which are recycled to contribute to the nutrient supply. Composition of the manure or slurry, soil type and precipitation influence how easily the organic fertiliser is leached through the soil. To know how much manure etc that should be applied to the land, the manure should be analysed to know levels of N, the soil type recognised (to establish if it is free draining), the requirement of the crop known, to determine the quantity to be spread. For example, slurries have 40-60% more soluble N than of solid manures (Pain 2000), and are therefore more easily leached. <heading>Understand levels present in the soil (soil analysis of mineral N, N produced by legumes), previous cropping, amount applied as manure and the amount the crop needs to reach the required yield - </heading>to understand level of inorganic fertiliser to be applied. When spreading manure or slurry, the farmer should take into account likely weather conditions to reduce leaching, by not applying wastes when the soil is: <list>WaterloggedFloodedFrozen hardSnow-covered (DEFRA 98)</list>Water losses from the soil are greatest during the winter (highest rainfall), so fertilisers should not be applied at or just before this time. Application of fertiliser should account for relief - steeply sloping fields are avoided (more surface runoff). Fertilisers should not be applied within 10m of surface water (including ditches). Manures should be spread accurately and uniformly, to prevent over application, and reduce the possibility of leaching. When applying an inorganic fertiliser, the type of equipment used may prevent nitrate loss. Pneumatic fertiliser distributors are more accurate than spinners, but by using headland discs (or by tilting the tractor linkage) on a spinning disc spreader helps to avoid hedges and ditches. Fertiliser applications could also be split into as many applications as feasible, as it will be utilised more efficiently. (Self 05) <heading>Minimise disturbance to the soil - </heading>Grass swards, in particular those including legumes, when ploughed up increase the risk of leaching. Ploughing increases the mineralisation of nitrogen, making it a mobile nitrate, allowing leaching, and exposes fixed nitrogen. The levels of N released can be reduced by minimising soil disturbance (DEFRA 98). If a grassland needs reseeding, it should be done with as little cultivation as possible, and grass should cover the field by early October. <heading>Inputs from grazing livestock - </heading>Livestock contribute significantly to leaching of nitrates, e.g. grazing animals use only 10 to 35% of the Nitrates ingested, the remainder return to the soil as urine and faeces (Bussink, 1994). Previous work has indicated that in grazed grassland, cattle urine is a major contributor to nitrate leaching. (Hack-ten Broeke and van der Putten, 1997). If N fertiliser is applied to land already urinated upon, this will exceed the requirement of the plant and excess N may be leached to the soil. <heading>Intensity of grazin g - </heading>Reducing (particularly in the autumn) will reduce nitrate losses, as less urine and faeces will be returned into the cycle and leached by rainwater. Legumes play a significant role in the supply of nitrates to grass, by fixing nitrogen. Clover is the most common legume in UK grass swards, and its growth responds adversely to the response of inorganic N. In permanent pastures that are not intensively grazed, there is little need to apply N to the soil, as legumes may produce the levels needed to supply the grass. <figure/>The Government have reacted to the increased need of reducing nitrates in the water supply by introducing Nitrate Vulnerable Zones across 55% of the agricultural land in the UK. This is to protect surface waters, groundwaters and water likely to suffer from eutrophication, from the exposure of too much nitrate. Farmers within these zones are limited to the level of nitrogen fertilisers (organic and inorganic) that can be applied to their land and when. The map on the right shows the distribution of these zones across England. NVZ's have placed significant management constraints upon farmers. This is a way of environmentally indexing areas, in the future this may be done for individual fields, and may have a much greater effect. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The grass plant is extremely efficient in taking up N from the soil, provided that there is sufficient moisture, and the temperature is suited for growth (Brockman). It is due to the inefficiency of the animal at grass that causes a poor distribution of N, and makes the N most at risk of being lost. Grassland soils typically have high contents of organic matter, resulting in a substantial supply of N by mineralization. (Brockman). However, it must be noted that an input of nitrogen in excess of the plants requirement is likely to be leached. Due to this, it may be suggested that reducing the nitrogen input to the soil to a level slightly below the level needed to give the optimum yield, will ensure that there is less loss to the soil. Rainfall, over application of nitrogen and livestock are the key contributors to leaching from grassland, but careful management can reduce the effect. It must be realised that downward leaching is not the only method by which nitrates are lost from the soil. Nitrates are also lost: <list>Upwards, crop uptake and gaseous loss.Sideward, via surface/subsurface flow.Ammonia volatization.Denitrification.</list>Intensively grazed grassland is at the highest risk of losing nitrate, having the highest input of nitrogen, and generally in being in areas of England with a higher rainfall. Fertilisers (organic/inorganic) should only be applied to the grass when it can make best use of the nitrates. In a grassland system this would mean not applying any between 15 th September and 1 st February. From the mid season onwards, the amount of fertiliser applied should be reduced, as the grass will not grow as much. Application of a fertiliser should only be done if the growth of the grass will actually be used fully. 