Sheepdrove Organic Farm, is well recognised throughout the organic food sector, as supplying a diverse range of high quality organic meats to its customers, by various means. Sheepdrove is a mixed organic farm, situated in the Berkshire Downs, covering 910ha of relatively shallow and nutrient-free chalk soils. Due to the farm being of an organic status, the 'reliance of external inputs, whether chemical or organic, is reduced as far as possible' (Lampkin et al 2004). In order to retain the productivity of the land, (as commonly practiced on organic farms) a rotation between clover-rich grazing leys, cereals, field beans and herbs, is practiced. Into this rotation, and the permanent pasture, livestock graze. Sheep are one of the five livestock enterprises on the farm, and unlike the beef, pigs and chicken, may be considered as a seasonable meat. In the last fifty years, lamb has been the only sheep meat eaten in the UK (Mutton Renaissance), and with this being in season for only a limited period of the year, many sheep farmers depend entirely upon lamb sales for income. However, Sheepdrove has succeeded in marketing lamb, and sheep meat as a year round product, and by doing so has opened up a number of niche markets, including that for mutton, and ram lamb meat. In order to understand the availability of sheep meat year round, it is essential to understand the production system(s) in place on the farm. <heading>Production Systems</heading>Despite being an organic farm, Sheepdrove still retains the main characteristics of any lowland sheep farm, which generally involve, combining 'the various elements of the production system in order to sell lambs at a price greater than their cost of production' (Croston et al 1994). As with other lowland farms, Sheepdrove; Makes the best use of grass (the cheapest, convenient and most natural source of nutrition), throughout the year, Produces a product, that the market is demanding, Attempts to keep costs down, and achieve the best return from the product that is possible. Currently, 35 lambs per week are slaughtered, with the first batch of new season lamb being slaughtered in mid-March. Lamb continues to be sold through the rest of the year, and mutton is available from September till mid-April. The main reason behind this ability to sell sheep meat year round, is due to the different systems of production on the farm, and the revival of mutton. These different production systems are: <list>Early lambing system,Spring lambing,And the methods that lambs are finished, dependant upon whether they are from the early, or spring lambing flocks. </list><heading>The Early Lambing Flock</heading>The early lambing system is designed to achieve the best margin out of the early-season premium prices for spring lamb. Ewes are mated between September and early October, with the aim of 600 ewes lambing in February. Lambs are sold from mid-March onwards. Even with a premium being charged for the lamb due to its organic status, a much higher profit can be generated by selling lambs at this earlier date. However, ovulation of ewes in September and October, is much lower than that of the later lambing flock, a problem that can be difficult to overcome. The use of breeding, is as essential tool in overcoming this issue. <heading>Breeding - </heading>It is generally considered, that the ideal ewe will be, 'relatively small, with good milking potential, which can be crossed with a much larger, meat-producing breed, to produce several offspring that grow fast and economically' (Boden 2005). To fulfil this aim, Sheepdrove have chosen the Shetland ewe as the nucleus of the flock. Shetlands are a more hardy breed than traditional mule crosses commonly seen on lowland farms, and 'the Shetland ewe is capable of spectacular results when given the opportunity of better pastures and a higher feeding level' (NSA 1989). Both pure-bred Shetlands, and Shetland cross ewes are used for both the early and spring lambing periods. Of the Shetland crosses, a number of ewes are Shetland x Poll Dorset. Poll Dorset ewes have the ability to breed at almost any season of the year (NSA 1989). The benefits of the Shetland, crossed with the benefits of the Poll Dorset, produce a ewe capable of conceiving successfully at an early time, and produce a fat lamb within a relatively short period. The early lambing ewe flock are put to the following rams, for the following reasons: Hampshire Down - 'Hampshires are widely acknowledged as the sire that produces the fastest growing and earliest maturing cross bred lamb' (NSA 1989). Suffolk - Crossed lambs mature early at a good weight, with a high percentage of lean meat and little wasteage. Texel - An ideal terminal sire, producing most significantly a good male lamb (suitable for selling as ram lamb, later in the season). Charollais - Easy lambing, good conformation. Various terminal sires are used, because each breed produces lambs that mature and lay fat down at different weights. The use of lambs with differing growth patterns enables the constant supply of fat lambs, easily spread throughout the year. The number of lambs per ewe, are in actual fact lower than would be expected of an organic lowland farm. Table 1 shows the number of lambs born per ewe. From this we can see that the early lambing flock, is in fact less productive than the UK average. <table/>Prolific ewes, such as the Lleyn, and some of the traditional mule crosses, are favoured on some lowland farms for their ability to produce two or more lambs, with as suggested above. However, at Sheepdrove, they do not aim to have any triplets, and where possible avoid supplementing the ewe (associated costs). Ewes are scanned at 80 days of pregnancy. If ewes in the early mating flock, are not in lamb, they will be recycled into the later lambing flock, and culled if they then appear to be barren. <heading>Housing and Feeding</heading>The early lambing flock, are housed in January, to allow ewes to settle and avoid stress prior to lambing. The ewes are fed grass silage, and oats. It is common practice on sheep farms, for ewes to split according to the number of lambs that they are carrying. Here however, ewes are split according to their condition, to enable their diet to reflect this. Lambs are not tail docked or castrated, because Sheepdrove believe that they do not need to, not because there are any organic rules saying that they cannot. This is understandable where leaving ram lambs entire is concerned, as ram lamb meat is a speciality product. However, not tail docking can increase the incidence of fly strike, an issue that is dealt with with the ewes. Ewes and lambs from the early flock, are turned out at two weeks old. This protects lambs from adverse weather, but makes them more susceptible to a large number of diseases and infections. Lambs from the early flock, are finished early, with the intention of gaining the premium. The lambs are reared on grass, with a feed supplement of forage (including turnips and kale) speeding the liveweight gain. Lambs are slaughtered at 38kg, a larger size than the UK average of 16-22kg (Croston et al 1994). <heading>The Spring (late) Lambing Flock</heading>As with the early lambing flock, Shetland and Shetland cross ewes are put to terminal sires, to produce lambs that will mature at different weights. Charollais, Suffolk and Texel rams are used, for the reasons outlined previously. Shetland rams are also put to a number of ewes, to breed replacements. The late lambing flock, of 1400 ewes will lamb between April and May, outside. This reduces the risk of disease, and will keep feed costs down. Outside lambing also requires less labour, with the average number of ewes per man outlined below. <table/>The late lambing flock produces fat lambs from June onwards, with ram lambs in particular being finished at a much later date. Many of the lambs are finished off of grass, with forages and barley added to the diet when there is less grass available. Practices, including scanning, tail docking and castrating are as with the early flock <heading>Biosecurity</heading>'Animal health promotion in organic farming is based on preventative management and good husbandry' (Lampkin et al 2004). All organic livestock farms are required to have a written animal health plan, as part of livestock management, which is approved by the Soil Association. 'The routine prophylactic use of veterinary medicines (such as antibiotics and wormers) is not permitted',(DEFRA 2004), although exceptions are made for farms with a recognised problem. Ways that Shepdrove try to prevent the onset of disease, and keep to the plan are: Breed choice - The Shetland are a hardy breed, and the original Shetland ewes are of a high health status and enzootic abortion free. Closed flock - all female replacements are home-bred. Rams bought in, are health checked, and isolated before introduction to the flock. Ewes are condition scored, before lambing, and after so changes can be made to avoid the onset of disease. Ewes are dagged, so the ewes are clean before shearing, and so the possibility of fly strike is minimised. Feet are checked, and problems sorted out where possible, or susceptible ewes culled. Lambs can be treated for illnesses the same as lambs on a conventional farm, but by turning the lambs out, and lambing outside reduces the need for medication. A clean grazing system, and rotations are the methods commonly used at Sheepdrove, to control nematode worms, and other sheep parasites. Faecal egg counts are also used, to determine whether or not the sheep need worming. Double boundary fencing - prevent neighbouring flocks entering, bringing in disease. Lambs and ewes intended for slaughter, if treated must undergo an extended withdrawal period. 'Stocking rates will generally be lower on organic farms than other farms' (Soil Association 2000-06), with this being not only a benefit to the soil, but also to the flocks health. <heading>Marketing</heading>The systems outlined previously, and the differing methods of finishing lambs, produces sheep meat, year round. With these different types of meat being produced, at different times of the year, promotion has been an essential tool in the success of the meat. All of the sheep meat is sold through boxes, either purchased over the internet, or in one of the two Sheeepdrove butchers. Below is a list of the varying products available: When marketing these products, the website has proven to be the be the most effective method. The website is very informative, and promotes animal welfare and meat quality most strongly. With these different types of meat available each week, recipes are added to the box, further emphasising that Sheepdrove has control of the entire sheep process, from the beginning of the process, through to the way the customer cooks it. <heading>Conclusion</heading>It seems that the system currently in practice on Sheepdrove organic farm is ideal for producing the lamb and mutton, for sale through home-delivery and their butcher shops. The product produced, is done so with a more affluent, and environmentally and animal welfare conscious person in mind. A premium is charged for the product, reflecting its quality, and the high standards under which it has been produced. The website, being very informative and easy is an ideal way to market its products. The customer can also expect variety throughout the year, with different cuts, and different types of sheep meat available at different times: <list>New season lamb - Mid-March onwardsLate season lamb - August - October. Ram lambs (promoted by their strong taste)Mutton - September to April. Use of cull ewes. </list>This is an excellent way of not only maintaining demand for sheep meat year round, but also good to keep the customer loyal to the Sheepdrove brand. Extended lambing essential to spread lambing peaks, labour requirements and enable availability of lamb year round Ageing and less productive Shetland flock 