<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Canning is a method of preserving food by first heating it to a temperature that destroys contaminating micro-organisms, and then sealing it in air-tight jars or cans. Canning it relies on high temperatures to destroy micro-organisms and enzymes. Because of the danger of botulism, the only safe method of canning most foods is under conditions of both high heat and pressure, normally at temperatures of 116-121°C depending on the type of food which is canned. Foods that must be pressure canned include all vegetables, meats, seafood, poultry, and dairy products. The effect of heat processing on the nutritive value of food is variable. For instance, the vitamin-C content of green vegetables is much reduced, but, owing to greater acidity, in fruit juices vitamin C is quite well retained. There is also a loss of 25 - 50% of water-soluble vitamins if the liquor is not used. Using heat to destroy microorganisms and proper canning techniques it is important because invisible microorganisms are all around us. Many are beneficial and others are harmful. All foods contain microorganisms, the major cause of food spoilage. During the canning process, air is driven from the jar and a vacuum is formed as the jar cools and seals, preventing microorganisms from entering and recontaminate the food. The acidity level, or pH, of foods determines whether they should be processed in a boiling water canner or pressure canner. The lower the pH, the more acidic food is. Low-acid foods, such as vegetables, meat, poultry, and fish, must be pressure canned at the recommended time and temperature to destroy Clostridium botulinum, the bacterium that causes botulism food poisoning. Canning of low-acid foods in boiling water canners is absolutely unsafe because 100 0C is not high enough to destroy C. botulinum. If botulinum bacteria survive and grow inside a sealed jar, they can produce a deadly toxin. Even a taste of food containing this toxin can be fatal. Acidic foods have pH values below 4.5. These foods include pickles, most fruits, and jams and jellies made from fruit. Acidic foods contain enough acidity either to stop the growth of botulinum bacteria or destroy the bacteria more rapidly when heated. Acidic foods may be safely canned in a boiling water canner ( URL ). In this practical baked beans and carrots were used for the canning practical exercise. The objective was to understand the procedure involved for the processing of canned products and factors affecting the safety and quality of the products. <heading>Materials and procedure</heading>Flow diagram of the experimental conditions used for processing of canned baked beans and carrots. <list><heading>Canning procedure for baked beans</heading>Soaking of 1kg of beans overnightDrained soaked beans and weighedBlanched beans using hot waterPreparation of 2 sauces A and B of different recipesFilled beans into 10 cans (2cans filled with sauce A and the rest with sauce B and leaving small head space) Clinched the cans and exhaust for 5 minutesSealed cansSterilized cans at 120 0C for 60 minutesCool (pressure cooling)</list><list><heading>Canning procedure for carrots</heading>Peeled and sliced carrotsBlanched carrots at 90 0C for 5 minutesPrepared 5% brine solutionFilled cans with carrots and brine solution and leaving small head spaceClinched cans and exhaust for 5 minutesSealed the cansSterilized cans at 120 0C for 30 minutesCool (pressure cooling)</list><heading>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</heading>The recipes of the sauces were as follows <table/><table/><heading>To calculate the moisture content of soaked beans</heading>Data;  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Therefore the final moisture content of the bean was 52%. <heading>KEY PROCEDURE USED TO ENSURE A SAFE PRODUCT</heading><heading>Soaking</heading>Soft water was used to soak 1kg of beans overnight. Hard water yield a product which will require longer cooking time to make it edible, or with very hard water it may not be possible to secure a satisfactory product from the standpoint of tenderness. Extremely soft water used for soaking and blanching will contribute to the splitting and matting of the beans in the can. <heading>Peeling </heading>It is an important operation that removes surface soil and associated microbial contamination. Incorrect pealing can lead to excessive wastage of sound raw material. This is normally a main problem when peeling is done manually. Various methods are used such as steam pealing, mechanical peeling or combinations to avoid such problem. Carrots were peeled before further processing of the carrots in the cans. Raw material quality it is an important aspect to consider during canning of food products. Canning products are produced with the aim of being stored at ambient temperatures, hence the raw material used should have minimum/ low microbial load and of good quality attributes so that it doesn't contribute to the fast spoilage of the product. Blanching is a pre treatment method used in food processing where by a mild heat treatment and /or steam is applied for a certain short period of time depending on the food product so as to inactivate enzyme activity in food, removing air from intercellular spaces which increase bulk density of food and assists formation head space for vacuum cans, softening of tissues as well ass cleaning of vegetative microorganisms. However blanching when applied in food products it does have disadvantage causing loss of nutrients in food which are sensitive to heat e.g. vitamins. Both beans and carrots were blanched at 90  oC. The sterilisation temperature was 120  oC and 1bar pressure for 60 and 40 minutes respectively. The raw materials were prepared manually. During blanching process, food is heated rapidly to a preset temperature, held for a preset time and then cooled rapidly to near ambient temperatures. There are several factors which influence blanching time, which are <list>Type of food blanchedSize of the piece of the foodBlanching temperature andMethod of heating (Fellows, P 2000).</list>Syrup, brines and sauces were added in baked beans and brine for the sliced carrots so as to improve flavor, color, texture and aroma of the beans and carrots respectively. Syrup it has high sugar content and brine it was 5% salt (NaCL) which also tends to improve in control of microbial growth and improve keeping quality of the products. Also in the sauces it contained mixed spies and herbs, vinegar which improves flavor, taste, texture, and acceptability of the product as well as the keeping quality. Moreover sauces, syrup and brines are also added in solid foods so as improve the rate of heat transfer in the solid food and to displace air from the container, which are very crucial during sterilization and packaging of the products. Filling levels it is very important factor during canning of food products. Accurate filling of containers/ cans it is important to ensure compliance with fill weight legislation and to prevent give away by over filling. A head space is needed during filling above the food to form a partial vacuum. This reduces pressure changes inside the container during processing and reduces oxidative deterioration of the product during storage. When filling solid foods with sauces, to prevent air from becoming entrapped in the product which would reduce the head space vacuum, viscous solids are added before solid pieces of foods. But it is not crucial when dilute brine or syrup as air is able to escape before sealing. However, it is important to fill in the product while still hot (hot filled) so as to minimize chances or recontamination of the product and facilitate fast heat transfer during sterilization of the product after sealing (i.e. reduces processing time). Exhausting is a process whereby heat is applied to replace air in the head space of the container by water vapor. This prevents air expanding with the heat and reduces strain on the container. The removal of oxygen also prevents internal corrosion and oxidative changes in some foods. Steam replaces air and on cooling forms a partial vacuum in head space. Double seam is a sealing process for canned products where by a can is sealed twice. First the can is loosely sealed i.e. clinched so as to allow heat processing to take place during exhausting. When the can is loosely sealed and subjected to heat, it allows air to be removed inside the can and replaced by steam (which is important for enhancing keeping quality of the products in terms of microbial control). Second sealing tightened two hooks to produce double seam which ensures the aperture is cleaned of the product to prevent microbial growth and potential contamination of the product (Fellows, P 2000). Retorting (processing) is the heating process applied to sealed containers to extend the shelf life of the food product. The goal of retort processing is to obtain commercial sterilization by the application of heat. The micro organism of greatest concern is Clostridium botulinum, a gas forming anaerobe that produces a lethal exotoxin. Also any spoilage organism's present need to be inactivated. Retorting destroys or inactivate micro organisms, certain bacteria may survive the process, so the product is safe, but not necessarily sterile, i.e. Commercial sterilization. Commercial sterilization is an inactivation of organisms of significance to both public health and spoilage under normal conditions of storage There are several factors that influence the rate of heat transfer and thus determine the time the product exposed to the heat. This includes type of process applied, equipment design, the size and shape of the container, product viscosity, particulates and headspace. The higher the temperature the faster the killing rate, therefore the shorter the time of exposure to heating temperature. In retort containers, after the heat passes through the container via conduction, it can heat the food by conduction or convection. Conduction is appropriate for solid pack foods such as baked beans and sliced carrots and convection heating is best used for products or portions of the food exhibiting some degree of flow e.g. liquid foods. For conduction-heated products, the centre of the container is the slowest heating point and the time it takes to reach the thermal processing temperature is longer than it is for products processed by convection heat transfer. In products heated entirely by convection, the coldest point will fall near the bottom of the container. Many foods, however, do not exhibit a single mode of heat transfer and the cold point must be determined by measuring various points in the can with thermocouples. High-acid foods, those with a pH of less than 4.5, do not support the growth of spore-forming bacteria, although yeast and mold can still cause spoilage. This means that if the pH is low enough, cooking, filling, followed by cooling yields a safe product without retorting. Low acid foods with pH value above 4.5 readily support the growth of spoilage micro organism, therefore sufficient heat processing (sterilization) has to be done to ensure safety of the product since pH provide basis for the amount of heat the product has to be exposed to ensure it reaches commercial sterility ( URL ). After sterilization, it is important to use pressure cooling so as to reduce strain on the container. This is achieved condensing steam in the retort, food cools more slowly and pressure in the container remains high. Compressed pressure is used to equalize the pressure to prevent strain on the container seam. Post process handling of the cans is important after sterilization so as to avoid any chances of recontamination of the food products in cans. Several aspects to consider during post process handling are the following, Air Cooling - Contamination of air cooled cans is more likely to occur if the cans are wet. Because air cooled cans are normally removed from a steam process without any exposure to water, this is not likely to occur. However, if wet items such as gloves or jackets are laid upon the cooling cans contamination may occur from these items. In addition to supplying the contaminating organisms the water on these items could give the organisms the motility required to penetrate the can through the seams. Typically, the seam compound would be in a state of flux during the beginning of this period, just as it would be with water cooling. At the same time the can is forming vacuum while cooling. Thermophilic Growth - Optimum growth temperature for thermophiles is 131 oF, with a range of 110 oF to 170 oF. Interior of air cooled cans would be in this range at some point during cooling. Care should be taken to assure that air cooled cans be stacked so that air circulation is adequate to prevent holding of cans at thermophilic temperatures for long periods of time. Also thermophiles can cause flat sour spoilage or swollen cans. Flat sour spoilage is when the can ends do not swell, but the product pH drops, giving the product an undesirable sour flavour. Water Cooling - Water cooling the cans may be more susceptible to contamination. Because the cooling water in addition to supplying the organisms, also supply the motility needed for the organism to penetrate the can's seams. The seam compound is also more flexible, therefore less resistant to microbial penetration during the cooling cycle. Cooling water should be chlorinated or adequately treated to kill organisms which may be found in the water so that if water leaks through the seam it will not carry any organisms into the can ( URL ). <heading>QUALITY OF PRODUCT</heading>To start with the two sauces made i.e. A & B, before mixed with the beans and processed under heat treatment during exhausting and retorting, the colour and taste of the sauces were different as after the treatment. Before sauces were of bright red colour of the tomato juice and more viscous while after being mixed with beans and processed, sauces were less viscous and sauce B which was mixed with mixed spices & herbs was more brownish in colour as compared to sauce A, also the flavour and aroma of the sauces was improved. In terms of texture and softness of beans was improved after the processing. However, the beans in two sauces A & B were not as soft as compared to the commercial product (Baked beanz Henz). This is most probable to the time the beans have been exposed to heat treatment during retorting determines the softness of the product. During the practical, baked beans were sterilized for 60 minutes, which is likely beans didn't soften enough as compared to the commercial product. Also the storage time, probable as the commercial beans were produced long time, it is possible the longer the storage time, the softer the beans becomes (mixed with sauces). While for the beans processed during the practical were tasted and compared with commercial products immediately. Also the sugar content of the commercial product was less as compared to beans in sauce B & A respectively. Carrots were softer than normal acceptable texture. This is due to the time used to process was longer than it should have been. Most probable they were over heated during blanching and retorting. However, the brine sauce used on carrots also contributed to heat transfer inside the can and to give acceptable taste. <heading>CONCLUSIONS</heading>In canning process, food products are heated sufficiently at high temperature and for a long period of time to destroy microbial growth and enzyme activity. As a result, sterilized foods have a shelf life in excess of six month at ambient temperatures. However, severe heat treatment of in container (canning) may produce substantial changes in nutritional and sensory components of the food. This can be minimized by either reducing the time during processing or processing food before packaging i.e. aseptic packaging. In container sterilization, the length of time required to sterilize the food depends on, <list>The heating resistance of micro organism or enzymes likely to be present in the food (e.g. heat resistance micro organisms are likely to be found or not).Physical state of the food (liquid or solid, natural convection is faster than heat transfer by conduction).Size of the container and shape (determines rate of heat transfer inside the container i.e. penetration to the centre). Heating conditions (e.g. agitations of the container increases the rate of heat penetration in viscous or semi solid food).pH of the food (Fellows, P 2000).</list>Heat resistance of micro organism is temperature dependant. Clostridium botulinum is more stable heat resistant micro organism, of which 12D is needed at 121.1 0C for 3 minutes to ensure C. botulinum are destroyed. A 12 D process is used when there is likely of botulism to be present, otherwise it can result in over processing and excessive loss of quality in food. To ensure safe product rate of heat transfer through the container and into the food is important. Rate of heat transfer is influenced by the type of product, processing time & temperature, container size, filling level & temperature, agitation and venting conditions as discussed above. It is important to control all these factors affecting heat penetration and use of Good Manufacturing Practise so as to produce a safe and acceptable quality with good nutritional quality attributes. Also it is important to establish quality assurance of the product, in terms of checking, inspecting or controlling from the raw material (sound raw material i.e. of good quality), to control filled weight, final product assessment (sensory characteristics), seam evaluation (prevention of any chances of post process contamination) as discussed above. In addition to have a target spoilage rate of < 1 in 10 4 containers. To achieve target spoilage doesn't exceed 1 in 10 4 containers, rate of heat penetration it is important to determine with the use of F value. F value for a process is the number of minutes required to kill a known population of micro organisms in a given food under specified conditions. This F value is usually set at 12 D values to give a theoretical 12 log cycle reduction of the most heat-resistant species of mesophilic spores in a can of food ( URL ). 