<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Sensory evaluation of different brands of chocolate from different producers was done with the use of profiling technique. Profiling is a sensory technique which uses a group of panelist to systematically translate and discriminate the nature and intensity of sensory characteristic of a food product. During the practical, before assessors tasted different four brands of chocolate to differentiate different attribute, the panel discussed and agreed on the criteria/ terminologies to be used to describe different attribute which were measured by using unstructured scale method. Chocolates analyzed were from Waitrose Belgian milk, Cadbury's dairy milk, Asda milk and Galaxy milk. The panel consisted of fifteen assessors and samples of four chocolates were eaten whilst discussing the attributes. The panelist were not experts but have received basic training in detection of different sensory attributes, and being able to assign an appropriate value of intensity of attribute being looked at. <heading>AIM</heading>The aim of the experiment was to train the panel on the ability to discriminate different attributes of milk chocolate tasted, the panel to demonstrate ability to communicate information about character and intensity of sensation and to use the data obtained to determine the accuracy and reliability of assessors with the use of statistics package for sensory analysis and to demonstrate ability to interpret data/results obtained. <heading>METHODOLOGY</heading>In sensory evaluation of milk chocolates, there were 15 assessors to discriminate the nature and intensity of sensory attributes. The analysis was done twice to replicate the data. Firstly the panel tasted all chocolate blindly in the sensory laboratory while chocolate samples were labeled 1-4. The panel compiled list of vocabulary in which was thought described chocolate best as it was eaten with the help of panel leader. Descriptive words were discussed in the panel so as assessors understood and being able to use them to describe attributes of the chocolates. Descriptive words were grouped into three main categories as follows; <list>Texture (mouth feel)Hard first bite- The toughness/softness when the chocolate piece is bitted.Fast melting- how fast chocolate piece melt in the mouth.Smooth- the feeling of chocolate inside the mouth i.e. softnessGrainy- the way chocolate melts in the mouth i.e. into small pieces e.g. like sandFlavour (to discriminate if the chocolate piece has any of the following flavours and at what intensity).Cocoa, Butter, Sweet, Dairy, Fruity, Nutty and Caramel (coffee).After effect(mouth feel)Mouth coating- feel in the mouth after swallowing chocolate.Sweet- if there is sweetness sensation in the mouth after swallowing chocolate.</list>With the use of unstructured line scale, attributes were evaluated for each of chocolate brand by use of computer. The panel while were tasted the chocolate samples in sensory laboratory, they sat in individual booth and rinsing their mouth in between sample tasting. <heading>RESULTS</heading>Table showing different means for different 4 brands of chocolate determined by 15 assessors in duplicate. Also least significance difference was calculated to test which means are significantly different in Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). <table/><figure/><heading>DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION</heading>Method used for scoring was that of an unstructured scale i.e. open line scale with maximum and minimum marked on the ends of the line. This scaling was done on the computer so that data could be analyzed electronically. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used in the two way ANOVA technique to calculate whether or not the scores had any significance difference, if there was a difference in the assessors and the least significance difference. The significance differences between the scores are shown on the table above. Using the data on the table and star diagrams above, the differences between attributes for different brands of chocolate can be seen clearly. Galaxy was generally the highest score and by a long way in the category of dairy despite having the lowest milk solids. All others have at least 20% milk solids where as Galaxy only has 14% milk solids. This is seen clearly on the star diagram where by Galaxy line follows an outer path. Galaxy had the lowest score for the hard first bite due to the notable softness on the chocolate. Galaxy showed most differences to the Waitrose Belgian chocolate, Asda milk and Cadbury's dairy milk. This is because Galaxy represents the extremes against hard first bite, dairy, sweet and mouth coating which is represented in the different cocoa solids in the chocolates. In Galaxy there were 25% cocoa solids and in Waitrose there were 30% cocoa solids. This account for the Waitrose chocolate to have highest score in cocoa flavour and hardest first bite since are related. The amount of cocoa also contributes to the bitterness of the chocolate and as Waitrose had the highest score for the bitterness flavour and hard first bite. Asda had mostly middle range values for the attributes but was clearly the driest. The Asda chocolate difference were mostly against Galaxy and Waitrose, and mostly similar with Cadbury's dairy milk. This is mostly probable Asda chocolate is imitating attributes characteristics of Cadbury chocolate, this can be seen clearly on the star diagram where by the score line for Asda and Cadbury they are more closely related except for the fruity flavour. Cadbury chocolate generally scored the highest after the Galaxy chocolate with most significance difference in the fruity flavour as compared to the other three types of chocolate. However from the general overview of the results from the table above, there are some attributes where by there were no significant difference between assessors. This means on the ones where there was a significant difference between the assessors, results are not as accurate as they could be. This could have been due to the panel not fully understood the words used to describe the attributes, this mostly probable arose from the ability to distinguish/ describe the attributes. Also this is due to probability of some of the panelist couldn't distinguish the different taste of attributes and used the same word to describe it. Other possible factor which could affect the result is the temperature of the chocolate. Temperature affects hard first bite, fast melting attributes. However chocolate were stored on the fridge at the same temperature but there was a possibility of affecting the quality/ attributes of chocolates when served for sensory evaluation and if left on ambient temperature for long. Generally from the scores obtained, it showed that assessors for most of the attributes, used different parts of the scale in scoring because some had high scores while others had low scores. Generally in commercial sensory analysis (in food industries) panelists are usually screened and selected. Ideally there should be no difference between panelist and samples such that assessors should have no/low significance difference i.e. probability of 5%. 