<heading>OBJECTIVE</heading>The purpose of the experiment was to understand the indirect heating system of UHT milk treatment, to analysis milk properties, colour, flavour, microbiological and quality attributes with respect to UHT treatments. During the practical, indirect heating system in the pilot plant was used. <heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Ultra High Temperature (UHT) is a continuous process that involves rapid heating to high temperatures (about 140 0C), holding for short period of time (1 to 10s) and rapidly cooling. While pasteurization conditions effectively eliminate potential pathogenic micro organisms, it is not sufficient to inactivate the thermoresistant spores in milk. The term sterilization refers to the complete elimination of all microorganisms. The food industry uses the more realistic term commercial sterilization, a product is not necessarily free of all microorganisms, but those that survive the sterilization process are unlikely to grow during storage and cause product spoilage. In canning, the objective is to ensure the cold spot has reached the desired temperature for the desired time. With most canned products, there is a low rate of heat penetration to the thermal centre. This leads to overprocessing of some portions, and damage to nutritional and sensory characteristics, especially near the walls of the container. This implies long processing times at lower temperatures. Milk can be made commercially sterile by subjecting it to temperatures in excess of 100° C, and packaging it in air-tight containers. The milk may be packaged either before or after sterilization. The basis of UHT is the sterilization of food before packaging, then filling into pre-sterilized containers in a sterile atmosphere. Milk that is processed in this way using temperatures exceeding 135° C, permits a decrease in the necessary holding time (to 2-5 s) enabling a continuous flow operation. Some examples of food products processed with UHT are liquid products e.g. milk, juices, cream, yoghurt, wine, salad dressings, foods with discrete particles e.g. baby foods, tomato products, fruits and vegetables juices, soups and larger particles e.g. stews ( URL ). There are two principal methods of UHT treatment i.e. direct and indirect heating. Direct heating system, the product is heated by direct contact with steam of potable or culinary quality. The main advantage of direct heating is that the product is held at the elevated temperature for a shorter period of time. For a heat-sensitive product such as milk, this means less damage. Also there are two method of direct heating system which are injection and infusion. Injection - High pressure steam is injected into pre-heated liquid by a steam injector leading to a rapid rise in temperature. After holding, the product is flash-cooled in a vacuum to remove water equivalent to amount of condensed steam used. This method allows fast heating and cooling, and volatile removal, but is only suitable for some products. It is energy intensive and because the product comes in contact with hot equipment, there is potential for flavour damage. Infusion - Food in a free falling film is pumped into a chamber of high pressure steam. The time of the fall matches the desired holding time. The product, therefore, falls onto a cooled surface, followed by flash cooling in vacuum chamber. This method has several advantages which includes instantaneous heating and rapid cooling, no localized overheating or burn-on, and suitable for low and higher viscosity products Indirect heating systems the heating medium and product are not in direct contact, but separated by equipment contact surfaces. Several types of heat exchangers are used which are plates, tubular, scraped surface and double-cone heat exchangers. <heading>MATERIAL AND PROCEDURE</heading>As given in the practical handout. <heading>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</heading><heading>MILK ANALYSIS</heading><table/><table/><table/><heading>CALCULATIONS</heading><heading>Estimation of F0 value for UHT sterilization process</heading>To determine F 0 values based on 135 0C for 1s and 140 0C for 2s.  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  As F 0 indicates time required to obtain a given reduction in the number of micro-organisms. Usually as the aim is to achieve commercial sterility i.e. 12D for C. Botulinum which is most heat resistant micro organism. A product is said to be safe at 121.1 0C for 3minute at the slowest heating point. Since at 135 0C F 0 achieved is 0.41s, this it's not enough to attain commercial sterility and the product will be unsafe. As compared to 140 0C F 0 is 2.59s the product will attain commercial sterility i.e. will be safe. <heading>Average and minimum residence time</heading>Data given; (L = 160cm, diameter = 0.96cm) and F 0 value to assume turbulent flow.  FORMULA  Therefore,  FORMULA   FORMULA  Based on the formula above, t av and t min were calculated and results are shown in the table below. <table/><heading>Steam consumption</heading> FORMULA   FORMULA  Where from the steam table, Latent heat of steam under 140 0C is 2144.0  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Cooling requirement</heading> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION</heading>According to the results above, milk analysis was done by performing alcohol test. It is shown that alcohol stability falls with addition of CaCl 2 because of the pH drop. Usually good quality raw milk its alcohol stability is within 80-100%. From the table above shows that as CaCl 2 increases alcohol stability was dropping. Alcohol stability indicates of milk to heat treatment. It can be concluded that as the quality of raw milk deteriorates, also alcohol stability drops. For the case of milk properties, theoretically addition of CaCl 2 shouldn't affect milk composition in terms of fat and proteins. From the table, it's shown that there are variations for fat, protein and lactose for different milk samples due to addition of CaCl 2. This can be most probably due to experimental errors. But FPD was increasing on addition of CaCl 2 indicates the temperature of which milk will freeze and pH was dropping, which indicates the milk was becoming more acidic. In terms of flavour, mouth feel and colour, UHT has the flavour of cooked cabbage which is due to removal of volatile compound and formation of reducing sulphur compounds(H 2S , sulphydryl groups) due to denaturation of proteins and lipids which causes formation of ketones and lactones. Untreated milk i.e. without addition of heat treatment was yellowish/ cream in colour. While the colour of UHT milk is much whiter as compared to raw milk and this is due to increased size of the casein micelles and presence of Lactulose due to heat treatment. Lactulose is also used as an indicator of heat treatment of UHT & sterilized milk as well as to categorize the severity of heat treatment (the higher the quantity lactulose present, the higher the heat treatment used). Mouth feel of UHT milk was increased greatly on addition of CaCl 2. This is because CaCl 2 causes drop in pH, increases ionic stability of Ca 2+ in milk and consequently causes casein micelles to be more stable and also addition of CaCl 2 promotes fat molecules in milk to behave like casein micelles. Milk sample with 0.045% CaCl 2 after being heat treated (UHT) sediments were formed. Usually UHT processing usually give rise to a better or high quality because of the following reasons; The D and Z valves are higher for quality factors than micro organisms. The reduction in process time due to higher temperature (UHTST) and the minimal come-up and cool-down time leads to a higher quality product. Long shelf life greater than 6 months without refrigeration, can be expected. Packaging size. Processing conditions are independent of container size, thus allowing for the filling of large containers for food-service or sale to food manufacturers. Cheaper packaging: Both cost of package and storage and transportation costs; laminated packaging allows for use of extensive graphics However there are several difficulties which are encountered during indirect heating system which are; Sterility; Complexity of equipment and plant are needed to maintain sterile atmosphere between processing and packaging (packaging materials, pipe work, tanks, and pumps), higher skilled operators. Also sterility must be maintained through aseptic packaging. Particle Size; With larger particulates there is a danger of overcooking of surfaces and need to transport material both limits particle size. Also there is a lack of equipment for particulate sterilization, due especially to settling of solids and thus over processing. Fouling; this is deposit formation of particles. And it more susceptible to liquid with high viscosity. It causes pressure drop and physical damage of the gasket. Keeping Quality; Heat stable lipases or proteases can lead to flavour deterioration, age gelation of the milk over period of time. There is also a more pronounced cooked flavour to UHT milk. <heading>Packaging of UHT milk products</heading>The most important point to remember during packaging is that the environment should be in aseptic condition (must be sterile). All handling of product post-process must be within the sterile environment. There are several different package forms that are used in aseptic UHT processing whichare; <list>Cans, are used with a plastic body and a metal lid.Paperboard/ plastic/ foil/ plastic laminates with or without head space.Flexible pouches.Thermoformed plastic containers.Flow moulded containers.Bag-in-box is use for bulk transportation from a few litres up to one metric tonne ( URL ). </list><heading>Microbiological spoilage of the UHT product</heading>Usually in UHT products are heat treated as to achieve commercial sterility i.e. 12D for C. Botulinum which is most heat resistant micro organism. A product is said to be safe at 121.1 0C for 3minute at the slowest heating point. In addition to ensuring the destruction of micro-organisms, the heat treatment of milk also results in a number of other reactions and changes.The main changes are inactivation of enzymes, denaturation and complex formation, maillard browning reactions, loss of vitamins and amino acids. Choosing the type of process and temperature-time combination best suited to the handling of a range of products of widely varying initial quality and composition, should be based on the bacteriological and physio-chemical changes. During the course of time, the following terms have gained general acceptance in connection with food sterilization processes. <heading>D-value or decimal reduction time</heading>The D-value, which denotes the decimal reduction time, is the time required at a specific temperature and under specified conditions to reduce a microbial population by one decimal. The decimal reduction time is dependent on the temperature, the type of micro-organism and the composition of the medium containing the micro-organism. <heading>Z-value</heading>The Z-value is the increase or decrease in temperature required to reduce or increase the decimal reduction time by one decimal. It is a measure of the change in death-rate with a change in temperature. <heading>Sterilizing effect or lethality</heading>The sterilizing effect, which is also called lethality or death-rate, indicates the effect of a heat treatment, expressed as the number of decimal reductions in the number of micro-organisms. <heading>F-value or process value</heading>The F-value indicates effect of a heat treatment, which is governed by the product heating temperature and the time during which the product is held at this temperature (product holding time). F-value can be interpreted as the time required obtaining a given reduction in the number of micro-organisms. As it can be concluded that, UHT processing of food products aims to produce safe and quality products with extended shelf life. However, main concern is inactivation of heat resistant micro organisms. Although UHT processing has advantages and disadvantages as discussed above, still UHT processed food products stands in a good position of improved quality image and longer shelf life with storage at ambient temperature. 