<heading>Introduction</heading>This practical investigates the bonding of several substituted derivatives of molybdenum hexacarbonyl.. The complexes are first synthesized, and the bonding characterized by obtaining Infrared spectra and 1H NMR data. <heading>Safety</heading><heading>Solvents</heading>Tetrahydrofuran, toluene, n-hexane and light petroleum (40-60º) are extremely flammable and 2,2-bipyridine is flammable. For these reasons, the entire experiment will be free from sources of ignition. Due to the volatile nature of some of the compounds used, all chemical handling will be carried out in a fume cupboard. <heading>Corrosive and Toxic chemicals</heading>Molybdenum hexacarbonyl and allyl isothiocyanate are toxic and so care must be taken when handling these substances. In addition, protective glasses and vinyl gloves will be worn at all times. Side reactions can produce unknown compounds, ie., rearrangement of thiocynate to cyanide and so all products must be considered 'unknown' and therefore highly toxic. <heading>Preparation of (2,2'-bipyridyl) tetracarbonyl molybdenum(0)</heading><heading>Experimental Procedure and Observations</heading>Molybdenum hexcarbonyl (0.62g) and 2,2'-bipyridyl (0.40g) where made into solution of toluene (25mL) and placed into apparatus setup to reflux with a nitrogen bubbler attached. The system was flushed with nitrogen for 10minutes. The two powders where only sparingly soluble but after 15minutes of warming (130ºC, bp. toluene 110º) the solution had turned pink and the dissolution was complete. Rapidly the translucent solution's colour intensified from pink to red, to deep cranberry red and finally to intensely deep purple-red (cf. aq potassium permanganate). After 1½ hours, the solution (resembling red wine) was allowed to cool and as this happened fine deep red / rouge needle-like crystals settled to the bottom. The product was filtered out under reduced pressure using a sintered disc, washed with hexane and dried. The product when dry weighed 0.770g, which is a 90.15% yield. <heading>Stoichiometry of Reaction</heading> FORMULA  <figure/>The empirical formula of the product from calculations is Mo 1C 14H 8N 2O 4. This is in agreement with the proposed stoichiometry. <heading>Preparation of (η3-allyl)(2,2'-bipyridyl) dicarbonyl isothiocyanato molybdenum(II)</heading><heading>Experimental Procedure and Observations</heading>2,2'-bipyridyl tetracarbonyl molybdenum (0.52g) was added to tetrahydrofuran (25mL), but did not entirely dissolve. To this was added allyl isothiocyanate (2.6g) and the solution turned red/brown and was heated under reflux (96ºC, bp. Thf 66º) for 1½ hours under a nitrogen atmosphere having been flushed of air. As the solution was allowed to cool, a deep blood red powdery solid settled and this continued to precipitate as the solution was cooled further in an ice bath for 2 hours. The solid was filtered out under suction and washed with light petroleum, the remaining solution was very faintly pink. The solid appeared to have darker crimson more crystalline parts and lighter more powdery parts. When dry, it weighed 0.556g, which is a 98.58% yield. Reaction Stoichiometry Overall, the starting complex looses two moles of carbonyl and gains allyl isothiocyanate.  FORMULA  This occurs via a multi-step mechanism, beginning with thermolytic decarbonylation to form a highly labile five carbonyl coordinate complex which is stabilized by THF. The intermediate complex has a free pair of electron available for donation onto an electrophillic species, the allyl isothiocyanate in this scheme which allows the formal oxidation step to occur. Subsequent attack of the cationic complex by thiocyanate affords the product with loss of more carbonyl. The empirical formula of the product from calculations is Mo 1C 16H 13N 3S 1O 2. This is in agreement with the proposed stoichiometry. <figure/>13C NMR 203 <heading>c. A description of the Carbonyl-metal bonding</heading>The carbonyl moiety associates to the central metal species via the carbon atom of the group. The electronic structure of the carbonyl group is such that there are two ways for the bonding can occur. The first, weaker strategy is through a σ-interaction between the highest occupied molecular orbital on the carbon atom and a vacant orbital on the metal centre in a head on manner (ie., along the z-direction). <figure/>The second, significantly stronger strategy is through 'back-donation' from an occupied d xy or d yz orbital on the metal into the vacant π-antibonding orbital on the carbonyl. <figure/>Despite the synergic nature of these two bonding strategies, the π-back donation interaction is by far the more dominant of the two. Since this interaction utilizes the CO π-antibonding, the CO bonding order is reduced. This causes a reduction in the carbon-oxygen bonding strength and increases the bond length, which in-turn results in a less energetic vibration, and a thus a lower υ(CO). Hence, the υ(CO) for the carbonyl groups found in metal carbonyl compounds are lower than that of the free carbon monoxide. <heading>c. A description of the η3 allyl-metal bonding</heading>The allyl anion has two extreme resonance structures, but spectroscopic evidence as quoted by Hull and Stiddard, 1967 suggests that there is no C=C double bond present at any time, since υ(C=C) is absent between 1500 and 1700cm -1. In addition, 1H-NMR spectra shows peak data consistent only if the terminal 1,3 carbons are electronically identical ie., the negative charge is not localized to any one carbon terminus. Thus is implied the presence of the resonance stabilized delocalized structure of the allyl anion in the coordination complex. <figure/>The type of bonding present to the central metal species is the side-on overlap of the π-orbital from all three carbon atoms into a vacant metal orbital. This overlap strategy is referred to as η3 bonding since it involves three atoms being bonded directly to the metal. <figure/>By inspecting the molecular orbital energy diagram for the allyl anion, it can be seen that there are two occupied MO's and one vacant. <figure/>The orientation of the occupied bonding and non-bonding orbitals, being co-parallel would result in a σ-interaction. <figure/>However, the anti-bonding orbitals being fully out of phase, are anti-parallel with one-another. This would allow a π-back donation strategy to occur, ie., demonstrating π-acid character. As with the case of the carbonyl association, the back-donation would lower the C-C bond order and increase the bond length, this would lead to a less energetic C-C vibration, ie., υ(CC) shifted to a lower wavenumber. <heading>d. IR Spectrum, υ(CO)</heading>The υ(CO) of free carbon monoxide is 2155cm -1, which in coordination compounds as previously mentioned, is shifted to lower wavenumbers. This follows the decrease in energy of the CO stretch vibration due to the decrease in bond order, bond length and bond strength. According to Nakamoto, 1986 most carbonyl compounds 'exhibit a strong a sharp band at ca. 2100-1800cm -1'. <table/>The complex hexacarbonyl molybdenum belongs to the point group O h. From the character table it can be found that there is only one IR active vibrational mode, T 1u. Nakamoto, 1986 gives the vibrational wavenumber, υ(CO) as 1986cm -1. The complex tetracarbonyl bipyridyl molybdenum belongs to the C 2v point group. <figure/><table/>From the character table, it can be seen that only the three vibrations, A 1, B 1 and B 2 are IR active (since they belong to the same representation as x, y or z ie., they result in a change in dipole moment). Stiddard, 1962 quotes there to be four IR active C-O stretching modes, Orgel, 1962 suggests a pair of bands, closely separated. This could perhaps be due to the different environments the four carbonyl's are found in - two equatorial to the bipyridyl and two axial. The average of the two is quoted as 1908cm 1 with a spacing of ca. 100-120cm -1. The product complex, dicarbonyl bipyridyl η3-allyl thiocyanate appears to have two isomers, one with belongs to the point group Cs (one plane of vertical symmetry present), the other has no symmetry elements). <figure/><figure/>Hull and Stiddard, 1967 quote there to be two υ(CO) modes at 1927cm -1 and 1848cm -1 (average, 1887.5cm -1). The general trend going from molybdenum (0) hexacarbonyl to molybdenum (0) tetracarbonyl and to molybdenum (II) bicarbonyl is a decreasing wavenumber for the υ(CO). This represents the weakening of the carbon-oxygen bond, and could be caused by an increasing degree of π-back donation. Also, an increasing pull of electron density from the carbonyl group onto the metal at higher oxidation states. The number of bands observed can be explained in terms of modes of vibrations using group theory. <heading>e. IR Spectrum Analysis:dicarbonyl bipyridyl η3-allyl thiocyanate bonding</heading>Nakamoto, 1986 quotes a peak for υ(CN) to be 'near and below 2050cm -1' for Nitrogen bonded complexes and near 2100cm -1 for those that are Sulphur bonded. There is certainly a peak 'near' 2050cm -1, but this is also close to 2100cm -1 (actually 2090.6cm -1) and so a conclusive inference cannot be drawn from this alone. Next to be considered is the υ(CS) peak, which for Nitrogen bonded complexes, is located between 860cm -1 and 780cm -1 or between 720-690cm -1 for Sulphur bonded. There is a peak at 825cm -1 which satisfies the criteria for the υ(CS) of a Nitrogen bonded complex. Finally, a sharp δ(NCS) close to 480cm -1 should be present for Nitrogen bonded whilst several low intensity bands near 420cm -1 for Sulphur bonded - there is a sharp peak at 471.9cm -1 which could be this. More evidence is required. If we now turn our attention to Hull and Stiddard, 1967, a weak peak is quoted at wavenumber 825cm -1 corresponding to υ(CS) and a strong υ(CN) peak at 2075cm -1 for Nitrogen bonded species. In combination, these are good indications the metal is associated to the thiocyanate via the Nitrogen terminus. On my acquired spectrum for the dicarbonyl bipyridyl η3-allyl thiocyanate compound, a weak peak can indeed be seen at 825cm -1 and a strong peak close to 2075cm -1 (observed 2090.6cm -1). The 2090.6cm -1 peak is in the carbonyl vibration region, and so alone, is not definitive inferable evidence. However, the total absence of a υ(CS) between 720-690cm -1 strongly discounts the likelihood of a Sulphur bonded complex and also, in conjunction with the peak at 825cm -1, the 2090.6cm -1 vibration is very likely to be the υ(CN) that I am looking for, and I am led to the conclusion the bonding is via the Nitrogen terminus. <heading>f. 1H-NMR Spectrum Analysis:</heading>Transitions that occur 'fast' on the NMR timescale cannot be distinguished source from destination, only fairly slow transition give rise to strong crisp peaks. Proton exchange between heteroatoms is a very fast process which gives blurred lines in the spectra - this is probably not happening in this complex as peaks are all sharp. This is because the individual resonance peaks can be isolated from one another. Interpretation of the 2,2-bipyridyl spectrum. Eight protons are present in 2,2-bipyridine, four on each ring system. Nitrogen is an electronegative element and deshields neighbouring protons to the NMR field, thus the peaks for greatest chemical shift are to be found for photons on atom a (noted on thre spectra diagram). The two rings posses delocailsed π-bonds which allow electron density to flow around the ring in an aromatic fashion. This 'flow' causes protons coplanar to the ring to be exposed to an enhanced region of the magnetic field induced and are thus deshielded significantly. This extra downfield shift due to the ring current causes C-H proton resonsants between 8 and 9 (a region usually associated with aldehydes). Around the ring, those protons most intimately associated with the nitrogen has most downfield chemical shifts, ie., in order of decreasing shift. a, b, c and b. With the largest chemical shift, the proton alpha to the Nitrogen, which resembles an aldehyde in environments - an sp 2 carbon bonded to the hydrogen, in close proximately to an electronegative element. When bonded to the metal centre in the complex, electron density from the bipy nitrogen is lost. This would cause the nitrogen to be more electron deficient and thus have a stronger pull on electrons in the 2,2-bypyridine rings, hence causing an even greater 1H-downfield shift. Nearby hydrogens can couple spins with other protons in NMR so multiple peaks are often apparent for a single proton due to coupling with neighbors. The coupling between protons adjascent on the heterocycle backbone cause the splitting pattern observed. All the different possible structures of the bonded allyl species, only one for the triphaptic bonding strategy results in only two environments with the splitting pattern observed. The two terminal proton environments are identical and both differ from the 2-carbon. <figure/>The NMR data presented by Hull and Stiddard, 1967 conclusively proves the trihaptic nature of the bonding and the delocalized nature of the π system. The X-Ray evidence provided by Graham and Fenn, 1969 shows the central allyl carbonan to by closed to the metal centre. This certainly disproves any terminal allyl sigma association. It also does away with the dihaptic possibility, s0ince on grounds the steric bulk of the methyl group approaching the metal centre, the free allyl end would be pushed away. Again, the only plausible structure, supported by both NMR (section C above), X-Ray and IR is trihaptic bonding. <figure/><heading>g. The 18 electron rule</heading>Molybdenum being in group 6 has the valence configuration 5s 24d 4, which in the coordination complex, hexacarbonyl Mo(0) has the configuration 4d 6. There are 6 carbonyl ligands, each bonded to the central metal contributing 2 electrons each per bond, giving 12 electrons. This added to the 4d 6 configuration gives 18 electrons, therefore obeying the 18 electron rule. The complex Tetracarbonyl bipy Mo(0), two of the carbonyl ligands (2 electron donors) are replaced by the bidentate 2,2-bipyridyl ligands which donates a total of four electrons. Thus this also has 18 electrons. The product complex is more difficult. If the molybdenum where assigned the oxidation state of (II), it would possess the configuration of 4d 4. There are 2 carbonyl ligands (4 electrons), one bidentate 2,2-bipyridyl (4 electrons) and one thiocyanato ligand (2 electrons). This is 14 electrons. The allyl anion bonds trihaptically and so contributes 3 electrons. This gives 17 electrons and is not correct. An alternative approach is to assign an oxidation state of (0) to the metal centre. In the complex, it is convenient to consider the ligands as neutral and then to begin counting electrons. For reasons of energetics it is most favourable for the ground state of Molybdenum to have only unpaired electrons so the electron spins can be parallel - this gives rise to the configuration 5s 14d 5. So now, with 5 electron on the metal species, 4 from 2 carbonyls, 4 from the 2,2-bipyridyl, 2 from the thiocyanate and 3 from the η3-allyl ligand gives 18! Hence, all three species conform to the 18 electron rule. 