<heading>Introduction</heading>This practical investigates the properties of two metal acetylacetonate complexes. The complexes are first synthesized, purified and their UV-Vis and IR spectra obtained. <heading>Safety</heading><heading>Flammables</heading>Acetylacetone, pyridine, toluene and 40-60º Petroleum ether are flammable. Thus the entire experiment will be free from sources of ignition. Due to the volatile nature of some of the compounds used, all chemical handling will be carried out in a fume cupboard. <heading>Carcinogens</heading>Pyridine is a suspected carcinogen and thus all human contact with it will be nil. <heading>Corrosive and Toxic chemicals</heading>Oxovanadium(IV) sulphate, manganese(II) chloride hexahydrate and potassium permanganate are all toxic, sodium sulphite is harmful and an irritant and sulphuric acid is corrosive and so care must be taken when handling these substances. Protective glasses and vinyl gloves will be worn at all times. <heading>Preparation of Oxobis(2,4-pentanedionato)vanadium(IV)</heading>A dark blue solution of oxovanadium(IV) sulphate hexahydrate (5.045g) in water (75ml) was made-up and combined with a solution of acetylacetone (5ml) and anhydrous sodium carbonate (5.0093g). The resulting solution turned black and was nearly opaque when held to the light. It was maintained at 80ºC until light opaque blue crystals where seen to form (10minutes). The solution was then cooled in an ice bath, which promoted further crystallisation of intensely coloured, opaque indigo petrol-blue crystals. The solution was filtered with a sintered glass crucible under reduced pressure and washed with water to reveal flaky intense indigo-blue, granular crystals of varying particle size ranging, from course to sand-like. Moisture was driven from the product using an oven set to 100ºC.  FORMULA   FORMULA  The dry green product (0.9986g) was fused in a nickel crucible with white potassium hydrogen sulphate (2g) to form a black bubbling mass. Once the effervescence subsided, five further portions were added to affect total decomposition. A green-blue solution of the cooled melt in sulphuric acid (200ml, 1M) had to it added, a microspatula-worth of sodium sulphite and was brought to a gentle boil for two minutes. An aliquot (20cm 3) of the resulting solution was titrated with potassium permanganate (0.02M). <table/>Analysis shows that Vanadium content by weight = 18.22% (5.35% error when compared to the literary value of 19.25% quoted by Row and Jones, 1957). <heading>Preparation of tris(2,4-pentanedionato)manganese(III)</heading><heading>Experimental procedure, account and observations</heading>A solution of Manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate (1.0144g) in water (40ml) was made-up and to it was dissolved sodium acetate trihydrate (2.6060g). To the faint pink solution was added acetylacetone (4ml) which instantly colourised it translucent yellow off-clear. Potassium permangate crystals (0.2070g) where than added which caused the solution to cloud-up brown. Upon stirring, the solution turned a dark olive brown and very fine black granular crystals where apparent forming around the surface which caught the light. With time, the precipitation of crystals became so heavy that the solution glimmered as it was stirred. The resulting solution was filtered using a sintered glass crucible, washed with water and air dried. The black crystals where fine and granular in consistency, until they where dissolved in toluene (10mL) at 55ºC. The solution was decantered, and cooled in ice with 40-60º petroleum ether for one hour. During cooling, fine black needle-like crystals formed out of solution. After the one hour, recrystallisation was still not complete but the experiment continued. The crystals were filtered using a sintered glass crucible under reduced pressure, then washed in pet. ether and air dried. <heading>Reaction stoiciometry</heading>Basic action of sodium acetate on acetylacetate (formation of pentandionato ligand)  FORMULA  Oxidation of Manganese(II)  FORMULA  Under the less extreme acid conditions, there are two possible oxidation stoiciometries  FORMULA   FORMULA  Assuming reaction 1.1 takes place, since the mixture has been basified;  FORMULA   FORMULA  Reduction of the manganate(VII) ion to manganate(II) is not supported by the brown-clouding of the solution which suggests manganate(IV) was formed instead. Also, a more acidic pH is required to fully reduce MnO 4-. Lastly, the ligand association with manganese(III) stoichiometry.  FORMULA  Combining all equations gives  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>2.1.5 Infrared Spectra</heading><table/>The bis(pentandionato)vandyl complex can be though of as a derivative of the vanadyl cation (V 4+ ligated to O 2-). It has a has a d 1 configuration and is thus diamagnetic. Arising from the d-d transitions, as with many other vandyl coordination compounds, this complex is blue. The spectrum for Vandyl bis-acetylacetonate yields a new strong peak at 997cm -1 which corresponds to the vibration for the vandanium-oxygen vanadyl bond - this is close to the value stated by Nakamoto, 1986 of 1001cm -1, and of Selbin, 1965 of 996cm -1. This is significantly stronger than the MO vibrational frequencies quoted by Nakamoto, 1986 for the metal-oxygen acac bond. The V=O bond is exceptionally short due to an increased bond order as electron density in populated p-orbitals residing as lone pairs on the oxygen, are donated into vacant d-orbitals on the metal cation ie., ligand-to-metal pπ-dπ donation. This gives rise a particularly high bond stretch vibrational frequency, ie., 940-980cm -1 (Shiver & Atkins, 1999). This results from the increased bonding order of the V-O bond. The orientation of orbitals is such that a triply bonded moiety is entirely plausible. This postulate is supported by thermodynamic evidence showing one of the strongest M-O bonds of any metal (with the exception of T 4+). Occupation of those previously vacant d-orbitals on the metal disfavours ligation trans to the oxygen atom as to avoid competition for the d-orbitals, hence a tetragonal (square) pyramidal structure is found. The shape of the pentandionato ligands causes a slight deviation from the perfect square base to more rectangular. <figure/>Association of a ligating species trans (the only available site) to the vandyl oxygen causes a reduction of the V-O bond order and thus the υ(VO) is made less energetic, ie., the result of adduction of pyridine is to shift the υ(VO) to a lower wavenumber. This is supported by the work of Selbin, 1965, in which works he states that in many solvents with un-appreciable coordination ability the wavenumber of vibration is 1006±2 (solid mull in nujol, υ(VO)=997cm -1), whereas in highly coordinating solvents, υ(VO) is lowered close to 972cm -1. <heading>2.1.7 Magnetic Data</heading><table/>The number of unpaired electrons can be found by manipulation of the magnetic moment, μ of the complexes.  FORMULA  The number of unpaired electrons present in the manganese complex suggests the octahedral splitting parameter is low enough as to allow unpairing of all electrons. The octahedral shape is distorted with the result being the compression of some bonds and extension of others, this would alter the splitting pattern but only the pure octahedral splitting is shown below. <figure/>Lever, 1984, explains that distortion along the z-axis will cause splitting of the e degeneracy. However, this principle was not specifically applied to the complex vanadyl bis-acetylacetonate and so the undistorted model will be used. <enote>A.B.P. Lever, Inorganic electronic spectroscopy, Elsevier, Suffolk, 1984. </enote><figure/><heading>2.1.6 Ultraviolet-Visible Spectra</heading>Spectra was obtained at 850-350nm. In all UV-Visible spectra obtained, there is a distinct trough centred at 400nm. This is quite probably due to the wavelength cut-off set for the bulb switch over from the visible bulb to the mercury UV bulb. The actual spectrum is more likely to be continuous from 450 up to 350nm. To establish this, a different spectrometer would have to be used, or it known for definite if it is viable to adjust the bulb cut-off wavelength using this spectrometer and the samples run again. However, upon closer inspection, the spectrum for Vanadyl bis-acetylacetonate appears to have two troughs at 400nm - one is for sure to be caused by the bulb switch-over, but the other could perhaps be the Band III peak! In addition, the spectra obtained for the vanadyl complex in pyridine, and the manganese complex in both toluene and pyridine exhibit major fluctuations to the expected smooth spectrum at wavelength under 375nm. This can perhaps be rationalised by considering the absorbance below this wavelength goes above the working range of spectrometer of between 0 and 3.5. Above A=3.5, the sensitivity becomes very low for the machine ie., in the case of vanadyl in pyridine, the absorbance approaches 6 which given the logarithmic ratio nature of the measurement means the machine is trying to make measurements in the one part transmission per million range (0.000001% transmission). Thus, instrumental error will become large. The major fluctuations perhaps result from UV dispersal in the sample or a failure of the apparatus to self compensate using the UV bulb which just turned on. For what ever reason this occurred, a possible fix would be to try diluting the sample solution, by one hundred fold for instance. <table/>Locating the band I & III peaks for the manganese tris-acetylacetonate in Toluene were difficult, and the value quotes an estimate. The vandyl bis(acac) complex, with C 2V symmetry the degeneracy of the eπ* is removed, and thus four d orbital transition are possible although not all are allowed following formal symmetry rules. The bands between 500nm and 800nm are these d-d transition. This is what gives rise to the colour of the complex. The strong adsorption characteristic of the vanadyl centre gives rise to it's typical blue-green colour. All higher bands are charge transfer. The effect of an associating solvent is shift the band II peak higher in wavenumber, and band I to a lower wavenumber, as is quoted by Selbin, 1965. <heading>Calculation of the extinction coefficients</heading>The Lambert-Beer law can be manipulated to give the molar extinction coefficient in terms of absorbance, cell length and molar concentration. The exact mass of the samples dissolved which where used in the spectroscopy is unknown. It would appear therefore impossible to calculate molar extinction coefficients. However, the assumption made that the solutions were saturated is true for solutions in toluene, for which the solubilities where low and so the concentration is known ie., saturation solubility. With solubility data available from literary sources it should be possible to calculate, or at least estimate the molar extinction coefficients. However, I was unable to find literary values for the solubility of complexes in toluene. In pyridine, the complexes where very soluble and I was not able to saturate the solutions. <heading>2.1.8 ESR Spectra of VO(acac)2</heading><heading>Calculation of the gyromagnetic factor, g</heading>H is taken to be 0.335T (3350gauss)  FORMULA  <table/>1.575cm read from the graph corresponds to 88.68gauss or 8.87mT. This is a fairly large hyperfine splitting constant and implies the paramagnetic electron is delocalised away from the metal centre. <heading>Physical means of g and A</heading>Paramagnetic materials possess an unpaired electron which spin can be forced to undergo a transition through the application of radiation. The energy required to bring about this spin transition depends on the strength of the magnetic environment in which the paramagnetic electron is found. The magnetic field is applied externally and thus it's strength is known - however, the frequency of radiation required to bring about resonance is different to what would be expected, which implies the electron experiences additional magnetic influences. These other magnetic effects are caused by the local magnetic environment in which the electron is found, ie., through spin-orbit coupling. When an electron is placed in a magnetic field it's degeneracy is split dependant upon the B-fields magnitude. The energy separation between levels is proportional to the effective magnetic field strength and the gyromagnetic factor. The gyromagnetic factor is characteristic of the complex under measurement. For a free electron, the g-factor is 2.0023 (g e), and when the observed g-factor is greater than g e, the local field is larger than that applied externally. The magnetic field set for which the data was collected requires radiation with frequency of 9.22GHz. This is in the X-Band range, and has a wavelength of ca. 3.15cm. Nuclei that possess non-zero spin contribute additional magnetic components to the field. This gives rise to a hyperfine, 2I+1 splitting pattern. The magnitude of the hyperfine splitting constant tells us how probable it is that the paramagnetic electron is found close to a magnetic nucleus. This is has a very important implication - if the ligands possess magnetic nuclei, then the constant tells us to what extent the metal's paramagnetic electron is delocalised onto the ligands. 