<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>The study of molluscan data can yield important palaeoenvironmental information about the changing landscape throughout history and prehistory, providing indications of long-term climate change and variation in land use. To provide a reliable interpretation of ancient environments, a multiproxy of bioarchaeological evidence should be considered, including mollusca, pollen, macroscopic plant remains, charcoal, and insects. Unlike pollen, which can be anemophilous (and therefore distributed over a wide area) molluscs are useful for examining micro-environments due to the specific nature of the distribution of shells in particular habits (Evans 1972: 87). Similarly, mollusc analysis is suitable for samples from chalky and lime-rich areas, conditions which are not favourable to the preservation of pollen grains (ibid.: 5). The subject of this investigation is the Ufton Green area, which is located in the Kennet Valley between Reading and Newbury. The Kennet Valley has produced evidence for human activity at numerous sites along the river including over 50 Mesolithic sites between Hungerford and Newbury (Allen & Allen 1997:1). Figure 1 shows the location of Ufton Green and other sites in the Kennet Valley. <figure/>A number of cores were taken from the river palaeochannel along a transect close to the Mesolithic site of Ufton Nervet. This report is the analysis of the mollusc assemblage from core 50, with particular reference to sample depth 53-65 cm (figure 2). A percussion corer was used to extract this core from the present ground surface to the bottom of the channel, a depth measuring approximately 2 metres. The identification of mollusc species and the examination of their distribution throughout the core sequence will be used to interpret the environmental landscape at Ufton Green. Changes in land-use, as indicated by the appearance of different species, may be inferred to be the result of human activity and impact on the environment. <figure/><heading>METHOD</heading>Samples of soil were taken at varying intervals through the core. The molluscs were extracted from the sediment by wet sieving. This process also preserves other organic remains including charcoal, seeds, and insect remains. Microscopic analysis of each sample was undertaken a member of the class in order to separate the molluscs by species and to identify any other potentially interesting or informative remains. The method employed in the classification of mollusc species was detailed visual analysis of each shell. In addition to overall shape and size, characteristic features include: <list>Shape of the apertureDepth of the sutureTightness of the spiral at the apexPresence of ridges, furrows or hair pitsColourShiny appearance </list>In some cases, comparison with the study collection was necessary to confirm the identification. For example, in the analysis of molluscs from sample depth 53-65 cm, the similarity in appearance of Carychium tridentatum and C. minimum necessitated the comparison of shells from the sample with known examples of both species from the reference collection. It was only in contrast to the taller  C. tridentatum that the unidentified shells could be verified as C. minimum. <heading>RESULTS</heading><table/><figure/><heading>DISCUSSION</heading><heading>Depth 53-65 cm</heading>The molluscan assemblage at depth 53-65 cm contains a range of shade-loving (13%), intermediate (11%) and open-country species (23%) but the largest group is represented by freshwater species (53%). Freshwater species can be divided into four groups by their preference for particular habitats (Lowe & Walker 1997: 205). These groups are defined as: <list>SlumCatholicDitchMoving Water</list>Figure 5 shows the percentage of freshwater species belonging to each ecological group from depth 53-65 cm. The bivalves represented in the sample were not identified to species level making it impossible to assign them to these groups so they were omitted from the pie chart. The majority of the mollusc taxa at this depth belong to the 'slum' group which is dominated by Lymnaea truncatula. This native species inhabits marshy grassland and can survive in bare mud in marshes (Kerney 1999: 51). Also present in this group is Anisus leucostoma which is commonly associated with L. truncatula and is most typically found in swampy ponds and ditches (ibid. : 60). There are no species from this depth belonging to the 'catholic' group and the 'ditch' group is comprised of only one species, Valvata macrostoma. This species is rare, being mainly restricted to East Anglia, and inhabits ditches in marshland and river floodplains (ibid. : 28). The conditions favoured by these freshwater species indicate that the area may have been marshland, water meadow or fen. The 'moving water' group constitutes 22% of the molluscan assemblage, with Vlavata piscinalis as the main component, represented by 19 shells. This species thrives in still or slow moving muddy water (ibid.:29) so it is quite plausible to expect a suitable niche to exist in a marshland environment. Theodoxus fluviatalis (figure 6) and Bithynia tentaculata require slow-moving well-oxygenated water such as rivers and canals. It is conceivable that a small nearby stream or tributary could account for the presence of these moving water species. <figure/><figure/>The terrestrial species from this sample come from both shade-loving or woodland species and open country species. This is due to the fact that snail habitats are much more localised than human environments, meaning that shade-loving species can live in grassland at the base of long grass alongside open-country species who favour shorter grass (Evans 1972: 87). The marshland interpretation as suggested by the freshwater species is supported by the shade-loving terrestrial species represented by Carychium minimum and the Succinea species, both of which are common in marshes and other wet places (Kerney 1999: 44, 76-77; Kerney & Cameron 1979: 58) and by Zonitoides nitidus (figure 7) which is restricted to marshes (Evans 1972:190). Evans considers that intermediate or catholic species are of limited value in environmental analysis (1972: 197). However, in this particular case, the presence of species which favour damp environments further substantiates observations made in the other ecological groups, such as Vallonia pulchella which inhabits water meadows and marshes (Kerny 1999: 108). Vallonia excentrica is abundant in this sample, which despite its preference for dry, open grassland, occasionally lives in marshy environments (ibid.:109). Conversely, Pupilla muscorum is common to dry places particularly sandy or rocky ground, but is only represented by two shells compared to 43 individuals belonging to the Vallonia species. <heading>Core Sequence- Limitations</heading>Before attempting the interpretation of the sequence as a whole, it is important to assess the comparability of the different samples. Given that the total number of shells is different in each sample, ranging from 17 to 197 shells, the fairest method of comparing them is to consider the representation of the ecological groups in relation to each other and compare the percentages. This is shown graphically in figure 4. However, this should be approached with caution to prevent misinterpretation of the evidence. At depth 53-65cm, the freshwater species represent 53% of the total number of shells compared to 100% at depth 179-181.5cm. If quoted in percentages these figures could be misleading because the actual number of shells that correspond with these percentages are 104 and 17 respectively. Likewise, the weight of the sieved sediments before the molluscs were extracted varied between samples. Depth 53-65cm weighed 133 grams while 179-181.5cm weighed only 27 grams, therefore it is to be expected that the larger sample would yield a higher total of snails and that this is due to sampling methods rather than palaeoenvironmental factors. Another aspect to be considered is preservation of shells. Certain types of soils, such as lime-rich sediments preserve molluscs better than non-calcareous soils and this can also affect the number of shells in the sample. This might be the reason that depth 103-115cm, a context of silty clay contained 88.5 shells while the deposit below (115-160cm) which was made up of silt with calcareous inclusions produced a total of 142 shells (figure 4). <heading>Core Sequence- Interpretation</heading>Throughout the sequence, freshwater species are predominant. There is a general trend showing an increase in open country species but there is not the decline in shade-loving species that would be expected to suggest widespread land-clearance. <heading>Non-Molluscan Data</heading>Evidence from non-molluscan palaeoenviromental data can also provide information about the changing environment, climate and land use. Botanical remains such as seeds, if identifiable, can be used to verify the environmental interpretation of the molluscan assemblage. For example, the seeds found at depth 151-173cm included Potentilla c.f erecta, Eupatorium sp., Carex ertille, Chenopodiaceae and Schoenplectus lacustris which are semi-aquatic species that live on the margins of water (A. Brown, pers. comm). This would support the interpretation of a marshland or water meadow environment. The presence of Rumex and  Rubus species, however, would suggest grassland or open space in woodland (Clapham, Tutin & Moore 1987: 306). <figure/><figure/>Flint microdebitage was also discovered in some of the samples. This cannot be assumed a priori to have an anthropogenic origin, given that flint is a naturally occurring material which can appear to be 'worked' but its form may be the result of frost or plough damage. Careful inspection under the microscope revealed that 13 pieces of microdebitage from depth 151-173cm showed some of the typical features of a flint flake such as the striking platform and the point, bulb and ripples of percussion (figures 8 and 9). Depth 177-173cm also yielded 4 possible pieces of worked flint. This suggests a human presence in the area at the time of these deposits which has implications for land use and could be reflected in the molluscan data (Evans 1972: 126) but in this case there is no increase in open country species to suggest land clearance at these depths. Charcoal can also indicate human activity, but like flint can be the result of natural processes. An abundance of charcoal came from depth 151-173cm, and its association with worked flint could infer that the burning was the result of human activity. 