<heading>Introduction</heading><heading>Rationale</heading>The Neolithic site of Çatalhöyük is situated on the Konya Plain in southern Turkey. Figure one illustrates the location of the site. It was originally excavated by James Mellaart in the 1960s and since 1993 has been subject to new excavations and research directed by Ian Hodder. The aim of the Çatalhöyük project is to gain a better understanding of the Neolithic way of life at this unique settlement site. Modern field techniques are being combined with experimental archaeology, ethnography and scientific analysis to create an interdisciplinary research environment. <figure/>One of the key scientific methods employed is micromorphology (e.g. Matthews 2005; 1999; Matthews et al. 1996). This can provide the opportunity to observe microscopic remains in situ and provide information about microstratigraphy. This is a particularly relevant field of study at tell sites like Çatalhöyük which have been occupied for hundreds of years, accumulating numerous layers of habitation debris. Micromorphological analysis of deposits from different contexts can indicate what kinds of activities were being undertaken in particular buildings or spaces. Data collected can then be used in the interpretation of the function of that building or context, be that an obsidian workshop, animal corral, or oven rake out. One of the benefits of this scale of analysis is that whereas excavation of a building can only provide a picture of one moment in time, microstratigraphy can inform us of accumulating layers even on an annual, seasonal or monthly basis (Matthews 2005: 368). <heading>Aim</heading>The aim of this report is to provide a detailed analysis of one layer of a thin section which was taken from space 171 in building 18, Level X. The context under analysis has been interpreted in the field as an oven rake-out (Farid 1999). It is hoped that this study will provide evidence to either support or refute this claim by establishing the nature of the deposit through the micromorphological analysis of the corresponding unit in thin section. <heading>Previous research. </heading>Building 18 had previously been excavated by Mellaart in his 1963 excavations. He recorded this structure as room X.8 and his description of the building is very brief. <quote>"The building immediately underneath, X, I, [building 18] had no features which definitely marked it as a shrine. The long narrow room along the north side was filled with strongly built, but empty grain-bins. A few worn smears of paint on the north and east walls of the main room suggested the possibility of geometric kilim paintings of familiar types, but they were too fragmentary to restore the pattern." (Mellaart 1964: 70)</quote>This was most likely due to his research bias towards the buildings which he interpreted as 'shrines'. This is evident from the way he dismisses building 18 in favour of the adjacent 'shrine,' "disappointing as this building was, its companion, Room X, I, provided us with a fine example of a Level X shrine" (Mellaart 1964: 70). Unlike its 1960's predecessors, this report is intended to elucidate day to day activities being undertaken within the building rather than concentrating on the unique and spectacular ritualised behaviour which may have been performed around the site. However the distinction between these seemingly dichotomous categories of 'ritual' and 'domestic' may in fact not be as clear cut as they appear. "Rituals and symbols permeate everyday life" (Bradley 2005: 3) and are "not opposed to domesticity [but] often grow out of it" (Bradley 2005: xiii). Even the mundane activities such as the maintenance of ovens or buildings as indicated by episodic re-plastering may have been imbued with symbolic meanings and may have formed part of a ceremonial act repeated annually or seasonally, perhaps at poignant times of year (Matthews 2005: 368). The notion of ritualised or symbolic activities being practiced in what appear to be 'domestic' contexts is further strengthened by the discovery of 11 figurines in building 171, 9 of which were found in oven rake-out (Hamilton 1999). The 1999 archive excavation provides more detailed observations of the building and the associated features. There are 6 phases, each of which is associated with a fire installation in the south or southwest corner of the building (Farid 1999) as appears to be the case generally throughout the site (Cessford & Near 2006: 177). Throughout the occupation deposits of this building are the remains of features which have been interpreted as domed ovens and the floor layers are described as "dirty", "trample layers" and "oven rake-out". The exact location of the deposit sampled is unknown so it is impossible to identify the context or phase to which it belongs, particularly since the description of the various phases seems to indicate that similar types of deposits occurred on a number of floors belonging to different phases (Farid 1999). Even if this information was available, there would be considerable difficulty in reconstructing the sequence due to the disturbance to the stratigraphy caused by Mellaart's earlier excavations. <heading>Methodology</heading><heading>Materials</heading>The thin section under analysis is W0197 which was taken from space 171 in building 18 at level X. This is located in the south area of the east mound and was re-excavated and samples taken in 1999. A detailed explanation of the sampling strategy can be found below. A plan of the level X building phase in the south area is illustrated in figure 2 and figure 3 shows the location of this excavation area in relation to the whole of the east mound. The unit which is the focus of this study is the penultimate unit when counted from the base of the section. This is indicated in figure 4. <figure/><figure/><figure/><heading>Sampling Strategies</heading>The section examined here is one of a large number of samples taken from the south area in the 1999 field season (Matthews 1999). The area to be sampled was first cleaned with a palette knife to define the boundaries and then measured to the size required, as shown in figure 5. Samples were taken in blocks measuring approximately 13.5cm x 6.5cm x 10cm. These were removed from the deposit using a large Swiss Army knife to score around the area and cut away the excess sediments. Once removed, these samples were wrapped tightly in tissue paper and taped up, then placed in wooden packing cases to protect them while in transit from Çatalhöyük to the laboratories at The University of Reading. Figure 6 shows a context section with samples removed. Once back in the laboratory the samples were allowed to dry then, under vacuum, impregnated with an unsaturated polyester resin and left to harden. Samples were then cut, ground and polished into a thin-section with a thickness of 30 µm and a thin glass coverslip was overlaid to seal it. (Matthews 2005: 358) <figure/><figure/><heading>Micromorphological Analysis</heading>Visual analysis was completed using an optical polarising microscope at magnifications of x40, x100 and x400. Both plain polarised and cross polarised light were used to reveal different properties of the groundmass and inclusions in the fabric. Reflected light was also used to identify red ochre pigment particles because it is easier to distinguish from the groundmass in this type of light. Detailed observations of the various components within the deposit were recorded on a laboratory sheet which can be found in the appendix. This included description of the range of particles and inclusions, together with measurements of size and abundance in the sample. Measurements were made using the gradiometer built into the microscope, the scale of which was first assessed using a micrometer. Micromorphological terms and definitions were used with reference to relevant literature (Courty et al. 1999; Bullock et al. 1985) and from knowledge acquired during practical sessions. Minerals in thin section were identified using a reference atlas (Mackenzie & Adams 1994). <heading>Results</heading>Results of the analysis included in the appendix have been summarised in table form here for ease of reference. Table 1 outlines the details of the deposit sampled for analysis. Since this report focuses on a single unit of a single thin section this table is very simple, whereas in comparative studies a more complex table could be constructed to include units from different sites or areas of the same site or within a single thin section. <table/>Table 2 summarises the most important characteristics of the unit which will also briefly be described here. The deposit represented in the unit is between 4-6 mm thick and comprises of a sandy clay loam which appears beigy brown with dark brown/black flecks in plain polarised light. The coarse/fine ratio ranges between 60/40 and 70/30 with the nature of the fine material being organo-mineral. The groundmass has low-order birefringence and is crystallic, with limey clay inclusions undifferentiated in cross-polarised light. The microstructure includes chambers and planes which vary from 10-40% abundance. The related distribution is embedded and the groundmass is unsorted. The basal boundary is a smooth gradual transitional anthropic boundary while the upper boundary is more diffuse. <table/><table/><heading>Inclusions</heading>The unit has a number of organic and inorganic inclusions which are summarised in table 3. The orientation of these inclusions is moderate and parallel with the boundary and the darker organic lens which can be found just left of the centre of the slide is strongly sorted with parallel orientation. Plant remains are observed in both charred and silicified preservation. The charred remains were dark brown/black in plain polarised light and were not birefringent. They ranged from 0.5-7mm in size with an abundance between 10-40%. The more substantial fragments display large vessels of early growth and smaller vessels of later growth suggesting deciduous wood. These are visible on the example pictured in figure 7. The arrangement of these vessels indicates that the species represented in the sample are oak and ash. Some charred remains were woody or shrubby but no vessels were preserved so these were unidentifiable. The silicious plant remains were amorphous for the most part and their abundance in the unit was less than 10%. Where the silicified remains retained a distinct form they represented tuba-like bulliform cell structure. Some ashes were also present.  FORMULA 2.5 mm <figure/><figure/>There was also evidence of burnt bone in the sample. These fragments were between 0.4-0.8mm in size and were dark orange in plain polarised light which indicated that it had been burnt. In cross-polarised light it appeared brown and black with wavy extinction and this confirmed that it was bone. Figures 9 and 10 show an example of a burnt bone fragment from the unit in both plain and cross polarised lights. 0.8mm0.8mm <figure/><figure/>Microartefacts were observed in the unit, one of which was a microcrystalline chert chip. This was a single triangular fragment measuring 1.5mm across which appeared clear in plain polarised light and sparkly blue under cross-polarised light, demonstrating first order birefringence. Figures 11 and 12 illustrate a comparison between the appearance under plain and cross-polarised lights. 1.5 mm1.5 mm <figure/><figure/>A number of anthropogenic aggregates were observed in the sample including a basalt aggregate, fragments of limey clay plaster and a single burnt plaster aggregate. The basalt aggregate measured 0.7mm and was unique in the unit. In plain polarised light clear angular crystals were visible with inclusions of larger crystals and black flecks (see figure 13). In cross-polarised light the basalt crystals were shiny pale blue and the larger crystals could be identified as feldspar as shown in figure 14. The limey clay aggregates measured between 0.5-4 mm in size and the abundance in the sample ranged from 10-20%. These rounded fragments, as seen in figure 15, were beigy grey in plain polarised light and remained unchanged in cross-polarised light. Figure 16 illustrates the burnt plaster aggregate which measured 1.01mm and appeared orangy brown in plain polarised light, with white inclusions identified as quartz. 0.7mm0.7mm <figure/><figure/>1 mm1 mm <figure/><figure/>Other inclusions included red ochre particles, fragmented water lain sediments, spherulites and recrystallised salts. Red ochre flecks are most easily distinguishable in reflected light where it appears shiny orangy red. This is illustrated in figure 17. These flecks measured between 0.1-0.5mm and were less than 2% abundant in the sample. The water lain sediments, as shown in figure 18, appear brown in plain polarised light. The particles within the sediment itself are well sorted which indicates natural deposition, however its fragmentary nature suggest that it is not an in situ deposit. The fragments are 0.55mm think with the maximum length measuring 1.55mm. The re-crystallised salts observed in the sample can only be seen in cross-polarised light and appear as coatings on the interior of voids. These are visible in figures 10, 12 and 14. Spherulites are also only visible in cross-polarised light where they are tiny pale yellow, pale blue and white sparkly circular particles characterised by a black cross. These measured between 0.005 and 0.01 mm and can only really be seen using magnification of x100. 1.3 mm0.2 mm <figure/><figure/><heading>Discussion</heading>As archaeologists "our task remains to move between our interpretation of objects as determined by material science techniques and what these interpretations might tell us in terms of the intentional and meaningful aspects of material culture" (Jones 2002: 66). This is expressed in diagrammatic form in figure 19. Micromorphology operates on a microscopic scale which can provide detailed insight and high resolution data which cannot be achieved on the macroscale of excavation. However, in order to conduct a thorough investigation it is necessary to move between scales of interpretation. This process is particularly relevant to this study given that the results of the micromorphological analysis provides information about what the unit is comprised of, but this raw data needs to be interpreted in the wider cultural context of the site as a whole if it is to be useful and informative. A summary of interpretations is outlined in table 4. <figure/><table/>The chert fragment could be interpreted in two different ways. Firstly, it could be interpreted as evidence for the use of fire-stones in the lighting of fires where percussion of stone against stone is used to create a spark. However, Cessford and Near have conducted research into pyrotechnology and the use of fire installations at Çatalhöyük and have concluded that fires were most likely to have been started using the friction created by wood rubbing against wood which leaves little trace in the archaeological record (2006: 176). An alternative explanation for the presence of this chert chip could be that it represents flint knapping activity which has taken place in the vicinity. It might be expected that flint knapping would leave a larger assemblage or flint scatter, but this can be explained by other anthropogenic formation processes such as sweeping and cleaning the area. "House floor assemblages cannot be presumed to be fossilised representations of past activities" (LaMotta & Schiffer 1999: 21), deposits may have been removed, rearranged or re-deposited. This is particularly relevant to the interpretation of activity floors which would require the clearance of debris for the continuation of activities. The majority of this refuse may have been deposited elsewhere in a secondary context. The chert fragment, measuring only 1.5mm, would be small enough to be overlooked by this clearance, perhaps by laying between the fibres of a broom-like sweeping implement or falling into a crack or depression in the floor. As a result, this and other microartefacts can become incorporated into the archaeological record. LaMotta and Schiffer note that "microartefact studies on the floor matrix are required for isolating reliable samples of primary refuse from assemblages in well maintained houses" (1999: 21). Therefore, by examining the microartefactual evidence present in the thin section, such as the chert fragment, it may be possible to reconstruct the activities conducted and thereby ascertain the function of the building. Other microartefacts of cultural origin contained in the sample which may be included in this study are the basalt grains and the burnt oven plaster aggregate. The former could be the interpreted as evidence of the use or manufacture of grindstone tools, while the latter has been burnt so appears to indicate that at some stage in the history of this fragment it has been exposed to fire which could have been in a hearth or oven. Previous micromorpholocial analysis of oven plasters has shown the fabric to be characterised by sandy silt-clay loam particle size with quartz and feldspar inclusions and an orange oxidised surface and darker core (Matthews 2005: 372). The fragment observed here is not in situ and is only a small fragment (c.1mm), nevertheless it has a comparable particle size with quartz inclusions and appears to be orangy brown in plain light suggesting oxidisation. As a result of comparison with descriptions of known examples of oven plaster it is possible to infer that this is an oven plaster aggregate. It is not surprising to find remnants of oven plaster in an oven rake-out. Recent ethnographic studies of local villages around Çatalhöyük have revealed that ovens can be re-plastered after every firing (Matthews 2005: 361). Although this act may have been performed for a number of different reasons such as symbolic or ritualised renewal, as has been argued for wall and floor plaster (Matthews 2005: 368), a functional explanation for this practice may be that the clay plasters weaken under the intense heat, crack and disintegrate. If this is the case, then it would be usual to find fragments of broken up oven plaster in the oven rake-out. As previously discussed, the small size of this fragment may have facilitated its incorporation into the archaeological record while larger pieces may have been swept away. The limey clay plaster fragments are highly calcareous and are likely to have come from the surrounding Pleistocene lake deposits (Matthews 2005: 365). The wall and floor plasters throughout the site are made from this fine clay mixed with water and ethnographic studies of modern surrounding villages found that local people still utilise this resource (Matthews 2005:365-6). The aggregates in this unit can be interpreted as the remains of some kind of soft lime clay plaster flooring. The pieces are fragmented which suggests trampling, this supports the interpretation of floor plaster rather than re-deposition from a wall, ceiling or other installation. The rounded shape of the fragments may indicate sweeping activity which would have the effect of rolling the particles which would alter their shape. This sweeping action may demonstrate how this material was incorporated into the oven rake-out. Spherulites are produced in the digestive tract of herbivores and are incorporated into the archaeological record through deposition of dung. In this context the presence of spherulites could be interpreted as Neolithic burning of dung as fuel. Ethnographic studies have shown that the use of dung as fuel is widespread and is often chosen by preference over other fuels (Sillar 2000: 46, 53) and in some cultures dung is imbued with symbolic meaning or associated with ceremonial practices (Sillar 2000: 52-53). Alternatively, the choice of dung for fuel may be related to over-exploitation of wood resources for fuel and building leading to substitution of one for the other. As Sillar remarks "it is difficult to overexploit the use of dung as a resource" given that cows, sheep and llamas annually produce 4 times their body weight in dried dung (2000: 51, 46). However, the presence of charred deciduous wood remains demonstrates that wood was still available. These charred remains may also be evidence of the fuel used to fire the oven. Given that evidence for both dung and wood exists, the most plausible explanation is that the villager exploited a mixture of fuels in their fire installations. Given the use of red ochre elsewhere in the site for painting, the particles included in the unit could be interpreted as the remains of paint from walls or perhaps from the oven itself. Since it is not associated with any plaster fragments this may seem unlikely. It could however, have been trampled into the floor as a raw material during a painting episode. Mellart described how the building next door was "a fine example of a Level X shrine" (Mellaart 1964: 70). The burnt bone may represent either the remains of dietary subsistence, having been incorporated into the oven rake out, or alternatively could be a chipping from the manufacture of bone implements which is attested at this level (Hodder 1999) which could have accidentally been blown into the oven where it became burnt. A final possible interpretation could be that these remains could be human. Although this seems unlikely, there does exist a practice of burying neonates behind ovens at Çatalhöyük, and a single skeleton was found in space 171 in the south-east corner (Hamilton 1999). The tiny fragments which exist in the unit could easily have ended up in the oven without being noticed. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The aim of this study was to provide a detailed analysis of thin section W0197 in order to establish the nature of the deposit. The results of this analysis have provided support for the field interpretation of this context as an oven rake-out. Charred and silicified plant remains, ashes and burnt oven plaster provide evidence for significant temperatures being reached, with the interpretation of charred wood and dung spherulites as fuel residue confirming the most likely explanation as oven rake-out. Hodder has proposed that in levels IX and X the hearth or oven provided the focus for daily activities such as the knapping of obsidian and manufacture of bone beads, arguing that "there seems to be some specialisation in craft production between different buildings, but obsidian knapping and storing seems to have been closely associated with hearths and ovens on the southern 'dirty' floors in most buildings" (Hodder 1999). Although there is no direct material evidence for obsidian knapping in the unit analysed, the interpretation is not necessarily disproved. It should be remembered that a thin section is only a 30 µm two-dimensional slice through the deposit, and as such may not necessarily be fully representative of the context as a whole. This interpretation of the hearth area is not disputed by the microartefactual remains, in fact, the chert chip and basalt grains support this notion of craft activities and if the bone fragments can be assumed to be the remnants of bone implement manufacture then this would also support this explanation. Micromorphological analysis can provide high resolution data about microstratigraphy and microartefactual remains which may not be evident in the macro-scale excavations. Through an interdisciplinary approach combining micromorphology with modern excavation techniques and ethnographic studies, it is hoped that a fuller, more detailed picture of the past may be reconstructed without losing sight of the wider issues. 