<heading>'BROCH-OLOGY'</heading>The archetypal brochs, standing conspicuously tall, towering over the surrounding landscape have long captured the imagination of antiquarians, archaeologists and visitors alike. This preoccupation with brochs is such that it has been described as 'broch-ology'- "almost an intellectual pursuit in itself" (Parker Pearson et. al 1996: 57). Here the term 'brochology' is adopted as a convenient term to refer to previous and current research into the nature and function of brochs. From the eighteenth century onwards these structures have been subject to a number of excavations and studies and much modern literature includes the history of 'brochology' as a discipline (e.g. Armit 2003, Hedges & Bell 1980). Various hypotheses have been suggested as to the function of these structures but before these are explored, it is necessary to define what exactly is meant by the term 'broch'. It is widely used to refer to a particular architectural form characteristic of the Iron Age in Atlantic Scotland. These are large circular or sub-circular buildings with hollow double-skinned walls of dry-stone construction some of which are preserved to a great height. Mackie defines the broch by its round plan, thick wall, size, ledge or scarcement on its inner wall and hollow-walled architectural features including an upper gallery, chambers in the wall and an intra-mural staircase (Mackie 2002: 2). A 'true broch' is generally assumed to be a tower-like structure (e.g. Parker Pearsonal. 1996: 59, Armit 2003: 33). The question of terminology is debated by archaeologists and a number of alternative terms have been used by various authors in an attempt to compensate for the loaded term 'broch'. Armit argues that the term 'broch' should be reserved for the tower-like structures rather than including any complex roundhouse (2005: 8). However, this causes problems when the structures are poorly preserved since it is difficult to discern between a broch and a complex roundhouse due to lack of evidence for the original height of construction. Substitute terms have included 'broch-towers' (Armit 2003:16), used by Armit to distinguish between those which are significantly tall and those which are not, while Hingley refers to them as 'substantial houses' (1995: 185). Hedges criticises the use of the term 'broch' for being "an outdated Victorian construct which does not reflect reality, which strait-jackets thinking and prevents progress in our understanding of the Scottish Iron Age as a whole" (1990: 17). One of the reasons behind his frustration may stem from the fact that the term 'broch' derives from the Norse word 'borg' meaning fortification (Armit 2003:13, Ritchie 1995: 98) and its continued use may influence the interpretation of these structures. The term 'broch' may in fact be inappropriate given the defensive connotations it imposes upon these structures which may have served as houses rather than forts. The root of this word indicates that the brochs were still well preserved during Viking times, attested by the re-use of Mousa in Shetland as a refuge by Norsemen and the discovery of Viking artefacts found at some Orcadian sites (Ritchie 1995: 98). Ritchie accurately sums up this semantic disagreement, stating that "the words that have been useful in the past, 'broch', 'dun', 'wheelhouse', may on the one hand be cast aside as the straight-jacketed world of the woolly past, and the buzz of the more generalised and forward-thinking 'Atlantic round-house' of current protagonists introduced" (Ritchie 2005: 1). Whereas Sharples and Parker Pearson promote the use of 'broch' over the classification of all structures as Atlantic roundhouses because of the confusion is could cause between brochs and other architectural types (1997: 257). However, Ritchie also recognises the endurance of the term 'broch' in the minds of the public, acknowledging that "the archaeologist has a duty today to this much broader constituency in terms of nomenclature" (2005: 2). For the sake of ease, simplicity and continuity, but with an awareness of the afore mentioned issues, the term 'broch' will be employed throughout this paper. <heading>TOWERS IN THE NORTH</heading>The construction of brochs is restricted to the area of Atlantic Scotland which encompasses northern and western mainland Scotland, the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland. This is part of the diverse regional settlement pattern which is evident in Britain throughout the Iron Age. The brochs of Atlantic Scotland have been compared to the ring ditches in southern and eastern Scotland and the crannogs found in the Highlands and elsewhere (Armit 2005: 8). As Armit points out, these monumental circular structures, which he groups together with Atlantic roundhouses, were "simply the northernmost manifestation of a much wider architectural tradition" (2003: 33) given that circular buildings are characteristic of British architecture from c.1800 BC until the Roman period. The similarity between brochs and the wider Iron Age building tradition extends beyond shape. Conscious decisions relating to the orientation of doorways is also evident in both brochs and Iron Age roundhouses (Parker Pearson et. al 1996:61) as will be discussed below. The scale and monumentality of these structures has led to much debate as to their function. Did they serve a defensive purpose? Did they live up to their Norse name as fortified sites? Or are brochs just big houses? Were they symbolic cultural markers of social status reflecting the hierarchical organisation of the settlement? Did they perform a ritualised role- conveying concepts of ideology? Perhaps they embodied elements of all of these ideas, although there is no reason to assume that there can be one homogenous explanation which can be applied to all broch-like structures across varying spatial and chronological contexts. This theme will be explored and developed further below. <heading>TOWERS OF REFUGE: EVIDENCE FOR DEFENCE AND FORTIFICATION</heading>Scott claims that some brochs could only have been built for defence (1947: 35). These would be the tower-like structures such as Mousa, Dun Carloway and Dun Troddan. The evidence he has presented to support this is their remote location (Mousa is situated on an island a mile from mainland Shetland) and he suggests that they were only occupied intermittently (Scott 1947: 35). It could be claimed that this contradicts the interpretation of brochs as domestic habitation sites, where a certain level of continuity of settlement would be expected, whereas sporadic use of brochs could signify that they were only inhabited during times of conflict or when under threat. However, he also acknowledges that these structures are of "questionable military value, being capable only of that desperate sort of defence that admits no offence" (Scott 1947: 35). Similarly, Sharples and Parker Pearson have highlighted the weaknesses of broch structure from a defensive point of view, drawing attention to the fact that, although the walls may be have been high, the dry stone walls would have been easy to climb due to the convenient hand and foot holds provided by the wall itself (1997: 264). Mackie, however, is convinced of the defensive capabilities of brochs like Mousa with their high walls, single entrances and internal passageways (2002: 13). It should be remembered that Scotts' analysis of brochs was written nearly 60 years ago and as such, he would not have had access to the information which is available now. I would question his interpretation of brochs as being inhabited sporadically since this would require detailed and systematic excavation of these sites, ideally with microstratigraphic sampling which I suspect had not been undertaken at the time when this article was published. By his own admission he states "no ancient sites have been more fully excavated than those of brochs and, unfortunately, none with less result" (Scott 1947: 3). Furthermore, recent excavations such as Dun Vulan have shown that the floors were kept clean, probably being swept out on a regular basis (Parker Pearson et al. 1996: 63), making it difficult to discern the extent of continuity of occupation. <figure/>It has been argued that Mousa was "built primarily for defence" (Mackie 2002: 13) and since it is the tallest standing broch preserved to a height of 13 metres (illustrated in figure 1), it makes a useful example with which to explore the notion of fortification. Mousa has a range of architectural features which could be interpreted as defensive, including high smooth walls with only one entrance which led through a passage that was only 1.65m high where the potential intruder would have been met with a heavy wooden door reinforced with a timber beam to barricade the entrance (as attested by bar-holes in the stonework) (Mackie 2002: 13). There is a 'guard chamber' at the foot of the stair and a raised stair door which would have provided the next line of defence if the entrance was forced. These features have led to the conclusion that "the intra-mural stair played a vital role in the defensive strategy of the designer of the tower" (Mackie 2002: 15). The location of Mousa also alludes to the defensive nature of the site. The tower itself is situated on a low promontory close to the rocky shore on a tiny island with an area of less than 2 km 2 (Mackie 2002: 17). Its proximity to the shore would have allowed good visibility across Mousa Sound to the Shetland mainland (figure 2), thus allowing the occupants to observe any potentially hostile vessels sailing towards them. The choice of an island setting would have made enemy approach more difficult given that any approach would have necessarily been by sea. The broch itself is visible from the mainland and may have served as a warning to potential invaders that the island was well protected. The limited size of the Isle of Mousa could also have facilitated the ability to patrol the whole territory while being large enough to provide the agricultural land needed to support the number of inhabitants. <figure/>However, it should be remembered that "all inferences from a single site are usually tentative" (Mackie 2002: 13) and that interpretations formed at one site cannot be applied a priori to other sites without further research, particularly with Mousa since it is unique both in its preservation and in its proportions. Analyses have shown that Mousa is atypical among the Atlantic roundhouses of Shetland, having both the smallest internal and external diameter and the highest wall base percentage- that is to say, the highest ratio of width of walls : overall diameter. The wallbase percentage at Mousa is 64.5% and enabled the tower to be built to the significant height at which it stands today (perhaps even higher), while the other 26 most well preserved examples in Shetland have a wall base percentage between 42.5- 57.5% implying that they could not have supported the weight of a tower as high as Mousa (Armit 2003: 58-9). These figures suggest that Mousa may have been exceptionally tall in comparison with other similar (but shorter) structures, so it is possible that it may have fulfilled a slightly different function. Nevertheless, these structures may still have reached 5-10m (Armit 2003: 59) and their monumentality and magnitude would have had an imposing effect on the landscape. This adds to the impression they give of being defensive buildings. <figure/>Further evidence for fortification at broch sites can also be gained from other sites such as the brochs of Gurness and Midhowe in Orkney which were associated with defensive features in the form of walls, ditches and ramparts. Figure 4 shows the Great Ditch and ramparts at Gurness. They are located either side of Einhallow sound on the coastline of Mainland Orkney and Rousay respectively (see figure 3) and there is a good degree of intervisibility between the two sites. Furthermore, there are a number of other brochs lining the shore which suggests this may have been a particularly important transport route during the Iron Age which required surveillance from a fortified tower. The proximity of these brochs to one another seems to argue against the interpretation of these buildings as farmhouses, suggested by Scott (1947: 33) due to the competition for suitable arable land it would create. Shortage of land may well have been a source of conflict, especially since many of the brochs were built quite close together. For example, on the island of Rousay, Orkney, three brochs fall within the boundaries of one modern farm (Scott 1947: 16). While it may be the case that these buildings were not occupied simultaneously, the evidence suggests that these were in use over a long period of time (Scott 1947: 16) and so are likely to have been at least partly contemporary with each other. However, this is not necessarily the case in all regions; in Shetland, for example, it has been estimated that the arable landscape could have supported between 160 and 250 people in the areas surrounding each broch (Sharples & Parker Pearson 1997: 257). <figure/>Gurness and Midhowe, unlike Mousa, are not stand alone towers, but have other buildings surrounding them. Figure 5 shows a plan view of these buildings at Gurness in relation to the broch. This could be taken to indicate that the broch was a communal building which was used as a refuge in times of trouble by the occupants of the whole settlement, thus supporting the claims for the defensive nature of the brochs. Alternatively, it could be argued that these buildings were houses like any other in the settlement except for their large size which could denote elite residences. The material evidence does not appear to favour either hypothesis, given the absence of weapons to suggest warfare (see below) and the rarity of exotic objects like imported goods or prestigious metalwork (Parker Pearson et al. 1996: 62) which could demonstrate the elite status of the occupants. It should be noted here that a certain level of regional diversity exists among broch architecture and towers with surrounding settlements are mainly restricted to the Orkney and Caithness (Fojut 2001: 18). <figure/>There are problems with dating and the assessment of contemporaneity of different features in the archaeological record, for example, whether brochs were in use at the same time as the surrounding buildings or if brochs in close proximity were inhabited simultaneously or consecutively. This is particularly problematic when sites have not been excavated using modern techniques to interpret the complex stratigraphy. Howe, in Orkney has been recently excavated and due to the rescue status of the excavation the archaeologists were able to destroy the upper layers, which have been preserved for public viewing at other sites, in order to further the understanding of the stratigraphic relationships within the site (Ballin Smith 2005: 69-70). Ballin Smith who was involved with the Howe excavations concludes that "without an understanding of the detailed inter-relationship between [external structures] and the broch or roundhouse, and the defences, in forming a cohesive broch settlement complex, the story of the site would only be half told" (Ballin Smith 2005: 72). At Howe, some of the Middle and Late Iron Age buildings which are associated with the broch's external settlement lie outside the defences (Ballin Smith 2005: 72). Does this mean that whatever the danger that triggered the need for defences ceased to pose a serious threat? Or could the defences have just been for show but when the population increased, the need for space outweighed the importance of expressing strength, given that an increasing population would signify a successful, powerful group who perhaps now outnumbered their enemy? Or were these features not actually defences at all? Further detailed excavations like those at Howe are needed to investigate these questions. If brochs were defensive structures, who were the occupants defending themselves against? Childe proposed that these structures were built by foreign invaders as a way of controlling the newly occupied territory and population, but he also thought that these invaders were Vikings (Scott 1947: 3). There is no material evidence to support invasion and although there have been a range of opinions held by archaeologists as to the dating of brochs (e.g. Armit 2003: 51, Mackie 2005: 12) it is now commonly accepted that they pre-date the Vikings, 'true brochs' having been built around 200 BC (Bradley f.c. 175). Scott suggests that the enemies of the broch dwellers may well have been raiders from neighbouring areas and islands, or 'sporadic internal hostilities' may have arisen but there is no archaeological evidence which indicates the occurrence of serious attacks (1947: 15-16, 35). There is no evidence in the material culture assemblage to suggest warfare, almost no weapons have been found, only daggers and spears which were more likely to have been used for hunting than for warfare (Scott 1947: 18). Therefore, if brochs are to be interpreted as defensive structures, I would argue that they were primarily a visual statement of power over a particular area, without any actual physical threat of raiding or warfare. <heading>TOWERS OF DOMESTICITY</heading>"The five hundred brochs were neither towers of refuge, nor barons' castles, but farmhouses" (Scott 1947: 33). This view is particularly relevant to the case of Hebridian brochs where fertile land was abundant and the broch dwellers were able to control sufficient land to support themselves, unlike in Caithness and the Northern Isles where 'population congestion' may have been a problem (Scott 1947: 33), leading to the competition for land and need for defences as described above. While there may have been a certain level of regional diversity affecting how fortified these structures needed to be, I will now argue for the main function of brochs as being residential. Are brochs big houses? "There is now sufficient evidence to show that brochs were meant to be lived in; so many have produced occupation refuse that they cannot have been simply places of refuge" (Parker Pearson et al. 1996: 61). There was a large midden outside Dun Vulan on South Uist, composed of an accumulation of floor debris including pottery sherds, bone fragments and organic residue which has been interpreted as being derived from food remains (Parker Pearson et al. 1996: 63). This is what would be expected from a 'domestic' or habitation context. This is further supported by the material assemblages in general which mainly consist of pots, bone tools and hammerstones, and as previously discussed, weaponry is noted by is absence from broch contexts. Parker Pearson et al. conclude that "these artefacts are indistinguishable from those found in wheelhouses and other contemporary settlements, and are indicative of basic subsistence activities such as grinding corn, butchery, food preparation, spinning, weaving and sewing" (1996: 62). Figure 6 shows the floor at Midhowe, with groundstone artefact. I would argue that since the artefacts from brochs are 'indistinguishable' from other settlement types, that they would have fulfilled similar functions, that is to say, they were used for everyday activities relating to subsistence and other domestic chores consistent with a habitation site. <figure/>"Clearly there was no single blueprint for the construction of these structures and, even among the well-preserved broch towers, no two are exactly alike" (Armit 2003: 57). This would seem to suggest a certain amount of flexibility and expression of individuality though the architecture of the brochs, a point which could be used to support the interpretation of brochs as houses. If these had been forts, built as part of some wider defence strategy against invaders, one would expect a higher level of homogeneity. If, as Childe argued, these were built as fortification by invaders in order to exert and enforce their newly attained power over the indigenous population (Scott 1947: 3) then it is even more likely that they would have conformed to a single design given that in this proposed scenario they would have been being constructed almost simultaneously under a single influence. Therefore, a house would seem to be the most plausible function for these structures, expressing the individuality of the occupants. Ritchie uses the analogy of a block of flats where each apartment is constructed with an identical layout but where the individual owners are responsible for the interior design (2005: 4). The single entrance which has been proposed as a defensive feature (e.g. Armit 2003: 64), given that it is easier to protect one doorway, may be more simply explained as a doorway like any other. Other Iron Age houses have only one entrance, why should brochs be expected to have more? This surely fits with the idea that they are monumental houses rather than fortifications. Could it not be argued that a fortified building might require an alternative exit should the tower be besieged? There are exceptions to this trend, where more than one entrance is evident, for example at Clickhimin in Shetland but it has been argued that these extra entrances represent secondary modifications (Armit 2003: 63). The doorway of Dun Dornaigil in Sutherland is marked by a distinctive triangular rock lintel as illustrated in figure 7. The stone is paler than the blocks used in the construction of the walls and draws attention to the entrance by creating a grand façade. Had this been a defensive structure one would not expect the occupant to advertise the whereabouts of the entrance, instead it would make more sense to attempt to camouflage weak points such as entrances. Therefore, I would argue that this elaborate entrance is a form of visual display conveying social messages about the wealth, status and power held by the occupants. <figure/>Armit has envisaged brochs as a stage in the typological sequence of Atlantic roundhouses, beginning with simple roundhouses dated between 800-400 BC which develop into complex roundhouses around 500-200 BC and finally evolve into broch-towers c. 200 BC (2003: 51). I would then question why, if the brochs are part of this same roundhouse architectural tradition, are they assumed to have fulfilled a different function? Would it not be more logical for the function to be similar to those that came before but with an increase in size and monumentality? By contrast with the (comparatively) ephemeral timber roundhouses which characterised much of Britain during the Iron age, it might be a fair assessment to consider brochs as heavily defended forts, but in the context of contemporary architecture in Atlantic Scotland, the thick walls and large scale of the buildings no longer appears quite so extraordinary. In fact, when the low temperatures and inclement weather (particularly the strong winds) of these geographical regions are taken into consideration, building these substantial houses with double-skinned walls (serving to insulate) seems like a practical solution. Exposure to the elements would have posed a significant risk to the welfare of the population especially since there was a period of climatic deterioration during the Iron Age (Oswald 1997: 89). They may have been 'defending' themselves against the weather rather than any human enemy. <heading>SOCIAL BOUNDARIES AND LIMINALITY</heading>The function of brochs need not be restricted to a purely utilitarian or functionalist interpretation. As Bradley has observed, "rituals and symbols permeate everyday life" (2005: 3). The distinction between the seemingly dichotomous categories of 'ritual' and 'domestic' is rarely as clear cut as one may expect. Ritualised and symbolic beliefs and behaviour are "not opposed to domesticity [but] often grow out of it" (Bradley 2005: xiii). This is relevant to the question of the function of brochs given that they appear to be much more than just 'big houses'- they may have been bound up with more symbolic meanings and power which could reflect the social organisation and ceremonial belief systems that existed in the Iron Age. The location of brochs within the landscape seems to have been chosen for reasons other than practicality. The choice of predominantly coastal locations has been explained as a defensive advantage (Ritchie 1995: 99), providing a barrier against invaders but these sites may have had other ideas associated with them such as the theme of liminality. Sharples and Parker Pearson have observed a pattern in South Uist that demonstrates this phenomenon (1997:263-4). Here the majority of brochs are situated at the boundary between the fertile arable lands of the machair and the peat-covered 'blacklands' while Dun Vulan is located between the equally hostile ocean and the machair. The choice of location in transitional borders has been interpreted as a symbolic representation of social inclusion and exclusion, marking the juxtaposition between fertile and infertile, between the 'cultured domestic' landscape and that which is left natural and unfarmed (Sharples & Parker Pearson 1997: 264). This categorisation of the landscape is reminiscent of the 'domus-agrios' dichotomy proposed by Hodder where he described agriculture as "'culturing' of the 'wild'" (1990: 86), taking the view that nature is in opposition to culture (1990: 45). Although, as Hingley points out, the landscape of Britain had been subject to farming for over 2000 years by the broch-building period, "nature was by this time at least partly altered by human activity" (1995: 188). The significance of this choice of location is twofold. Firstly, it demonstrates human domination over nature, and secondly, it reinforces social order. It has been noted that brochs are often detached from the main area of settlement "to emphasise or create a distance between the occupants and the community which served each broch" (Sharples & Parker Pearson 1997: 264). In order to reach the broch, an individual would have to pass through this landscape where she or he would be continually reminded of the social and symbolic boundaries separating them from the broch inhabitants. The broch and its landscape setting can be seen as a material manifestation social relations, conveying the themes of inside/outside, up/down, and inclusion/exclusion, where those outside the broch were excluded by the higher status individuals who occupied it. Similarities have been drawn with state elites and palace and temple architecture as an expression of "social distancing through domestic isolation, and a hierarchical structuring of social relationships" (Parker Pearson et al. 1997: 60). The existence of an elite within the social structure would have been required in order to organise the labour force to construct such monumental architecture. "Brochs embodied overtly hierarchical social relationships in their contrast between labour mobilisation and occupant numbers" (Parker Pearson et al. 1997: 66) which would have further emphasised the inclusion/exclusion divide. As can be observed throughout prehistoric Britain, there is a constant changing perception of the landscape with the shift in land use- from the Neolithic chambered cairns and stone settings through the Bronze Age barrows and field systems to the Iron Age Brochs- the people of each period have a characteristic way of monumentalising the landscape. Often there is reference back to the past, the construction of some monuments respecting those that went before, others destroying and replacing them. It has been argued that by constructing the brochs in particular places, the builders were attempting to identify with the cultural world of the past (Hingley 1995: 188) and to exploit ancestral power (Sharples and Parker Pearson 1997: 264). It is not purely the location of brochs that can be interpreted as a symbolic expression of power but the form of the structures themselves also echoes this attitude. "Permanent physical structure perhaps projects the reality, or myth, of stable domestic relations" (Hingley 1995: 188). The monumental stature and the permanence of building with heavy stone would have conveyed strong messages about power, control and status, reflecting the social relations between those within the brochs and those outside. This would have been further strengthened by the construction of these brochs in areas connected to ancestral power, justifying perhaps the positions held by those in power. An alternative interpretation of this connection with earlier monuments is suggested by Hingley who questions to what extent these "were truly houses for human as opposed to divine use" (1995: 188). A number of brochs and Atlantic roundhouses have been built on top or into Neolithic chambered cairns; such as Clettravel on North Uist, and Howe, Pierowall and Quanterness in the Orkney Islands (Parker Pearson et al. 1996: 60). It may have been the case that the broch dwellers were attempting to evoke ancestral power rather than just exploiting the previously sacred landscape for their own social gain. Alternatively, there may have been deeper ideological reasons for building the brochs in the footprint of earlier monuments. Parker Pearson et al. suggest that houses are "embodiments of myth, places of worship, calendars, and generally guides to the social and cosmic order" (1996: 61). If brochs are houses, as is argued here, then it is likely that they too may have been connected with belief systems and ritualisation, supporting Bradley's impression of ritual and symbolism as growing out of domesticity (2005:xiii). Another material expression of symbolic beliefs and cosmology is evident in the standardisation of the doorway orientation. This concept has been well documented for roundhouses (e.g. Oswald 1997) where there is a strong tendency for doorways to be oriented in an easterly or south-easterly direction which Oswald considers to be of great significance. He argues that "vernacular architecture is no longer seen as a passive functional backdrop to everyday life, but as a culturally meaningful artefact" (Oswald 1997: 94), acting as a "pervasive and potent expression of belief" (Oswald 1997: 92). The orientation of many of these doorways have been shown to correspond with solar alignments resulting in the majority of Iron age houses lining up with the direction of sunrise on either the equinox or midwinter solstice and, others aligning with the midsummer sunrise and sunset on the equinoxes (Oswald 1997: 93). A similar pattern has also been observed in broch doorway orientation. A brief survey undertaken by Parker Pearson et al. found that the entrances to brochs either faced eastwards (41 out of 90) or westwards (35 out of 90) with north and south seeming to be consciously avoided (1996: 61). The graph in figure 8 shows the number of brochs facing in each direction. This has significant implications for the interpretations of brochs for two reasons: firstly, it supports the claim that they were houses due to the similarities which can be drawn with other contemporary 'domestic' architecture from across Britain; and secondly, it proves that although a building may serve a 'domestic' function such as for habitation, this cannot be assumed to be mutually exclusive to inherent ritualised and symbolic associations. <figure/>It has also been said that the conscious orientation of doorways also expresses the need for man to exert his power over nature through the contradiction of the natural order. Sharples and Parker Pearson have observed that in the Gaelic language the same words are used for east and front, west and back, north and left and south and right, which, when taken in conjunction with the west-facing brochs has been interpreted as "subverting the natural order...to further demonstrate their control over nature" (1997: 264). <heading>CONCLUSION: ARE BROCHS BIG HOUSES? </heading>There is enough evidence of domestic refuse, middens and hearths to attest the use of brochs for residential purposes, particularly when combined with the similarities with the form and material culture assemblages from contemporary roundhouses from across Britain. However, brochs are more than just big houses. They are monuments of power, reflecting hierarchical social relations and asserting control over natural order through domination of the landscape. They are also cultural signifiers, physical embodiments of symbolic concepts and ideology as expressed through the orientation of doorways towards the sunrise. Their architectural form goes beyond the practical necessities of habitation, but was this the result of a need for defence? Although some aspects of the architectural evidence are quite convincing, such as the thick, high walls, ditches and ramparts, I would argue that given the lack of evidence for weaponry and warfare, that is it more likely that the 'fortifications' and defensive features are a form of visual display, reflecting the social status of the occupants and transmitting particular messages about power relations that would have been easily understood in the social contexts in which they were built. Conversely, Blythe has argued that "the absence of confirmed attacks on brochs should not be considered as conclusive evidence of there having been no threat against them and certainly cannot be a basis for saying that they had no defensive capability" (2005: 249). As Bradley has observed, these structures "were surely designed to impress" (Bradley f.c: 175), to impress or to intimidate, either way, the function of brochs is much more complex than the domestic/defensive dichotomy initially suggests. It seems likely that archaeologists will continue this debate gradually building up a greater understanding of these monumental structures. 