<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Genetic analysis has been widely used to give new insights in morphology, physiology, and evolution of the plant world. Genes play important roles in controlling morphology, some findings include he cossuppression of eukaryotic release factor 1-1 (eRF1) which form 'broomhead phenotype' at the inflorescence stem of Arabidopsis, ROT3 genes which cause elongation of leafy organs, Knotted-1 gene to be a key in the origin of the development of compound leaves. Furthermore, a model is constructed to explain the control mechanism of flowering initiation processes. In terms of evolutionary development, ABC model seems to be a profound theory to represent the identification of floral organs, and the function of S-genes in regulating the self-incompatibility and the effect on the evolutionary pathway of fertilisation is important. Genetic analysis is applied to the studies on sex-determination process in maize by masculinising genes and feminising genes, and polymorphism in fern species. Various methods such as AFLP (Amplified Fragment Length polymorphism) DNA-fingerprinting techniques, Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) analysis are now available and have the high potential to be a great aid for many purposes beyond the scientific research in the future. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>In the last few decades, the great advance of DNA analysis has contributed to solve many questions in the field of Plant Science. It is a very useful tool to investigate morphological, physiological features of plant body to the last details at molecular basis as well as to study on the development, differentiation and hence, evolutionary pathways of plant species. This report will review some research, firstly on the identification of DNA affecting the development of cells, leaf structure, shape of leaves and flowers and flowering time in terms of morphological expression of a plant body controlled by particular genes, secondly the role of DNA in evolution of organs, physiology of self-incompatibility, thirdly examples on the application of studies in sex determination process in maize and the uses of genetic analysis to investigate the species morphological variation, and look for the future prospectus on the study area. <heading>MORPHOGENESIS</heading><heading>'Broomhead phenotype' caused by the cosuppression of eRF1 </heading>Eukaryotic release factor 1-1 (eRF1) regulates the termination of translation of mRNA into proteins in eukaryotes. Due to the structural and functional similarities of eRF1 to a tRNA molecule, the mimicry of this factor was hypothesised to be a catalytic reaction for the termination (1). A study on Arabidopsis shows the importance of eRF1 in alternating the cell elongation and cell division as a first clear example of functional characterisation of this factor in plant homologous apart from the yeast, human, frog cilate, fungus, and other eukaryotes. The effect on morphology by the cossuppression of eRF1 in Arabidopsis is called 'broomhead phenotype' which induces the formation of a cluster of siliques at the top of the inflorescence stem which resembles a broom head. The reduction in internode elongation resulted in the lignification and the reduction of height in cells. Lignification occurred at the phloem cap cells and sieve cells, inter-fascicular fibres and fascicular cambium region. In addition, the radial cell division in the fascicular cambium was also modified, showing the disorganisation of cells in vascular bundles and the enlargement of nuclei (1). This research demonstrates the significant effect of a single genetic factor on a plant body at cellular level. <heading>Elongation of leafy organs</heading>There is sometimes a case that a single gene has a specific control on a particular organ. The ROUNDIFOLIA3 (ROT3) protein belongs to a family of cytochrome P450 and encodes genes which control the leaf length. An early study which investigates the rot3-1 null mutant of Arabidopsis with short leaf length but normal internodes and roots, concludes that the mutant is a defect specific to the suppression of the polar elongation of leaf cells (2). The importance of ROT3 genes is confirmed by Kim,. et al (2) using transgenic Arabidopsis; the null mutant rot3-1 was introduced either ROT3 genes of wild-type or rot3-2 allele, molecular clone of ROT3 gene. This transgenic Arabidopsis with wild-type ROT3 genes showed longer leaves than the parent mutant, but the leaf width to be remained the same. There was no effect on the elongation of the stem, roots and hypocotyls, although the shape of floral organs was modified. On the other hand, the samples with rot3-2 allele expressed the enlargement in leaf blade, but the length of the leaf petiole was unaffected (Fig. 1) (2). <figure/>Those morphological changes are argued to be caused by the genetic alternation in the shapes of leaf cells. However, this specific regulation over morphology by a single factor of ROT3 genes has not been well established. It is suggested the role of P450 or CYP90C1 in molecular cloning of ROT3 genes to be in steroid biosynthesis, hence, it is supported that ROT3 gene may have an effect on the polar elongation of leafy organs and Kim,. et al implied the future application this gene to the biodesign, i.e. the manipulation of plant organs. <heading>Compound leaves in tomato</heading>Some early studies demonstrate the formation of leaves from the flocks of the shoot apical meristem as dorsiventral appendages which are different from radial primordial that developed into axillary branches or stems (3). Morphological classification of vegetative leaves is firstly and apparently, division into either simple or compound. The molecular-genetic basis of this character is studied by Hareven, et al (3) in tomato leaf mutants using the maize homeobox-containing Knotted-1 gene. The striking result was the exhibition of different phenotypes on simple and compound leaves by the misexpression of the gene. Plants which were inherited with simple leaves including those of tomato mutants and Arabidopsis, were only affected in the malformation but not in the leaf ramification. In already compound leaves, various additions and orders of subdivisions up to 2000 leaflets were observed (3). This is, as hypothesised, to be caused by the relative flexibility in compound leaves compared to the genetic stability in simple leaves, allowing the former to express a wide range of mutations. It is suggested that the two forms of leaves are determined and altered by the difference in developmental pathway in the primary appendages of each leaf type programmed in the genetic level, hence compounds leaf is not the reiteration of a simple leaf resulted from the mutation in growth patterns but originally different (3). <heading>The control of flowering time </heading>The flowering mechanism which involves the transition stage of a plant from vegetative to reproductive development is sophisticatedly regulated by the combination of endogenous and environmental factors. Koornneef, et al. (4) shows what has been understood about the role of genes and other endogeneous factors in controlling flowering time in Arabidopsis. Monitoring of flowering initiation has led to reveal regulatory factors such as the decrease in floral repressor, controller of phase switching (COPS) and the activation of floral initiation process (FLIP) when COPS is at the critical low level. Several genes are identified as the controller called Floral Meristem Identity genes (FLIP genes) including LEAFY (LFY), APETALA 1 and 2 (AP1 and AP2), AULIFLOWER (CAL) and UNUSUAL FLORAL ORGANS (UFO) (4). In the process of the promotion or suppression of flowering, the responses to evoke physiological changes are dependent upon the genotypes in Arabidopsis as well as other endogenous factors. The model which summarises the interactions of relevant genes in various pathways is constructed by Koornneef, et al. (4), shows the complex control mechanism by various factors (Fig. 2). An example is two pathways involving two sets of late mutant genes which promote flowering time (4). The first is caused by the genes (①) with the high sensitiveness to day length in constitutive promotion pathway. Under photoperiodically inductive conditions, other late-flowering genes (②) induce promotion in the second pathway (4). However, in terms of responses to vernalisation, it seems that those mutants are not related to the mechanisms of receiving cold-signals, but VRN genes may be the important candidate genes (4). Those findings show only the tip of the iceberg; the interactions of genes with the environmental changes and light or clock signals are not yet well understood. However, it is remarked that the molecular-level analyses have provided significant outcomes in revealing the control mechanism of flowering time. <heading>GENES AND EVOLUTIONARY DEVELOPMENT</heading>The review by Shepard and Purugganan (5) on several studies on the genetic basis of morphological variation of flowers, inflorescence, and leaf development emphasises the importance of genetic analysis in terms of understanding evolutionary pathway. 'ABC model' is generally recognised today to dissect the specification of homeotic genes which lead to the development of floral organs; combination of three genes <figure/>identifies floral whorls (Table. 1). The roles of B and C function genes are suggested to be universal to all flowering plants from various studies (5) which implies the evolutionary events of the stamens and carpels might occurred only once. In coniferous plant species, orthologous genes in gnetophytes are highlighted in comparison, leading to the conclusion that B-function gene may be responsible for sexual gametes and C-function genes for reproductive development. <table/>Unisexuality and zygomorphy are two important elements in revealing the refinement of floral morphology and homologous genes which differ in the patterns of expression among plant species are investigated in this study area. The theory of the independent development of unisexual flowers in angiosperms has been agreed but the evolutionary pathway has remained unknown. An interesting evidence from a phylogenetic study suggests the polyploidisation and breakdown of self-incompability to be significant in re-constructing sex-determination process in some species (5). Moreover, it has revealed that zygomorphic and antinomorphic flowers have occurred several times through transition in the evolution of angiosperms. In terms of evolutionary significance, the variation in flower morphology might have been the strategy for pant species to prevent hybridization and to secure the successful breeding within species to some extent. It is supported that the adaptative importance between species in differentiating the inflorescence architecture can be revealed by the investigation on TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (TFL1) and LEAFY (LFY) homologs in angiosperms and the latter in particular, may also provide a clue in the evolution of angiospems to develop both male and female reproductive organs within a single floral organs. Furthermore, as suggested by Hareven , et al (3), there has been independent evolution of compound leaves, however, other findings show the repeated suppression and resurrection of developmental pathways may have been a significant factor as in the evolutional patterns in reproductive organs (5). <heading>Self-incompatibility </heading>In a study by Pandey (6), factors of pollen-style incompatibility in plants are discussed in terms of the genetic evolution and expression, with particular focus on the mechanism by which the incompatibility may be overcome. S-gene which exhibits two phases in physiology, S specificity determination (transcription) and S protein synthesis or precursor conversion (translation) was detected to regulate the genetic systems of self-incompatibility, floral morphology, site of inhibition and pollen cytology. In addition, the inter-specific incompatibility is controlled by Primary Specificity which is derived from the tapetum and produces the incompatible substances in sporophytic systems, while the substance related to the intra-specific incompatibility, to be controlled by Secondary Specificity produced by both meiosytes and rapetum (6). In terms of the evolution of Primary Specificity is suggested to be occurred in the progenitors of anemophilous gymnosperms for ovule protection and Secondary Specificity to be derived from the progenitors of angiosperm as cross-fertilisation promoters within species. It is also supported that the latter to be a duplicated form of Primary Specificity complex (6). Furthermore, S-gene complex may inherit the pollen growth capacity of a species, which is involved in the overcoming of incompatibility by the 'switch-on' effects of a 'regulator' in the incompatible pollen into the recipient's S-genetic element; the production of pollen growth substance is transferred to the incompatible ones, hence allowing the mimicry (6). This study indicates the importance of genetic transformation via irradiated pollen and drafting in producing the new recombination of genes. <heading>APPLICATION OF GENETIC ANALYSIS </heading><heading>Sex-determination process</heading>The role of genetic control over a plant is further applied to study on the sex determination mechanism, in this study in maize (7). Unisexual flower is the result of selective arrest and abortion of the organ primordia within a bisexual floral meristem. There are two genes identified to be involved in this process; masculinising genes which regulate gynoecial abortion and feminising genes inhibiting stamen development (7). The research found the failure in the process of the pistil abortion and the induction of stamen abortion result in the stamenate-to-pistilate conversion in masculinising genes and also the occurrence of the reverse ferminisation process by environmental factors. Gibberellins, a plant growth substance, were concluded to be an important element in the regulation of stamen abortion procedure and the floral tissue ferminisation, while it is also noted that dwarf mutants of ferminising genes showed the inhibition of biosynthesis pathway induced by gibberellins (7). The classes of DWARF genes, TASSELSEEDS2 (Ts2) and SILKLESS1 (Sk1) are also involved in the process and need the further investigation. This study shows the significance of identifying the responsible factors in the sex determination and revealing the overall process for agricultural purposes in particular . <heading>Polymorphism and genetic variation</heading>A study on fern species Asplenium hookerianum Colenso Asplenium colensoi Colenso (8) demonstrates an interesting result to pose a question on the taxonomy based on morphological variation. The aim of the study was to investigate if these pinnule morphologies correlate to the genetic variation by means of AFLP (Amplified Fragment Length polymorphism) DNA-fingerprinting techniques and DNA sequencing (8). The findings from the constructed phylogenetic trees were that there was no significant evidence leading to the separation into two groups corresponding to morphology but suggesting the strong influence in the genetic variation by geographical distribution rather than by morphology. Therefore, in terms of morphological expression, the polymorphism of the species is supported (8). However, the research failed to detect the genes which have control over pinnule morphology, only suggesting the higher possibility of the key genes be in chloroplast than in nuclear genome. The comparison with another study on one European species of Asplenium which discovered the maternal inheritance of chloroplast indicates if the genes which carry information on pinnule morphology were found in chloroplast which was only inherited maternally, the unequal dispersibility of genes can lead to changes in the morphological patterns (8) The genetic variation by geography also needs to be re-evaluated and may help the understanding of evolutionary process and the link with polymorphism in the species. <heading>PROSPECT OF GENETIC ANALYSIS</heading>The significance of identification of genes which correlate to the morphological features of a plant and the link with evolution is also highlighted by Irish and Benfey (9) with particular focus on the comparison of studies on Arabidopsis with those on other species. The study on homologous genes with the establishment of knowledge on the developmental programmes including the controlling mechanism in species other than Arabidopsis is suggested to provide useful theories to be applied into Arabidopsis. For instance, KNOX genes whose down-regulation stimulate leaf development were found in leaf primordia of species with compound leaves, the comparison of expression of these genes in tomato and Arabidopsis indicates the effect on the changes in the expression of genes to evoke different leaf forms through evolutionary events (3,5,9).In addition to the identification and direct comparison of target genes, this review remarks the importance of phylogenetic construction in developing the hypothesis on the traits of evolutionary changes across species. The other approach in studying evolutionary developmental biology is the extension of models to natural variations. Three methods are discussed; firstly, Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) analysis which is used to detect the co-occurrence of traits in the progeny derived from the crosses between subspecies. While this method is widely proposed in many studies (5) it is criticised that it poses the problem of insufficient identification at the gene level (9). Alternatives are multiple backcross in recombinant inbred lines which can effectively isolates the representative chromosomal regions, and comparative genomics which clarify the genetic origins of the adaptive traits by the comparison of genomes and their expression in related species. The validity of some techniques is still uncertain, however, it is supported that the advances in genetic analysis would find insights to solve questions on the evolutionary process of the development of plants (9). <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>Understanding the origin and developmental pathway of plant organs, physiology, and morphological variation and the traits of changes in genes offer vital clues to answer the evolution of plants. Genetic analysis on particular genes and the identification of their functions on morphological control over a plant body tells how plants are created. The relationship with external factors such as the environment also needs to be taken into account, however, no single environmental components only but a genome can evoke changes in morphology and physiology of plants. The application of findings to various purposes such as for agriculture has shown remarkable contribution. Recent progress on the methodology has expanded the possibility for study and the understanding of plant world. 