<heading>Introduction</heading>Calcareous grassland ecosystem has evolved as a consequence of interaction with human agricultural management on steep slope of calcareous soils. Natural succession has been suppressed by sheep or cattle grazing, so plant community has been adapted to this disturbance on land and has become a home to many invertebrates and birds species. This habitat was once widespread in North-western Europe including southern U.K (Adriaens, et al. 2005). One example is the Chilterns, Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Due to topography, human activities were relatively limited; hence the majority of agriculture on steep slopes was grazing by sheep, forming a species-rich habitat (EN, 2005). As happened European-wide, agricultural intensification and undergrazing in the last fifty years have led to the loss of the habitat, while use of fertilizers and herbicides have had further impacts on reducing the species diversity(Adriaens, et al. 2005). Today, only a total of 685 ha calcareous grassland remain in the Chilterns, but the great concerns to the condition of this habitat in addition to direct loss are fragmentation and isolation of small patches which are inherited with high risk of extinction due to the decreased genetic diversity (handout, Adriaens, et al. 2005). The value of biodiversity in calcareous grassland is recognized not only in the U.K context as listed in one of the U.K's Biodiversity Action Plan, but internationally as included in the European Community Habitat Directive (EN, 2005, the Chilterns AONB, 2006). Practical strategies for restoration and recreation of remaining calcareous grassland are now under investigation. This report will discuss the following topics with reference to colonisation, plant communities and succession; <list>Features of calcareous grassland, and the importance as a habitatEvaluation of methods for restoration and recreation and the factors affecting the outcomes of a project </list><heading>1. Features of calcareous grassland, and the importance as a habitat in the Chilterns</heading>The Chilterns lay on a ridge of Cretaceous chalk with overlaying Tertiary clay, sand or sand and gravel on the foot of the dip slope. Primarily due to the difficulty in access, North-facing steep escarpment has been utilsed for sheep grazing while other more reachable areas had been converted to beech woodland for industry and to arable crop production (EN, 2005). Calcareous grassland occurs on those steep slopes, the climax vegetation is woodland but grassland community has established through woodland clearance or burning and centuries of agricultural practice Poschold, et al, 2002) which created regularly disturbed nutrient-poor land. Many plant species, such as gentians, orchids, scrubs, mosses and liverworts (table. 1) have evolved with this environmental condition, supporting many invertebrate and birds species (EN, 2005). There are over 40 vascular plant species estimated to be found in 1 km⁻¹ area in the Chilterns, some of them are recognised nationally scarce species. Butterflies and other insects associated with the habitat are also of value. There are several important scrub species in the Chilterns which provide breeding sites for birds and shelters for invertebrates. Most of bryophtes are known nationally important survival of which is heavily dependent on grazing activities (EN, 2005, the Chilterns AONB, 2006). <table/><heading>2. Evaluation of methods for restoration and recreation and the factors affecting the outcomes of a project</heading>Abandonment of traditional agricultural management, successive conversion to arable land, fragmentation and isolation of small patches are the major threats to calcareous grassland community in the Chilterns, therefore, restoration efforts need to put an emphasis on re-establishment of appropriate management and the creation of linkage between small habitats (Kahmen, et al, 2002, Booth, et al, 2002). Some suggested conservation methods are (Adriaens, et al. 2005, handout); <list>Grazing by sheep or alternatively mowingSeedbank translocationSeed mixture plantation</list>Major problems in the existing degraded calcareous grassland are increased nitrogen content and limited light availability on the ground both of which have resulted in the dominant colonisation of unfavourable species and the failure to regeneration of important ones (Adriaens, et al. 2005). Such constraints would likely to be overcome by grazing and mowing which induce disturbance on land. Brys, et al (2003) showed that these methods would promote high species accumulation in the short-term and pointed out the significance of grazing over mowing to reduce the effects of high nitrogen level in the soil. This is also supported by During and Williams (1984) that grazing would lead to higher species diversity, but grazing intensity and duration require precise monitoring. However, lack of understanding among people and insufficient financial support by the statutory bodies are substantial issues in implementing the traditional management system again in the region (EN, 2005). Hence, incorporation of other forms of management as well as the improvement in grazing or mowing system, the labour requirement of which would be acceptable to people needs further study to successfully reestablish high biodiversity in calcareous grassland (Dolek & Geyer, 2002). Fragmented, isolated or degraded calcareous grassland habitats often suffer from limited seed bank sources and even if present, low dispersal capacity and low persistence which are further suppressed by invasive undesirable species are great obstacles for restoration (Bonn, et al, 1998, Adriaens, et al. 2005). Latter two methods seem possible alternatives for those vulnerable habitats. The translocation of flocks from well-established large areas to new restored sites would be effective (Adriaens, et al. 2005). Sowing seed mixtures on the area between the isolated habitats would also encourage creation of nearby habitat and would improve connectivity, hence promoting the seed dispersal to wider geographical scale (handout). Larger or connected habitats are beneficial to the colonisation of fauna which, in return, would improve dispersal capacity, whilst grazing is also important in this aspect (Beinlich  et al, 1996 & Bonn et al, 1998). However, a drawback to those approaches is the increased risk of colonisation of unfavourable species to larger areas (Adriaens, et al. 2005). Translocation of seed bank not only contains desirable rare species but invasive species or the key species which are different in the genetic composition to those formerly colonised the re-introduced sites. Remaining habitats in the Chilterns are relatively small compared to other parts of Southern England (EN, 2005). Hence, as well as taking account of the differences in genes and the composition of contained plant species, it is very important to select flocks which would not adversely reduce the regeneration capacity of original habitat. The other risk is the uncertainty of succession in the long-term. When introducing seed mixtures or in translocation, the species variety and the relative proportion of each species are crucial in determining the success of plant growth and colonisation of plant community through interaction between species (handout). The inappropriate choice of species composition has high potential of promoting or depressing the growth of particular ones, resulting in the creation of grassland habitat with no ecological value. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Restoration and recreation of calcareous grassland in the Chilterns is achieved through the combination of management mechanisms from different approaches, including grazing in existing habitat, the plantation of plants to isolated areas. The required management is different within the Chilterns due to various conditions of remained habitats. Restoration programme of plant community in fragmented areas starts from identification of proposed sites, careful selection of species to be re-introduced at the scale of genes, to monitoring of community establishment. Re-adoption of grazing practice need to take account of socio-economic aspects of people involved, hence the improvement of the system and alternatives are important consideration. In addition, it is vital to increase connectivity in achieving the recreation of large area of habitat on top of the restoration of isolated areas in the Chilterns. There is no single solution for restoration and the target should aim for the establishment of species-rich habitat in the long-term. The important factor in terms of the approach to people is the proposal and implementation of financial support systems for local farmers and education to raise awareness among the general public. In conclusion, those suggested methods would, with further investigation and incorporation of management regimes, lead to a strong way forward to enhance the ecological value of the Chilterns. 