<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Rice is staple food in Sri Lanka, a tropical island country in South Asia. Rice production is the most important agriculture and economic sector in the country. Rice is produced in the majority of the geographical areas in this country owing to high rainfall throughout the year and constant high temperature. Although the government policy framework, for instance, major irrigation projects, have been successful in increasing the rice productivity since its independence in 1948 to 1977, productivity has reached the peak in the 1980s and has been stagnated to date. Major constrains are excess and misuse of agrochemicals have been the primary problem not only for weed and pest control but also for environmental pollution and health hazards over the few decades, decline in soil fertility and negative or zero net benefit to farmers due to the consequences of economic liberalisation which allowed private sectors to control marketing. This report will suggest some important focuses for future development. In relation to the improvement in farming practices of individual farmers and government support, focuses should be; use of appropriate cultivars and timely cultivation, soil fertility improvement by addition of manure or rice straws and minimum use of fertilisers, Integrated Weed, Pests and Disease Management, post harvest management by construction of on-farm storage facility, and setting up of extension services. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading><figure/>The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is a island country south to India with population of 19.462 million in 2006 (Fig 1). It is a developing country classified as 'most seriously affected by the international economic crises' by the United Nations (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, IRRI, 2006). Rice production is the most important agriculture sector in Sri Lanka with an annual production of 2.7 million tones (95%of the domestic requirement). Rice is staple food providing the dietary values of 45 % of total calorie and 41 % of protein for one Sri Lankan. Consumption of rice is 100 kg per capita in 1998 and this figure is estimated to be stable to date. In terms of production sector, 30 % of the total labour force is directly or indirectly engaged Fig 1. Map of Sri Lanka (CAOD, 2006) in rice production and marketing, there are 1.8 million rice-producing farmers 70 % of which belongs to small folder with less than 1 hectare of agriculture land. 0.77 hectare; 34 % of the total cultivated land is under rice cultivation (Premaratne and Premalal, 2006, IRRI, 2006) Although life expectancy, health standards and education levels are high compared to other South and Southeast Asian countries the majority of rural subsistent farmers are poor due to stagnation in the rice yield and reduced profitability in recent years (Jones, 2002). Population growth is low but the base population is high in Sri Lanka and there is a need to increase productivity and improve production efficiency in order to meet the increase in food demand (Dhanapala, 2000, Gunatilleke, 1994, Jones, 2002). This report will illustrate a case study of rice production system in Sri Lanka, evaluate constraints on the current productivity and appraise some suggestions for development. <heading>Factors which determine the agriculture system and productivity</heading><heading>Climate, soil and the environment</heading>Rice production is practiced in three types; main irrigation with over 80 ha of tank and anicut systems, minor irrigation with smaller than 80 ha of tank, and rainfed systems. There are two distinct growing seasons, Meha (wet) season and Yala (dry) season. Meha season is from late September to early April during which Northeast inter-monsoon rains are distributed over the majority of island. Yala season is from early April to early September when rain is mostly fed to Southwest region (Fig,. 3,4) (IRRI, 2006, Premaratne and Premalal, 2006). Based on the annual rainfall, three climatic zones are categorised; Wet, Intermediate, and Dry zones. Temperature is constant throughout the year in a given elevation with average temperature of 30°C at Mean Sea Level (MSL) down to 15 °C at the highest altitude. By the combination of these two factors, seven agro-ecological zones are classified which are further divided into 24 regions which take accounts for the distribution of rainfall, soil type, and landform. Rice is cultivated in 19 of those 24 regions. In terms of geographical areas, 75 % of rice land is located within inland valley systems and the other 25 % in coastal flood plains (IRRI, 2006). <figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><table/>Soil types are diverse in Sri Lanka. The major physical properties of soils are Reddish Brown Earths, Red Yellow Podzolic, Red and Yellow Latosols, Reddish Brown Latasolic. Leaching of soil due to intensive rainfall is severe in Wet Zone, hence soil fertility is low in this zone. The base saturation of the dry zone soils remains at a higher range. Solodized solonetz, Bog and Half Bog soils are the major groups of problem soils found in Sri Lanka. As a whole, most soil types are generally suitable for various agricultural practices although fertiliser application is required on these poor soils (Premaratne and Premalal, 2006). <heading>Socio-economic factors</heading>The government has put an emphasis on an increase in rice production for its policy framework with the target to achieve self-efficiency since the independence of the country in 1948. There have been many large-scale irrigation projects, land development and settlement schemes implemented mainly from 1948 to 1977. Farmers have been supported by free irrigation water, fertilizer subsidies and guaranteed price for rice. Such nation wide implement in irrigation system and expansion of rice cultivation in the past few decades have contributed to the increase in productivity from 1.5 tonnes/ha in 1950 to 3.5 tonnes/ha in the early 1980s, but productivity has been stagnated since the peak in the 80s (Weerahewa, 2004, Wijavaratna, et al, 1996, ). There are some socio-economic drawbacks adversely affecting productivity. The significant economic change was induced from 1977 with economic liberalisation for domestic rice which allowed private sectors to enter the rice market. While the government share on rice market was decreased to less than 10 % in 1997, successful private sectors have expanded. Today, a group of oligopolistic buyers has control over paddy procurement, milling and distribution leading tot the exploitation of farmers benefit. In addition, increase in labour cost, costs of agrochemicals reduced the profit from rice, resulting in the negative or almost no net benefit to farmers. Those socio-economic factors in conjunction with diversity of environmental factors have contributed to the relatively low yield of 3.5 tonnes per hectare; 50 % of the genetic potential of the rice cultivars (Jones, 2002, Weerahewa, 2004) <heading>Major constraints to biological production</heading><heading>1. Weeds, pests and diseases</heading><heading>a) Weeds</heading>There are many weed species emerge in rice fields. In Sri Lanka, more than 70 grass species, over 50 sedge species, and over 20 broadleaf species have been recorded as weeds. Dominant species vary according to locality factors, such as soil type, hydrology, and irrigation pattern, 10 to 20 species are considered as economically important in rice field, particularly, Echinochola crusgalli, Ischeamum rugosum and leptochloa chinensis. In terms of regional trend, Dry Zone is severely affected by weed infestation due to the limited amount of available water during the critical period. Weed control is carried out by sustaining standing water in rice field which suppress the germination of weeds in early stage of the season, however, such practice is often not possible in dry zone. Therefore, there is substantial yield loss by weeds in the area (IRRI, 2006). <heading>b) Pests</heading>Excess and inappropriate use of insecticide has disrupted natural pest control mechanism which is achieved through the interaction of predators, pests and parasitoids to sustain the balance of each population. Therefore, pest problem has become an important issue in rice fields. Major inset pests in Sri Lanka are; Rice Thrips Stenchaetothrips biformis (Bagnall), Brown Plant Hopper Nilapavata lugens (Stal),Yellow Stem Borer Scirpophaga incertulas, Rice Leaffolder Cnaphalocrocis medinalis; Marasmia spp, Rice Gall Midge Orselia oryzae , and Paddy bug Leptocorisa oratorius (IRRI, 2006). <heading>c) Rice Diseases</heading>Numerous rice diseases exist in fields, but outbreak varies depending on the condition of the land, management, and climate, damages may be local or widespread. Economically important rice diseases identified in Sri Lanka are follows; <table/><heading>2. Water management</heading>Both excess and deficit in water are one of the major constraints on rice production in Sri Lanka. Problem by excess water occurs in Wet Zone as salinity where surface drainage is significantly reduced its function by continuous water logging. Seepage and runoff of water is accumulated in depression in inland scape, as water evaporates, dissolved salts remain on soil surface, resulting in development of salinity. Accumulation of Iron to toxic level is often accompanied with such circumstances. This problem has become severe by inappropriate land management in recent years by blocking of drainage ways or by neglect of management by farmers (Dhanapala, 2000,Gunatilleke, 1994, IRRI, 2006). <heading>3. Soil fertility and nutrient</heading>Studies which examine the response of rice yield to Nitrogen availability showed that the grain yield had declined over time without additional Nitrogen inputs to the soil (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, Dhanapala, 2000). This outcome was observed not only in the experiment by also at national level. This study indicates that the inherent soil nutrient supply is only sufficient for grain yield of 2.5 to 3 tonnes per hectare at least in the experimental fields. In addition to the low Nitrogen content, other studies on soil in Sri Lanka revealed that micronutrient level is at critical threshold. Zn, Cu Fe and S are the most important micronutrient deficient in Sri Lanka, while exception is Fe toxicity frequently reported in Wet Zone which is associated with excess water. Evidence from studies supported that those chemicals have significant effects on preventing rice plants from taking the necessary amount of nutrients during the important growth stage. Deficit in soil nutrients have therefore, contributed to the stagnation of the yield in recent years. In relation to the expansion and intensification of rice cultivation, increased cropping intensity meant that nutrient uptake by rice plants in a season has increased, resulting in the rapid decline of soil organic matter in rice field in the short term. Together with the climatic constraint that temperature in tropical Sri Lanka is sustained high throughout the year which accelerates decomposition of organic matter, organic matter content in the soil of Sri Lanka is often poor, less than 1 % in Dry or Intermediate Zones (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, Dhanapala, 2000). <heading>4. Inferior management practices</heading>Several problems in relation to inferior farming practices are identified as major constrains to decrease the productivity. Misuse of fertiliser and pesticide, often of excessive use, in the long term has caused environmental pollution downstream and contamination in water, and risk to human health. Seed quality is often poor, contaminated with weed seeds, hence magnifies weed problem (Gunatilleke, 1994). Non-seasonal cultivation with short duration rice cultivars (3-3.5 months) has reduced productivity, as it neglects the optimum use of climatic parameters such as temperature and rainfall. In non-seasonal cultivation, the growth stages of rice plants between fields differ depending on the timing of cultivation. This practice encourage pest and disease outbreak due to overlapping of crop cycle within a small scale of area. Inappropriate or inferior implement for ploughing used by local farmers further reduces the yield. Plough layer is shallow which inhibits the growth of roots, hence, the insufficient nutrient uptake result in the low yield (Ahikarinayake, 2005, Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001). <heading>5. Institutional constrains</heading>Lack of storage facility in local villages in the close proximity to individual farmers is a very important constraint on productivity. Lack of money to invest on constructing storage facility for rice is a common problem in Sri Lanka. Post-harvest loss is very high; there is 15 % loss of the grain yield by improper harvest time, incorrect processing and storage. Fact that a few oligopolistic groups has control over milling, processing, or marketing of rice further inhibit the farmers ability and incentive to improve or establish facility for processing and storage (Ahikarinayake, 2005, Wijavaratna, et al, 1996). <heading>6. Farmers' labour efficiency and knowledge</heading>Poor health and poverty suppress the labour efficiency. The rural poor accounts for the majority of people under poverty in Sri Lanka, inherent poverty in those areas induce low labour inputs in farming. Illness or sickness is not only caused by poverty but also by health problems associated with exposure to toxic chemicals due to inappropriate use of agrochemicals and storage. This is often primarily due to the lack of knowledge among local farmers on how often or when to apply the required amount of agrochemicals and how to store them under safe condition (Gunatilleke, 1994, Jones, 2002). <heading>7. Socio-economic constrains</heading>Increase in intensive use of insecticide and often its misuse have resulted in the health hazard. Sickness or deaths due to the toxic effects of agrochemicals to humans and poor sanitation status have been widespread. Health hazard by misuse of agrochemicals further reduce the farmers' labour input Inferior quality inputs and lack of extension service to provide information on technologies for improvement and on proper crop management have led to the inefficiency in production by individual farmers. Low social status of farmers in the open market discourages young generation to engage in rice farming (IRRI, 2006, Weerahewa, 2004). <heading>Suggestion for development: improvement in biological productivity and profit</heading>In relation to the improvement in farming practices of individual farmers and government support, several focus points are identified from the revealed major constrains; cultivars and timely cultivation, soil fertility improvement, weed, pests and disease management, post harvest management, and extension services. Extension of agricultural land was recognised as impractical since the majority of productive land has already been converted to agriculture purposes. However, cropping intensity can be increased from 119 % of the current figure to 136 % which enables to increase the total cultivated land area to 0.96 million hectares (0.77 million hectare in 2006). Prioritisation should be given to Low Country Wet Zone and the areas with minor irrigation systems in the Dry or Intermediate Zones where there has been an increase in neglect of rainfed rice cultivation. <heading>1. Cultivar and collective, timely cultivation</heading>Location specific rice cultivars should be recommended which would be successful in maximising the resource uptake in individual areas. Medium duration cultivars (4 - 4.5 months) should be selectively grown where water is not a limiting factor throughout the growing season. Medium duration cultivars are superior in terms of higher grain yield potential than short duration cultivars since the long growing duration enables plants to utilise the available energy for a longer period. Although use of medium duration cultivars was common in the past, it has declined to less than 18 % at present. Main potential reasons for this change are the increase in labour cost so that farmers tend to choose cultivars with shorter cultivation period, and establishment of irrigation systems which enabled to increase the efficiency and the extent of control on water use. Where rainfall is adequately supplied, longer cultivation is possible in Sri Lanka since the temperature, being constant, is not the limiting factor for agricultural practice in this country. Therefore, medium duration cultivars should be reevaluated its significance to be promoted again (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, IRRI, 2006). Traditional rice cultivation period was scheduled based on the change in season, with the onset of monsoon to region; however, such timely cultivation has been gradually ignored with the use of short duration cultivars. It is estimated that about 70 % of the rice fields under irrigation do not necessarily receive the sufficient water supply; hence rice plants are likely to be subjected to water stress due to occasional drought during its growth. Delay in crop establishment using short duration cultivars increases this risk and shortens crop growing period in good condition. In addition, collective cultivation of rice with the same growth stage between rice fields has declined but is very important to reduce the pest and disease occurrence. Overlapping of different growth stages of rice plants in a given area provides the ideal condition to complete life cycles of disease pathogens and pests within the area, hence stimulates transmission of diseases and pests. Timely cultivation which matches with the increase in rainfall by monsoon, early crop establishment with medium duration cultivars, and collective cultivation with uniform farming schedule are crucial to increase the yield and reduce the risks (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, Dhanapala, 2000, IRRI, 2006). <heading>2. Soil fertility improvement</heading>Degradation of soil fertility by continuous cropping and runoff by intensive rain are common problems in Sri Lanka. For regeneration of fertility, Nitrogen addition with fertiliser may be recommended with caution to avoid excess use. Crop diversification is another method which has been promoted, for instances, cultivation of chili, onion, green gram, cowpea, soy beans, ground nuts, and other vegetables in rice fields. Legume crops are particularly advantageous that those plants help regenerate soil fertility. Reduction of weeds and pests and diversification of risk for household are also important aspects. Nevertheless, production has not been increased since the peak in the 1980s due to the fluctuation in yields by changes in climate, market demands and low prices and the increase in imports. Lack of government support is a major concern to promote crop diversification in the future. Addition of rice straws, animal wastes to build up organic matter would be practical at farmers level. Occasional ploughing to the depth of 20 to 25 cm also helps nutrient accumulation and soil conservation. Furthermore, provision of appropriate implement for ploughing at affordable price with the support of government is an important consideration (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, IRRI, 2006, Weerahewa, 2004). <heading>3. Weed, pest and disease management</heading>Integrated Pest or Weed Management developed and implemented in Southeast Asia would be the most recommended strategy. This practice puts an emphasis on the proper land preparation for prevention, minimum use of agrochemicals, utilisation of natural Biological Control mechanisms. Land preparation includes ploughing, peddling, and leveling to reduce the germination of weeds, and management of off-field landscape such as bunds between fields which provide refuges for important natural enemies of insect pests during non-cropping seasons. Use of clean seeds without weeds contamination and appropriate water management are vital consideration for prevention. Rice diseases would also be suppressed by such land management to control humidity, temperature, and weeds establishment which are favoured by disease pathogens and fungi (Jones, 2002, Gunatilleke, 1994, IRRI, 2006). <heading>4. Post harvest management</heading>In order to minimise post harvest loss, on-farm storage facilities should be constructed and managed properly. One recent attempt which would be practical is an airtight bin constructed in ferrocement technology. The experiment by Adhikarinayake (2005) proposed the bin consists of two reversed stacked cones resting on three vertical pillars with a storage capacity of 2.5 tonnes of paddy. The constructed bins effectively insulated air to control temperature inside the storage and the insect damage was neglectable of about 0.1 to 0.3 % loss. The significance of this proposed storage system was that it can be constructed by farmers, hence improve their control over when to sell rice, extended storage period enables farmers to obtain higher benefits by selling rice in the off-season (Ahikarinayake, 2005). In addition, proper harvesting time and processing are also important to improve productivity, education to farmers is the key strategy in this aspect. Innovation on post harvest management which is easily practiced by local farmers is highly recommended and the government should take a lead to promote improvement. <heading>5. Extension services</heading>There is a real need to set up the extension services to ensure the information dissemination to individual farmers and to monitor the market trend on rice and major problems faced by farmers. In addition to the provision of on-farm storage facility, milling and processing facilities should be made available at wider scale not only to a group of olipolistic business sector in order to increase the benefit to farmers, hence to raise the social status of farmers which would encourage young generation to participate in rice production. Education on recommended farming practice should be carried out with the support of government and by extension service workers at local level in order to disseminate information throughout the country (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, Dhanapala, 2000, Jones, 2002, Weerahewa, 2004). <heading>Conclusion</heading>In order to increase productivity of rice, there is a need to change farming practices and land management at individual farmers' level. Pest, weed and disease management should adopt Integrated Pest or /and Weed Management which have been successful in Southeast Asia. Timely cultivation with appropriate cultivars which matches with locality factors is also important. Post harvest management, particularly construction of on-farm storage facility would benefit farmers not only by improving the storage quality but also by enabling sales of rice with higher price in the off-season. The government role is education of farmers and setting extension services to support farming activities. Therefore, it is suggested that those recommendations should be implemented by the government in conjunction with robust support from socio-aspects in order to raise the social status of farmers, hence to encourage young generation to be engaged in rice production. Integration of those various approaches is essential to increase biological production and farmers' profit from rice production. 