<heading>Introduction</heading>In land planning processes, land use suitability analysis has been recognised as an important step to provide reliable information as help on decision making for stakeholders involved. Land use suitability analysis is defined as to identify the most appropriate spatial pattern for potential land uses based on the investigation on the requirements of land features for a specific purpose, on preferences and on the predicted activities and their impacts on land (Makczewski, 2004). For instance, the targets include identification of potential habitat for wildlife, analysis on agricultural land use, and regional development planning. It is often aimed at proposing the best site for the specific purposes by ranking and rating the known characteristics of alternative candidate sites, such as location, size, climate, geological features, and proximity to important sites (Makczewski, 2004, Phua and Minowa, 2005). Geographical Information System (GIS) has been widely used as a tool for such analysis in land use planning. One example is forest management or conservation planning. Important function of GIS in forest planning is the ability to integrate various information in maps as associated databases, providing an answer which meets a set of criteria on planning in spatial context (Zek and Keles, 2005). The primary use of GIS was in forestry with aims to store maps in electric forms and to perform calculations such as areas, distances. It is now increasing applied for analysis to solve complex problems, for example, selection of sites for conservation, evaluation of alternative land uses (Makczewski, 2004, Zek and Keles, 2005). Spatial database in GIS may contain ownership boundaries, locations of roads, water courses, elevation, soil maps, and climatic features which enables practitioners to examine what activities to be carried out in which spatial scales. GIS also provides an aid to visualise landscape pattern of a forest, such as shape, size, distribution of patches or management units, spatial relationships between different land characteristics such as urban areas, agricultural land. Such spatial structure and features of forest determine biodiversity, aesthetic values, and susceptibility to disturbances (Zek and Keles, 2005, Phua and Minowa, 2005). The aim of this report is to illustrate the use of GIS in forest planning. In particular, objectives are to find the potential site for creating buffer zones from motor ways for neighbouring communities around the existing community forest Watling Chase in London, U.K and to investigate criteria for further evaluation on planning. <heading>Study site</heading>Watling Chase Community Forest is in south Hertfordshire and north London which consists of 188 km area of a mixture of farmland, meadows, wildlife areas, hedgerows and woodland as well as public open space and the urban fringe (Fig. 1). This forest is one of 12 Community Forests in England established in 1990 by the then-Countryside Commission as pilot project areas to demonstrate the potential contribution of forests to economic and to social regeneration (England's community forests, 2007, Watling Chae Community Forest, 2007). According to the Review 2005, the suggested key sites of interest in Watling Chase for the future management are new plantation along motor way corridors in order to reduce the impact of traffic fumes on air quality (Vaughan, 2005). Therefore, evaluation of areas for the potential buffer zone is an important process to be carried out for this target and for deliberation of the actual plans. <figure/><heading>Analysis and Results</heading><heading>Problem : </heading>Identification of potential new forest plantation sites as buffer zones along motor ways around Watling Chase Community Forest, north London. <heading>Data sets used</heading>The following data sets were chosen to be used to create the maps. <list>- Country boundary- Roads- Ecological regions- River basins- Land cover</list><heading>Criteria</heading><list>- Proposed sites to be along and in the immediate vicinity of the major motor ways around north London area.- The buffer zones should be in certain width adequate to support the function of forest for maintaining and enhancing wildlife habitat and for noise reduction, but minimum area so as not to have negative impacts on other land uses.- The buffer zones should not be suggested on grassland and agricultural land. - Environmental features along the buffer zone area to be similar to those of the existing community forest.</list><heading>Production of map</heading>Selection of U.K The outline of UK was selected from country boundaries data by using 'selection by location' tool (Fig 2). Selection of River Thames basin River Thames basin area was extracted by using 'selection by location' tool from river basins data (Fig 2). This is to provide the spatial boundary on which other data sets should be based. Water course is an important factor controlling the amount of water stored in the aquifer over time which influences available water for plants uptake (Forestry Commission, 1991). Therefore, it was suggested that the proposed sites should be within the area on the same river basin in order to homogenise the environmental condition for the growth of trees. River Thames basin which covers the area of the existing community forest was selected using 'selection by location' tool. Geological and climatic features of this selected area were estimated to be similar in relation to the requirements for forest plantation. Examination of ecological features. The attribute table showed that ecological features of the River Thames Basin area was classified as temperate deciduous forest, indicating the feasibility of forest plantation in this area. Since this feature was homogenous over the selected area, this layer feature was excluded from a criterion. Identification of roads of interests. Extraction of roads within the River Thames basin was carried out by the same selection tool. Motor way within the River Thames basin area was selected from the attribute table and was exported as a layer feature (Fig 2). Evaluation of land cover. Land cover data on the River Thames basin was extracted. Reclassification of land cover classes was carried out to simplify the description on land use (Fig 3). Creation of road buffer zones. Buffer zones along the major motor ways were created with buffer wizard (Fig 4). Based on the analysis on land uses and their patchiness, the width of buffer zones was suggested to be between 0.5 km and 1.0 km. Rasterisation of buffer zones (Fig 4 and 5). Overlay of land cover data and buffer zones. Identification of potential areas by raster calculation. Criteria were set as 1) a) the areas which are woodland and b) within the buffer zones of 0.5 km from the motor ways for the prioritised area, 2) a) the areas which are agricultural land or grassland and b) within the buffer zones of 0.5 km from the motor ways, and 3) areas within the buffer zones of 1.0 km for the maximum potential buffer area (Fig 4 and 5). It was suggested that the areas within 0.5 km away from the motor ways to be prioritised as potential new forest plantation sites. The area with the distance from the motor ways of less than 1.0 km would also be considered as important sites for future evaluation. In terms of the importance for further planning, woodland on the proposed buffer zone would be the first target for consideration (Fig 4 and 6). Those areas would have a higher potential to function as the extension of the community forest and to enhance biodiversity value by creating larger habitat for wildlife. Where the connectivity to the existing community forest would be favourable condition, creation of buffer zones around those areas would be beneficial for such possibility. Hence, further investigation on the ecological features of woodland and of neighbouring land should be prioritised. Much of the identified areas were under agricultural uses or grassland where the conversion to forests should not be proposed due to land ownership issues and economic issues of local communities (Fig 5 and 7). On the other hand, creation of buffer zones from the motorway traffic seemed an important issue for local communities, thus the conversion of agricultural land into woodland buffer zones should be evaluated its significance. The narrow buffer zone, possibly less than 0.5 km in width, may be feasible option. Investigation, consultation and decision-making should focus on the minimum requirement of woodland for buffer and for ecological function as well as on the other socio-economic issues on land use changes. Although 1.0 km width of buffer zone was identified as the 'maximum buffer zone', it was suggested that new plantation or extension of forests to this large spatial scale would be unlikely to be appraised due to many factors (Fig 4 and 5). Various land uses at present, the extent of potential impacts induced by conversion of land to woodland, changes in landscape pattern would also likely to be considerable. Management problems associated with such large scale forest would be an important issue in the long-term. Nevertheless, the presentation of this buffer zone on maps would be useful as an indicator on the scale of forest planning, particularly for considering the expansion of community forest to important conservation site in the future. <heading>Discussion and Conclusion </heading>Accuracy of the representation of information in GIS database is a very important matter in real world application. Representation of social, economic features in the environment as well as geographical elements is the first priority consideration (Makczewski, 2004, Phua and Minowa, 2005). Moreover, the process to combine objective and subjective information such as judgments and preferences is vital in order to reflect every view and feature which contributes to decision making on the target land. Demonstration of information in the form of maps by GIS approach has a risk that it may be misleading by over-influencing the value system of map developer (Makczewski, 2004). In this case of forest planning, conversion of land to woodland as buffer zone involves evaluation of socio-economic gain and losses by potential activities. Decision in such case would be complex, and should be made in conjunction with consultation with local people, land owners and uses. In order to achieve satisfactory agreement on land planning, information provided on the produced maps is very important and maps should contain all the required data sets for evaluation. <heading>Potential </heading>Although the level of analysis carried out was simple, potential of the produced maps in terms of application in reality and the ability to represent the necessary information are adequate. Maps clearly illustrate the potential sites for new forest plantation which meet the objectives. The maps have effectively selected the most appropriate areas and issues of interest for initiating the evaluation process and have shown the areas for prioritisation. Comparison of two maps; woodland and agricultural land would be useful to find out geographical relationship between those areas under different land cover, indicating the feasibility and difficulty in creating the buffer zones at a particular area. <heading>Limitation</heading>There are several aspects which limit the accuracy of the data presented in this case to fulfill the required information for the potential application. 1. Soil properties Land use history over time may have changes soil properties unsuitable for the plantation of trees. Such local specific analysis on the feasibility of growing trees from biological point of view is need for further evaluation. 2. Conservation In order to enhance conservation values, connectivity to existing forests and other important conservation sites should be further examined. There was lack of data on ecological features in details such as bird population and wildlife distribution around the existing forest and isolated habitat patches in the vicinity to the proposed buffer zones. This will help select which areas along the potential buffer zones should be prioritised for future planning and to convert from current land uses to forests if necessary. 3. Social perspectives Subjective information, such as preference of local residence on the size, location, structure, visual landscape of forest and buffer zones, and recognition on the importance of the buffer zones should be taken account in the real world situation. As mentioned, the significance of GIS approach is to enable map makers to integrate various information on factors affecting and/or likely to affect land uses in the form of maps (Makczewski, 2004, Zek and Keles, 2005). Data gathering on social aspects should be carried out in reality to maximise the potential use of GIS. 4. Other environmental factors Elevation, climatic conditions were assumed to have little constraints in the area of interest based on the fact that there are woodland patches in broader spatial scale around the existing forest of the selected region, indicating that much of surrounding land is likely to be relatively homogeneous in relation to the potential of land properties for forest growth. However, topography would be an important attribute since visual landscape is greatly affected by changes in elevation and on the distribution of forest cover (Phua and Minowa, 2005, Zek and Keles, 2005). Such factor may be considered to contribute to aesthetic value for which the role of community forest should be targeted. In conclusion, in spite of the limited amount of datasets used to give solution to the objectives; to identify the potential sites for extension of forests along the motor way in the close proximity to the existing community forest, the result provides a comprehensive map to visualise the key sites of interest in planning. It has been identified that current land cover and land uses; woodland or grassland and agricultural land would be the key elements for further evaluation. Evaluation criteria may include the vicinity of the existing forests or woodlands in order to enhance the wildlife value by extending the existing habitat, the importance of current land uses to local communities, or preferences of local residence on the structure, size of buffer zones. There is much potential on the produced maps to be applied for similar problems. In relation to the quality of visualisation of information required, this outcome has successfully represented the specific site on which the target on management planning and further evaluation should be based. This report has demonstrated the potential and limitation of GIS approach for the specific problem associated with land use planning in real world situation. 