<heading>Introduction</heading>Today, 10 % of the land area in the Britain, equivalent to approximately 2 million ha, is covered with woodland. Although the proportion is small compared to the world average of 30%, there has been a significant increase in woodland cover in the U.K since the beginning of the last century (Fig.1), owing to the principles particularly of the Forestry Commission being enforced. Forestry Commission was set up in 1919 when there was a national recognition of the lack of domestic timber resources available after the World War Ⅰ. Its original objective was to increase the woodland area for economic purposes, and since then there has been some modification in policies and the introduction of new schemes with the gradual shift of political and social emphasis on forestry towards the enhancement of the conservation value (FC, 2005). Today, Forestry Commission is divided into three branches; Forest Research; a central research organization on woodland-related issues, Forest Enterprise, which has a role in improving the commercial aspects of the forestry and Forest Authority which regulates grants and other administrations (FR, 2005①). The aim of this report is to look at the roles of Forestry Commission in the following topics 1) the provision of forest and woodland planting materials in the U.K and 2) forestry research and extension in relation to multiple forestry objectives with production, amenity, aesthetics, biodiversity targets and leisure with the example of the Hangers. <heading>1) The provision of forest and woodland planting materials in the U.K</heading><heading>Structure of the regulation</heading>The quality of planting materials, such as seeds, cones, shoot cuttings and planting stocks determine the value of forest for any purposes, hence there is 'Forest Reproductive Materials Regulation' which came into force in 2003 for providing a framework to identify, ensure and promote the use of high standard planting materials. Forestry Commission is a responsible governmental body on this regulation and controls the whole of the Britain (FC, 2005). Any sources of basic material from which Forest Reproductive Materials are collected and supplied by any owner is approved and identified by the National Register (table.1). <heading>1.2) Seed extraction and nursery systems</heading>The collected Forest Reproductive Materials are treated by Forestry Enterprise, or Plant and Sees Supply Branch to be supplied in the market. There are four units of Alice Holt in Surrey for seed processing and three nurseries at Delamere, Newton, and Wykeham, all of which have a duty to maximise the possibility of seeds to grow properly (FC, 2005). <heading>1.2 a) Seed extraction</heading>Alice Holt provides for the seed extraction, pre-treatment, storage, and sales (table.2). A large extractory and some storages with the capacity of more than 5 tonnes of seeds are located in the site. The majority of the processed sees is conifer, while the treatment of broadleaf seeds has also been becoming important in recent years. Due to the fluctuation of seed production year by year, there is sometimes a need of importing seeds from other countries including France, Holland while the surplus, in case, is traded abroad (FR, 2005②). <heading>1.2 b) Nurseries</heading>A total of 24 to 25 million plants for forest use are grown annually by three nursery units. Three regimes are commonly practiced at present, (1) field grown by which seeds are sown outdoors and trees are supplies as bare root stocks, (2) cell grown by which seeds germinate indoors and supplied with root protection by the plug of compost in the market and (3) Super Sitka for shoot cuttings to be grown in mist houses under the proper environment. <heading>1.3) Evaluation of the provision</heading>The current structure for regulating the market supply of planting materials is well established. The registration system is a good monitor to ensure the traceability of the products and to maintain the quality, although there have been some cases where conflict over the identification of planting materials harvested from the boundary area of the provenances or the zones has led to the biased grading of seeds in the market. Frequent analysis of the suitability of the regulation is required to ascertain the needs of the market are met. Climate change and other environmental issues which may have effect on the quality and the availability of the resources, both on the basic materials and on Forest Reproductive Materials should also be taken into consideration. Trading of the products across the countries may not be the best solution to compensate the lack of surplus, because the genetic components of the imported seeds are different and hence, there is no reliable prediction on the future effects of those alien trees not only in the U.K but in the countries where the U.K originated trees were introduced. <heading>2) Forestry research and extension in relation to multiple forestry objectives with production, amenity, aesthetics, biodiversity targets and leisure with the example of the Hangers</heading>Apart from the direct contribution to the U.K forestry in terms of scientific approach, Forest Research, as a government agency states the further objective to incorporate the role of forestry within an element for the enrichment of life on a local level (FR, 2005①). The Hanger on the East Hampshire is given as an example of how it can be practiced in a regional level. The Hanger is fairly convoluted with steep slopes and valleys, largely resulting from 'the land slump' and is comprised of two escarpments of greensand in the east and chalk in the west. Broadleaf tree species are abundant which charactarise the woodland on both slopes, although there are few remains of elms found today due to the Dutch elm disease spread in the 1970s and much of the beech may have been planted in the past. The coppice has been practiced in the area, although unaccessible sloping areas have been left unmanaged, forming the mosaic landscape of the flat agricultural land and woodlands on slopes. The largest land ownership in the area is National Trust and local people have also traditionally inherited fragments of woodland (EHDC, 1995, 2005. the handout). In terms of economic purposes, the woodland has almost no value. First of all, the costs of the management and extraction of timber resources on the sloping sites exceed the profit from the forestry. Secondly, the drastic decline in the demand for timber production due to the import and replacement by alternative resources has led to diminish the possibility of operating the industry. On the other hand, social contribution of the area is highly valued. There is a huge tourism attraction to the site as the home of father of natural history, Gilbert White whose book ' The Natural History of Selborne' was written in 1789 at Selborne (Natural History Museum, 2005). The area is rich in biodiversity and the landscape has an aesthetic value and has been designated as an Area Of Natural Beauty (EHDC, 1995, 2005). Hence, the emphasis on the woodland in the Hanger is mainly on the social aspects including the recreational, educational and conservation values rather than the forestry as an industry. In this respect, the management of the area, in particular that owned by individuals is a significant issue, since coppicing has been less and less practiced and large areas have been neglected. This has already resulted in the disturbance in natural regeneration and a decrease in biodiversity. However, following the East Hampshire Woodland Strategy adopted in 1995, various plans are to be implemented which may have some effect on the management of this woodland(EHDC, 1995, 2005). Nevertheless, it is the role of Forest Research to evaluate land use, give advice on how to involve the community in woodland management and promote local activities. It s important to ensure that information is available to the public, easily accessible and Forest Research should provide the appropriate services to meet the needs of those involved in maintaining local woodland. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Overall, the regulation on providing and monitoring planting materials is successfully structured as long as regular reconstruction is to be organised. In contrast, the contribution of forest research to the multiple forest uses is difficult to evaluate, but need to be satisfactory among the regional scale forestry or woodland management. The assessment of the best-fit structuring of the landscape and land uses is essential to raise the amount of the benefits obtained from woodland in practice. For instance, the Hanger where the timber production is insignificant in business terms, the sustainability of the woodland is highly dependent upon the ways it is managed, such as through involving the local community for recreational or educational means. It can be applied to any woodland in the U.K and Forestry Commission with tight connection with local authority has to play an important role in achieving the multiple goals of the forestry. <figure/><table/><table/>