<heading>Introduction</heading>Rice production is the most important farming system in Southeast Asia (Appendix 1). Six out of top ten countries in terms of rice production are tropical Southeast Asian countries (Pontius et al, 2002, IRRI 2006a). <table/>Tropical Southeast Asia receives the abundant amount of rainfall and solar radiation throughout the year which enables the multiple harvests of rice in a year in the region. It is generally recognised that the cultivation of rice Oryza sativa originated from South and Southeast Asia (Norman et al, 1995). Rice production system is mainly divided into three types based on the adaptation method to the depth of flooding and degree of water control: upland rice, wet or paddy rice, grown in water less than 1 m deep and deep-water rice, the depth of water is usually 1-6 m (Hong et al, 2004, Sigsgaard, 2000). In all systems, traditional rice farming was heavily dependent upon the intensive labour input particularly for weed management and preparation of seedlings for transplanting, and the yield was low due to loss by weeds, pests and inferior rice varieties (Khanh et al, 2006). There has been an increase in the demand for rice with rapid population growth over the past few decades. Development of new varieties was therefore, motivated in order to improve the yield per unit area of land. In the 1960s, so-called Green Revolution started by the introduction of IR8: new high yielding rice cultivar, the successive introduction of improved cultivars followed and spread throughout Southeast Asia (Hong et al, 2004, Norman et al, 1995). The increased demand for rice has caused many changes in rice production system and land management in those countries. Increasing labour cost has led to promote the use of insecticide and herbicide which adversely resulted in the disruption on ecosystem and the increased risk to human health and environmental pollution (Hong et al, 2004, Sigsgaard, 2000). In response to the recognition on the negative consequences induced by contemporary rice production system, Integrated Pest or Weed Management has been introduced into Southeast Asia since the 1990s. This management strategy puts an emphasis on the incooperation of Biological Control, minimum use of pesticide and education at farmers' level (Pontius et al, 2002). Biological control is defined as 'the action of parasites, predators, and pathogens in maintaining another organism's density at a lower average than would occur in their absence' (McFadyen, 1998). Tropical Southeast Asia supports rich diversity of flora and fauna species owing to the climatic condition. Many species have adapted to traditional rice farming practices, creating natural occurring Biological Control mechanisms in the rice field (Pontius et al, 2002). Recent research focus has been put on the reevaluation of such Biological Control on farming practice. This report will firstly outline the consequences of pest control in contemporary rice production system in the tropical Southeast Asia and the concept of Integrated Pest or Weed Management, secondly review some recent advances in Biological Control of pests and weeds which indicate the importance of integration of Biological Control in contemporary production system. <heading>Pests and weeds control under conventional rice production system in Southeast Asia</heading>Great diversity of invertebrate community had developed to ensure the balanced population dynamics in rice insect pests, predators and parasitoids over time in Southeast Asia; however, insecticide application has destroyed this stable condition (IRRI, 2006b). Broad spectrum insecticide application was promoted based on the assumption that new varieties were susceptible to pest damages and that farmers were incapable of practicing the complex pest control procedure. Insecticide application was carried out on calendar-based schedule and ignored the differences in locality factors. Insecticide significantly damaged population of natural enemies such as spiders and other predacious insect species through 'turning off' of natural ecosystem, resulting in the widespread outbreak of insect pest, notably of stem borers Chilo suppressalis, leaffolders Marasmia patnalis (Bradley), and brown planthoppers Nilaparvata lugens most of which were originally minor pests. The consequence of inappropriate evaluation on the role of natural Biological Control mechanism and misleading in insecticide use was the severe outbreak of pests and damages on rice (Pontius et al, 2002, Moody, 1992). Weeds in rice fields are the major biotic constraint on the yield reduction (table 2). Two important factors in contemporary system have contributed to the magnified weed problem over the last twenty to thirty years: change in production system and herbicide application. Increased labour costs have led to shift in production system from transplanted rice or deep water rice to direct seeded rice, of which wet-seeding is the common method (Moody, 1992). This change has caused an increase in weeds and the shift in the dominance of weed species from aquatic weeds to grassy weeds (IRRI, 2006c). The prioritisation on increasing weeds problem was on rapid, short-term solution, hence herbicide use was promoted. For instance, in Vietnam, although there was very small use of herbicide until the 80s; 0.5 % of total rice production area, there has been a dramatic increase in the 1990s. Herbicide accounts for 30.2 % of total pesticide use in all agriculture production in 2003. However, weed resistant to herbicide have emerged to colonise the field leading to the reduction of rice yield (Khanh et al, 2006, Baki & Azmi, 1992). <table/><heading>Integrated Pest or Weed Management</heading>Findings from many field observations and research since the 1970s eventually revealed those adverse effects of contemporary rice farming system. The concept of Integrated Pest and/or Weed Management (IPM or IWM) has developed and came to be enforced at farmers' level in the 1990s (Pontius et al, 2002). The primary objective of IPM and IWM is to incorporate natural occurring Biological Control in farming practice. There is a particular emphasis on farmers education in order to increase the awareness on the risk of environmental pollution and human health by excessive or mis-use of pesticide and to improve the understanding of natural Biological Control mechanism. Today IP/WM is an important farming strategy promoted by the governments in Southeast Asia and many field schools have been carried out (Fagan et al, 1998). <heading>Case studies: Recent advances on research and implementation of Biological Control</heading><heading>Pest control: Spiders as natural enemies and importance of land management</heading>Spiders (the most common genera of orb-weavers are Tetragnatha, Araneus, and Argiope, hunting spiders Lycosids and dominant species of web-building families are Theridiidae, Linyphiidae, and Agelenidae) are known as important predators of major insect pest, particularly of brown planthopper (BPH) Nilaparvata lugens (Sigsgaard, 2000, IRRI, 2006b). Studies demonstrated that the pest outbreak was due to the significant reduction in spiders and other predacious insects killed by insecticide. Today, those natural Biological Control agents are paid great attention in Integrated Pest Management (IRRI, 2006b). Study by Sigsgaard (2000) pointed out the importance of land management for the provision of suitable habitat for predatory spiders. Population dynamics of spiders depend on availability of suitable pests and hosts. Prior to cropping, spiders feed on alternative prey such as Collembola and dipterans and the population gradually increases. Weed residues within rice fields are an important habitat which provides refuge for predators and abundant alternative preys. Organic matter from plants leads to increase herbivores which indirectly induce positive impact on predator population. Bunds between fields: narrow and low reconstructed raised land with low vegetation cover, are also suitable as refuges for spiders during fallow or operation period and promote colonisation of ground-dispersing predators. Land management of bunds is crucial for the survival of spiders, grazing destroys webbing sites and hunting ground, resulting in the reduction of spider density. In addition, Barrion (1999) pointed out the importance of non-rice cropping habitat such as irrigation canal, set aside, roadside grasses or coconut and banana plantation area which is utilised by two key spider species: the linyphiid Atypen. formosana (Oi) and the lycosid Pardos. Pseudoannulata (Bösenburg & Strand). There are several future challenges to maintain spider population in rice fields. Two factors: expansion of synchronous cropping filed over the large area in response to increasing food demand, and the increase in herbicide use induced by increased labour cost, are likely to reduce the refuge for predators and early season alternative preys (Pontius et al, 2002). Urbanisation is expected to result in the reduction in water use for agriculture which may have negative impacts on spiders which are benefited from continuous flooding (Sigsgaard, 2000). Therefore, the focus for the development of rice production system and IPM in the future should be put on the re-evaluation of importance of land management and ecological interaction of insect pests and natural enemies. <heading>Pest control: Interaction of spiders and insecticide application on the control of insect pests</heading>Integrated Pest Management states the prioritisation of Biological Control but also allow the use of insecticide when required. However, the understanding on the compatibility of different pest control strategies has not well developed and the attention paid is often low. Experiment by Fagan et a, (1998) investigated the interaction of insecticide with one spider species Lycoside wolf spider  Lyosa pseudoannulata (Bosenberg et Strand) which is known to be a generalist predator on various insect pest species in rice. The finding showed that there was no additional positive effect on pest control by the combination of insecticide application and addition of spider population to the field, but canceling out the effect by each other. It was estimated that there occurred 'intraguild predation': omnivory behabiour in which one predator, often larger one, feed on another when both share a common prey source. Insecticide reduced the alternative prey density, stimulating the predation of smaller predator mesoveliid by wolf spider. Therefore, it was predicted if broad spectrum insecticide could reduce the density of mesoveliid below critical threshold level for pest control, there would be a potential of the increase in pest density as wolf spider is unable to compensate for the substantial decline of the other predator (Fagan et al, 1998). Although this study was designed only to assess the interaction of insecticide and Biological Control agents on the reduction of pest density but not to evaluate the relative efficacy of different Biological Control agents, it highlighted the point that selection of pest control method should take into account the interaction of different agents both chemical and biological in relation to the overall effect on the reduction of pests. The important indication from those findings is that there is a need to modify the contemporary farming practice in order to maximise the natural Biological Control mechanisms for pest control. Further research should aim to improve the understanding of how the population dynamics of natural enemies and pests are affected by the environment and insecticide use, and their ecological interactions. With accumulation of reliable knowledge on the role of natural occurring Biological Control agents, government, researchers should develop and promote strategies for pest control and take a lead to educate farmers. <heading> Weed control: Potential of allelopathy of weeds and rice as Biological Control of Weeds</heading>Owing to the rich species diversity in plant community in the tropical South East Asia, it is expected that there would be a high potential for the use of allolepathic plants for weed control. There has been an increasing trend of research focus on the investigation of allelopathic properties in weeds in rice fields in recent years. The definition of allelopathy is given as the phenomenon of suppressing the growth of one plant species by another through the production and release of toxic substances called 'allelochemicals' (IRRI, 2006d). One of such examples is study by Hong et al (2004) which examined the effects of ten allelopathic weed species on the reduction in weeds and on rice yield in Vietnam (table 3). Ten species were selected as candidate weeds for Biological Control agents based on the past field survey on 49 higher plant species found in the country. All ten weed species significantly reduced the number of weeds and the total dry weight of weeds. Although the extent of effects was variable between weed species, the rice yield was increased in all weed species treatments. Two potential positive effects by addition of allelopathic weeds are: reduction of weeds by allelochemicals and nutrient addition by those plants both of which indirectly promoted the growth of rice. <table/>However, there are some disadvantages revealed from this experiment. Firstly, the effects of weed suppression tended to be short-term probably due to the decomposition of allelochemical over time which allowed the re-emergence of weeds. Another concern is the application dose of dried plant materials, two tones per hectare were applied in this research which would be very labour intensive. Some candidate plants have been traditionally used for pharmaceutical purposes and are edible; hence the incorporation of those plants in rice field may be beneficial to farmers. However, information on the advert effects of candidate plants on the soil or other agro-products plants are limited and other aspects which have effects on rice production such as occurrence of disease or pest by these plants need careful examination prior to the application in practice. Efficacy from application time and doses also require further investigation (Hong et al, 2004). Research on weed management in Southeast Asia has not been given much attention compared to pest control for which IPM has been developed and practiced. It is partly due to the great diversity of weed species in tropical rice fields which makes the significant suppression of the growth of weeds difficult by an effective and practical method. Therefore, quick solution has been the use of agrochemicals (IRRId). Allelopathy is relatively innovative concept for weed control on rice field, though early in its development stage for practical use, there would be some potential by further research. In addition, the outcomes of many field surveys support the importance of appropriate land and seed management such as preparation of land by plaughing, puddling and leveling to prevent weeds germination, collection of clean seeds to avoid the contamination of weed seeds and water management (Baki & Azmi, 1992, Moody, 1992, Vongsaroj, 1992). It is challenging to promote such labour intensive work in land management under the current circumstances. However, the loss of rice yield by weeds and the increasing use of herbicide are important problems in the long term. Therefore, with further examination, recommendation on weed management in conjunction with the integration of innovative Biological Control strategy such as allelopathy, should be developed and passed down to individual farmers in order to effectively encourage the improvement in farming practice. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Great diversity of flora and fauna in the tropical Southeast Asia which has evolved to coexist in rice fields indicates that there would be high potential for the utilisation of natural occurring Biological Control mechanisms to control pest and weed problems. Recent advances in research demonstrated the importance of land management and caution to the use of insecticide on natural enemies such as spiders and associated invertebrate species. Higher plants with allelopathic properties also possess the possibility as agents for weeds control. Land management is an important aspect to be considered in rice production in order to enhance the ability to control weeds and/or pests problems. Empirical studies need further investigation in order to assess the efficacy and feasibility in practice at farmers' level. In addition to current understanding, future findings on natural ecosystem of rice fields, on anthropogenic impacts on rice production and on interactions between human beings and people will provide fundamental knowledge for the development of Biological Control techniques in conjunction with other control methods. Appendix 1 <figure/>