<heading>Introduction </heading>Changes in the structure and features of woodland are dynamic both in spatial and temporal scale. In terms of the span of an event in woodland there is great variation, dominant trees may live up to 300 or 500 years while significant changes may occur within a very short period of time. For instance, a storm may level stand trees in a large area within an hour, but the successive reformation of woodland would take several decades after such a disturbance. Gap formation and regeneration may continuously take place in an interval of a few decades. On the other hand, field and ground layer vegetation which is comprised of various annual and perennial grasses, herbs and shrubs have much shorter life cycle (Kirby and Morecroft, 2000). Due to such a variety of effects on woodland process most of which last longer than the duration of experiment, monitoring on site is often impractical. Therefore, prediction on the changes of woodland structure is very difficult. This is particularly problematic when dealing with the changes in field and ground layer vegetation which are strongly influenced by the growth of other layer vegetations and the environment. One useful tool for this purpose is a simulation model. This report summarises the attempt to construct a model which demonstrates changes in woodland structure over time with an attention to the understory vegetation cover and factors affecting the rate of increase on the filed and ground layer vegetation in order to take account of those factors in planning of woodland management. <heading>Aims & objectives</heading><heading>Aim : </heading>In response to the increasing interest on the creation of new woodland or restoration of abandoned woodland for recreational and educational purposes as well as for biomass or timber production, the features of field and ground layer vegetation has become to be considered as an important point in planning and management. For recreational purposes, the provision of diverse forest floor annual or perennial plants where visitors can enjoy the view in woodland is a valuable characteristic of the new woodland. From practitioners' point of view, there is a need to provide quantitative model to assess how the understory vegetation changes over time in such woodland. One important question is how the understory vegetation cover would be affected by the canopy closure and opening. Due to the difficulty in assessing the complex abiotic and biotic effects on the colonisation of understory vegetation, and in the generalisation of findings, and the fact that there is limited amount of work carried out in such multi-purpose woodland, there is no qualitative or quantitative model which provides such information. The aim of the construction of a model demonstrated here is to suggest a simplified example to answer this question using Stella package based on various information available to date. <heading>Objective : </heading>to evaluate changes in field and ground layer vegetation cover in one hectare of U.K temperate woodland newly planted for multi-purposes over 100 years. How the canopy closure, available light intensity, and the proportion of rainfall precipitates to field and ground layer influence the changes in undersotry vegetation cover. <heading>Construction of a Model</heading><figure/><list>Initial condition: tree plantation was carried out in grassland at wider space than that for commercial timber production, there is 4000 m² of grassland remained as initial understory vegetation cover.Factors affecting the vegetation coverRegeneration of new plants, death of existing plantsCanopy openness which depends on the maturity of canopy treesThroughfall rainfall which is affected by the canopy opennessCanopy openness and throughfall rainfall have effects on the growth of existing vegetation cover.</list>The environment of the herbaceous understory vegetation is modified by the dominants in the plant community, i.e. canopy layer trees which change the amount of radiation penetrated through to the filed and ground layer and affect the proportion of intercepting precipitation (Fedeer and Tanner, 1966). Although there is a great difficulty in investigating the relative importance and correlation of those factors on the growth of understory vegetation primarily due to technical problems in measuring on site and complexity of those factors which interact easch other (Anderson et al, 1968), there are several studies which investigated the effects of each factor. According to Shirely (1945), development of understory vegetation is greatly suppressed under limited light intensity of less than 4% of full sunlight. This finding was supported by another study which demonstrated that the increasing light intensity leads to the changes in the shoot to root ratio of plants, the allocation of biomass is inclined to shoots in order to increase the level of light interception (Blackman and Wilson, 1951). In terms of precipitation, general recognition is that two mechanisms are involved in affecting the understory vegetation. Firstly, the interception of precipitation by the canopy layer and the surface litter limits the total amount of precipitation available to the understory vegetation. Secondly, competition over moisture which penetrate to the forest floor between canopy layer trees and understory vegetation. Throughfall precipitation which is defined as the proportion of the precipitation faling directly through holes in the canopy to the forest floor (Voigot, 1960) is one of important components in the total amount of precipitation and moisture available to understory vegetation (Anderson et al, 1968). Based on such findings, Anderson et al (1968) investigated how herbaceous understory vegetation cover respond to canopy cover, light intensity, and throughfall precipitation in coniferous natural forest and relative importance of those factors in relation to the significance of effects on understory vegetation cover. Three factors are revealed as important factors in regulating the environment of the field and ground layer, thus the understory vegetation cover. Firstly, the canopy openness: changes in understory vegetation cover were proportional to canopy openness as expressed in % canopy opening relative to the completely opened condition without trees. Secondly, modification of light and throughfall precipitation by the canopy layer: the correlation between light and understory vegetation cover was significant, with an increase in light intensity, undersotry vegetation cover increased. The same pattern of response was found in the case of throughfall precipitation. Thirdly, environmental factors: one suggestion was moisture content of the upper soil layer which seemed to have effects on the distribution of roots of understory vegetation, however, the importance of such factor was suggested to be less than that of the other two factors. This early study demonstrated that canopy openness, light intensity and throughfall precipitation as major factors which have control over the understory vegetation cover, suggesting the throughfall precipitation as the most important. Although such study has not been given much attention in recent years, study by Thomas et al (1999) which examined the effects of thinning and fertiliser addition on the understory vegetation also support that the significance of those factors in regulating the growth of understory vegetation. <heading>Inputs of equations and data in the factors affecting the understory vegetation cover (variable)</heading><heading>Rate of death</heading>Potential undestory vegetation cover ranges from 0 m² to 10000 m² in 1 ha woodland <figure/>Death fraction increases with an increase in understory vegetation cover due to the reduction in the resource availability and increasing competition (Radford, 1998, Read and Frater, 1999). Therefore, the equation for the rate of death is expressed as: Rate of death= understory vegetation cover*death fraction <heading>Rate of regeneration</heading>Regeneration fraction, the proportion of new vegetation emerges each year is held constant at 0.15 % per year of the total existing understory vegetation. There was no data which represent the rate of regeneration of undersotry vegetation, therefore the figure used here is based on the estimation. Rate of regeneration is expressed as: Rate of regeneration= understory vegetation cover*regeneration fraction <heading>Canopy openness </heading><figure/>Canopy openness is expressed in the ratio, 1.00 canopy openness means that woodland canopy is 100 % open without any tree, penetrating the maximum level of sunlight to field and ground layer. With the growth of trees after the plantation, canopy openness decreases over time. In this original scenario, logging is planned in 60 years time which leads to an increase in the canopy openness in the following years. As the woodland matures, canopy openness decreases again. Canopy openness also reflects the amount of light available to the field and ground layer. In this model, it was supposed that canopy openness is equivalent to the ratio of light intensity to the understory vegetation which is the residual amount of light after it penetrates through canopy and other upper layers. The data which showed the changes in the canopy openness over time taking account the growth of trees were not available, hence the estimation on the values was based on the comparison of outcomes from several studies which worked on the measurement of canopy openness, light penetration to the understory vegetation in a woodland at a given condition (Smith et al, 1992, Valverde and Silvertown, 1997, Jennings et al, 1999). <heading>Throughfall rainfall</heading><figure/>The amount of throughfall rainfall available to field and ground layer is based on the hypothesis that there is a correlation between canopy openness and throughfall rainfall. Throufhfall rainfall in this model is expressed as the ratio relative to the condition when gross precipitation is equal to the throughfall rainfall, i.e. without any tree. 1.0 meaning 100 % of rainfall is precipitated to the field and ground layer. Grater canopy openness is equivalent to the situation where there is less canopy cover which limits the throughfall rainfall, hence the ratio of throughfall rainfall is high. With very dense canopy cover, throughfall rainfall is estimated to be significantly limited. The values were adapted from available data (Anderson et al, 1968, Crockford and Richardson, 2000), and the correlation between rainfall and canopy openness was set with estimation. <heading>Rate of increase</heading>Rate of increase is the growth of existing understory vegetation each year which is formulated as;  FORMULA  The equation was created based on the existing data on how light intensity, which is affected by canopy openness and throughfall precipitation affect the forest floor vegetation (Anderson et al, 1968, Valverde and Silvertown, 1997, Crockford and Richardson, 2000). Studies support that the understory vegetation cover is negatively affected by the canopy closure, in some cases as shown in the relationship in inverse proportion (Anderson et al, 1968, Thomas et al, 1999). Canopy closes with the growth of trees which limits the amount of throughfall rainfall and light penetration to field and ground layer vegetation. In terms of the relative importance of factors affecting the growth of exsiting understory vegetation cover, study by Anderson et al (1968) supported that rainfall is more important than the light intensity to filed and ground layer. This is consistent with the outcome of an experiment by Thomas et al (1999). Hence since canopy openness also represents the ratio of light intensity between canopy layer and field and ground layer, it was supposed that canopy openness induces 5% increase and throughfall rainfall 10% increase in the existing understory vegetation. The figure was based on the estimation as there was no available information investigating the relative importance of those factors on regulating the understory vegetation and its growth. <heading>Demonstration of how the model works</heading><heading>Case 1: with original inputs on factors</heading><figure/>The initial condition of woodland is set that new tree plantation at the density of less than that of commercial timber production on grassland. In addition, for recreational purpose in the first developing years, some areas are sown with field layer flora. Hence the initial 4000 m² of understory vegetation represents some restored features of grassland as understory vegetation and some sown flora. As the planted trees grow, canopy closes which reduces the rate of increase in existing understory vegetation cover, hence rate of increase declines over time. Rate of death is high at initial phase due to the intensified competition between trees and large area covered with grass and planted flora but as the understory vegetation gradually decreases, rate of death decreases. Regeneration fraction is held at constant which is dependent upon the total existing understory vegetation, therefore rate of regeneration of new understory vegetation is high at first with large understory vegetation cover and follows the similar pattern to the total understory vegetation. <heading>Case 2: regeneration rate increased to 0.2 (20 %)</heading><figure/>Higher regeneration rate allow for the higher recovery of vegetation over time, but the general trend that the vegetation cover is decreased over time is similar to the original model since light intensity and throughfall rainfall to field and ground layer has become limited over time. <heading>Case 3: Changes in the response of the rate of increase in existing understory vegetation to canopy openness (light intensity) and throughfall rainfall. </heading><figure/>The equation for the rate of increase was changed as;  FORMULA  The higher rate of increase in response to light intensity and precipitation induce the great increase in vegetation cover for the initial 10 years when the light and throughfall rainfall is abundant due to the relatively small sizes of trees. With canopy closure, vegetation cover decreases over time, however, because of the higher rate of increase, the final vegetation cover in 100 years time is greater than the output in the original condition. <heading>Validation of a constructed model</heading><figure/>In terms of the correlation between canopy openness and understory vegetation cover, finding by Anderson et al (1968) showed the understory vegetation was 3200 cm² of cover per m² under 60% canopy opening which is equivalent to the canopy openness in 15 years (*1), and 400 cm² under 20% canopy opening which corresponds to the condition in 100 years (*2). Undersoty vegetation cover in response to the proportion of throughfall rainfall was also similar: with 80% of throughfall rainfall, there was 3000 of understory vegetation cover per m² (*3) and with 30%, 1000 cm² (*4). Trends in understory vegetation cover was proportional to the increase in canopy opening and the increase in the throughfall precipitation (Anderson et al, 1968, Thomas et al, 1999), which indicate that the reduction in understory vegetation cover over time due to canopy closure is consistent with this outcome in the model. Therefore, it is concluded that this model fits to the purpose of the objective for the simulation. <heading>Sensitivity analysis</heading><figure/> FORMULA Among all factors, the most important factors affecting the changes in understory vegetation over time was the rate of regeneration: emergence of new plants of undestory vegetation. With regeneration rate of 0.5 (output 1) where 50% of existing understory vegetation is successful in reproduction and regeneration, the understory vegetation cover grows up to 8500 m² in the first ten years when trees are relatively small with low competitive ability. Irrespective of the growth of trees over time which limits the resource partitioning to the understory vegetation, high regeneration rate is able to support large area of understory vegetation, or it is likely that the growth of trees may be inhibited which is not included in this model. On the other hand, low regeneration rate, such as 0.02 (output 5), the understory vegetation is unable to compete with trees and cannot maximise the available light and throughfall rainfall for the growth of existing vegetation even in the early stages of woodland. Failure in regeneration leads to the significant reduction in the understory vegetation cover in long term, only 500 m² in area is covered with understory vegetation in 100 years time. Such outcomes imply that the recovery of undersotry vegetation is profoundly dependent on the regeneration success of plants, which is consistent with the real world circumstances (Radford, 1998, Read and Frater, 1999). The life cycle of herbaceous understry vegetation is much shorter than trees, so that the undersotry vegetation cover is likely to be significantly sensitive to the rate of regeneration other than the environmental factors such as light intensity, throughfall precipitation as the extent of modification in the environment by those factors may be slow to magnify and induce impacts over time, although abrupt changes may occur, such disturbances may be less significant to regulate the quick generation changes in understory vegetation. <heading>Example scenarios</heading><heading>1: neglect of woodland after 50 years, logging is not carried out, hence the woodland becomes over matured with dense closed canopy</heading><figure/>After 50 years, there is no temporal increase in vegetation cover as in the original case in which logging was taken place, indicating that the growth of understory vegetation would be further suppressed by the neglect of management. The result in the understory vegetation in 100 years in this case is approximately 2300 m²: smaller than that in the original condition of 2500 m². This difference in values may not perfectly fit in reality; however, the indication is that the neglect of management at the middle point of the project would have a certain effect which is likely to result in the suppression of the growth of understory vegetation. <heading>2: Logging of trees after 55 years harvesting up to 80 % of all trees and termination of the project</heading><figure/>By the time when the trees were harvested, the undestory vegetation decreased from 4000 m² from the initial year to approximately 2500 m². The open canopy after logging which allowed the high light penetration to the forest floor and the precipitation allowed the quick recovery of the vegetation but with natural succession, trees start to re-grow which eventually starts to suppress the growth of understory vegetation. Such simulation may be useful to examine how logging should be carried out: how many trees or area should be harvested, at which point of the time over the project in order to achieve the ultimate target on the condition of woodland in the long term. Understory vegetation cover can be used as an indicator to illustrate the rate of natural succession of trees and short-lived shrub and field layer vegetation and the effects of logging and natural succession on the community structure over time. <heading>Discussion </heading>There is much potential of this model for use in practice. This model enables to monitor how understory vegetation cover is influenced by combination of various factors in the environment and the rates of regeneration and death which directly relate to the relative reproductive success of plants. This model is a simplified representation on the processes which regulate the field and ground layer feature, hence there are some other factors excluded here which require further analysis on existing data and integration of those factors into a model. The rate of increase in existing vegetation which is referred to the response of understory vegetation cover to canopy openness and throughfall rainfall is based on the estimation. The relative importance of those factors and correlation between each other or inclusion of other factors should be investigated, and the equation needs to be formulated with reliable evidence in reality. As demonstrated in example scenarios, this model is particularly useful to examine how human management in the long term would affect the undersotry vegetation feature, in this model, simply the cover in area. Such application of this model is meaningful in the real world situation if the estimate on the consequences of management was able to provide a reliable evidence to support the planning of the project. The difficulty in the construction of this model was lack of available data which fit to the objective of the model; hence the values used were heavily dependent upon the estimation. There may be some significant failures in presenting the findings from observational study. Nevertheless, the general trend response pattern in the understory vegetation cover over time was consistent with the indication obtained from the outcomes by other research. In conclusion, the constructed model meets the objective to evaluate the changes in field and ground layer vegetation cover in one hectare of U.K temperate woodland newly planted for multi-purposes over 100 years. The model successfully demonstrated how factors such as regeneration, death of plants, canopy closure, available light intensity, and the proportion of rainfall precipitates to field and ground layer influence the changes in undersotry vegetation cover. By modifying the inputs of those factors, the model also allows to illustrate how human management may induce changes over time. In the construction process, principle steps were followed; 1: definition of the system and the objective, 2: data gathering to search for existing information on the particular purpose, 3: construction of a model, 4: validation of the outcome and the model, 5: sensitivity analysis to investigate which factors cause significant impacts on the variable, and 6: use of model as illustrated in the scenarios. Therefore, this model has a high potential to be applied in practice. 