<heading>Introduction:</heading>Advances in science and technology occur everyday, these discoveries penetrate into many process and become incorporated in our daily lives. Science is used by companies to promote their products, by the government to gain public support and in the law court to prove guilt or innocence. Science and technology are expertly used in these and other fields involving complex theories and ideas often from the forefront of research. This is a complicated environment and it is therefore necessary for the individual to have some minimal accurate science knowledge to give them the freedom to understand and objectively analyse what they are presented with, enabling the person to make informed, responsible, knowledge based decisions. Science has always been deeply interwoven with all aspects of life yet this relationship was not always as obvious as it is today. For many years science has been a separate entity seemingly unconnected with day to day living, the scientists surrounded themselves and their work with huge unfathomable towers of mysticism and discouraged public interest. However, now and in recent times the divide between science and society is closing. Scientists want to communicate with each other, other professionals and the public outside technical communities. Interest is also moving in the opposite direction as people want to understand more about the world and consequently it is necessary to integrate science into society and the local community so that it is no longer a separate, alien entity. The general public is however largely ignorant in the realm of science and most have finished their compulsory education as it is predominantly devoted to the young. Further learning is done privately following the individuals own preferences; the books they read, what films they watch and where they go. The key to successful science communication lies in an interested audience, if the audience is indifferent to the issue the an apathetic attitude will be displayed and no communication will be achieved. The media plays a large role in the communication of science by providing people with access to new knowledge in an entertaining format. This essay will analyse and discuss how science is portrayed in the Guardian and the effects media style has on science communication. <heading>Research Method:</heading>The development of opinions on the effects on science communication caused by the articles is an uncomplicated process. However, as the public interest directly effects the subjects of the articles effective study of this paper would be best conducted with the aid of a public survey. Consequently a questionnaire was designed to discover what views the public hold about the Guardian especially relating to science communication. Do you read the Guardian? Do you have a science background? What are the best aspects of the science articles presented? Is the underlying science coherently presented? Which science articles would you particularly be interested in? What features should an article based on a science subject contain? In what way might the Guardian be improved? Additionally one article was chosen as a test article to coordinate and channel opinions about the Guardian to ensure that the comments from different people can be related as they have the same base article. This was also useful as it allowed infrequent and non readers of the Guardian to have opinions. The opinions in this essay are therefore a collaboration of those collected by the survey and of the author. <heading>The Guardian:</heading>The Guardian was founded in 1821 by John Edward Taylor as a weekly newspaper in order to promote liberal interest after the Peterloo Massacre and support the growing campaign against the Corn Laws in Manchester. It became daily in 1855 embodying liberal ideas and a holding a political 'middle ground'. In 1936 the death of the then proprietor C. P. Scott up caused his son John (the inheritor), in order to avoid personal financial disaster, to set up the Scott trust to own and run the Guardian. The Scott trust is the present owner of the Guardian and all that it embodies, its main purpose being; "To secure the financial and editorial independence of The Guardian in perpetuity: as a quality national newspaper without party affiliation; remaining faithful to liberal tradition; as a profit-seeking enterprise managed in an efficient and cost-effective manner." (Ref 1, 2 & 3) This statement makes obvious that the Guardian serves a dual purpose, is not merely a broadcaster of information but is a profit seeking enterprise; consequently the articles published will be directly related to what sells best. Due to centuries of evolution in which survival depended on the knowledge of and ability to avoid or neutralise potential dangers, the public is largely risk orientated. Consequently the majority of media publications focus dedicatedly on bad news and this is no different in the science section. (Ref 8 & 9) If science is used in support of bad news the reader will begin to believe that science itself is the perpetrator. This is frequently the case as demonstrated by those who answered the survey with non-science backgrounds; many admitted a mistrust and dislike for science as a whole due to its affiliation with bad news. Additionally science is often incorrectly used in all areas of industry; the scale of this practise is demonstrated by the Guardians bad science section which routinely exposes many misuses of science. <heading>The Mediator:</heading>Science communication can be aided or abetted by the mediator in this case the journalist presenting it. If the author is well educated and has sound in depth knowledge of his subject the piece produced has the potential to be accurate and understandable. If on the other hand the author has minimal knowledge and understanding of his subjects, he is capable only, of producing a piece of poor quality or one that is simply wrong. The Guardian employs a range of science and technology correspondents with different cultural and educational backgrounds, and different life experiences. All have impressive academic and other credentials embodying scientific knowledge and journalistic experience which qualify them to write about science. For example George Monbiot has a zoology degree from Oxford and a has had a long journalistic career, Ben Goldacre, the author of bad science holds a First in Medicine and Alok Jha who has a Physics degree from Imperial College began his journalistic career in his first year by writing for the college newspaper. (Ref 5, 6 & 7) <heading>The Content and Composition of the Guardian Newspaper and the Guardian Unlimited: </heading>The paper designates a one page, (out of an average of 35 pages excluding sport and supplements) to the science section however, this is usually overshadowed by a large advertisement half of the page in size. Consequently, at a maximum of four per week there are very few science articles in the paper. Although the vast majority of articles with a science theme are in this section some may also be found in other parts of the paper, for instance an article titled 'Coal-fired power station to be updated' (22.12.05) on the subject of energy was placed in the financial section. The precipitation of science throughout the paper is very beneficial to science communication as it effectively illustrates how science is integrated within everyday life nonetheless such articles could be improved with the inclusion of more scientific information and references. In addition there is a weekly pullout technology section which focuses on development and use of technologies and products. A large part is devoted to computers and new gadgets and although this is a rather narrow view it enables people to become knowledgeable about the objects which directly affect them and their uses. Theoretically this could lead to an increased interest in science and technology as a whole and this section is therefore very beneficial to science communication. The Guardian Unlimited online contains a large and dedicated science section comprised of the daily news (at the top of the page), the science articles from the past week and contributions from the Guardians many other publications such as the Guardian weekly. The new articles are added daily to those from yesterday which are pushed further down the page allowing the casual reader access to news from several days past. At the end of most articles is a set of links allowing those interested to access related information. This has a very encouraging effect on science communication making it easier for people to sustain personal interest. The aspect of the internet site that has the largest effect on science communication is the interactive pages, including 'talk', where interested readers can take part in debates and discussions on the various issues presented in the articles. This is greatly beneficial to science communication as it allows the readers to converse with each other, conveying personal thoughts on the issue and enabling the ideas to precipitate through the public. The technology section is equally informative and is of the same size and layout as the science section also including interactive pages. The internet can be accessed by anybody in any part of the world and consequently the Guardian Unlimited is open to a very wide audience, this has naturally following positive influences on science communication. However, as it is only available to those with internet access many potential audiences are lost. The science and technology sections of the online version are far greater than their counterparts in the paper, and consequently the daily paper may be viewed as a condensed version of that which is available online. <heading>The Differences in the Aims of Scientists and Journalists in Science Communication: </heading>The rules which govern the worlds of science and journalism are inherently different. While the scientist's main aim in publication is to reach as wide an audience as possible the journalist will only be interested in a good story. It is essential to the journalist's credibility to have a track record of published articles and it is essential that the newspaper sells many copies. A paper which contains articles relevant to the target audience, in this case the upper middle class, will sell far better than one out of touch with the audience; consequently, initially only information with the potential to be of personal concern to the target audience is sought after. Science is a very broad field comprising of many varied and seemingly unrelated topics from, zoology to astronomy and geology to medicine. Still, the science topics covered in the media are based on the ability to attract readers, and consequently media constricts the diversity of science to a narrow band of 'popular science', for example human biology or space. This is supported by the survey, the majority of people said they where more likely to read an article on medicine, space or an area of personal interest as opposed to one from any other field. Additionally science is often used in support of exciting or dramatic events e.g. 'Toxic cloud fear, as oil blaze rages' (12.12.05) an article on the recent explosion of the oil distribution centre in Hertfordshire. <heading>Article Structure and Language:</heading>All articles are headed with an attention grabbing title to attract the reader's attention. The first paragraph is a summarising of the article including the main and most interesting points. In the test article 'Turkey and all the trimmings: 2m tonnes of extra greenhouse' (21.12.05), the piece describes the waste that occurs over the Christmas period and its consequential environmental impact. The stereotypical description of Christmas and the personification of the Earth 'our planet has to live with the hangover' in the first part of the article, serve to evoke feelings of guilt in the audience by causing them to fell personally responsible for the situation. The first phrase 'During the eating marathon of Christmas', is enhanced due to the combination of the words eating and marathon; eating is associated with overeating at Christmas but marathon is associated with health and fitness, the contrast of this opposite imagery is successfully used to add emphasis. As is usual in media writing the paragraphs are formed from long sentences with many commas, this draws the reader in as he or she is unable to pause until the end of the paragraph. The central part of the article is a bombardment of facts; this mass of information strengthens the article making it difficult to contend. The lack of conclusion has several effects on the reader and the article. Firstly it is important to note that the author is not at liberty to conclude facts presented in the article as this would indicate bias; additionally the Guardian purpose is the broadcast news not the analyse of events. Readers are encouraged by this system to participate in active thought and develop their own conclusions; however the reader is very much at the mercy of the author as to what evidence is presented and its phrasing, consequently no article can be entirely unbiased. There is no advice for those who might be inspired by the article and are interested in reducing their environmental impact over Christmas. Moreover the practice of science is dependent on the conclusion as the summation of analysis of the hypothesis with respect to the observations. Consequently the publication of science and technology articles in the Guardian is not conducive to the practice of science and therefore destructive to communication of science. The article is meaningless due to its lack of context, 'Trips to visit friends and family will release... 281,000 tonnes of CO 2 (assuming every family travels about 100 miles)', this large figure may shock the reader, however over Christmas C0 2 emissions due to family travel may actually be less than normal as there is no school run, no people driving to work etc. Jargon is reserved to the use of 'CO 2' and 'KWh', no knowledge of scientific terms is required yet for a scientist it is also interesting, in this way article effectively reaches its target audience of both scientists and non-scientists. The guilt and negative emotions created by the initial paragraphs continue throughout the article however, a positive slant is presented in the form of an opposing argument. 'On a more positive note.... As a nation we burnt 134,100m calories Christmas shopping.' However, this counter argument serves only to increase the impact of the previous statements as by comparison its size and content are pitiful. The final paragraph is used to credit the information to the Institute of Physics and to advertise Einstein Year however, as all the facts are placed above this it appears that the author has conducted the majority of the work alone and is now indulging in modesty. Conversely the sentence 'we tried to show that physics comes into our every day lives, and the festive season is no different.' this quote from the IoP although absolves the author from any responsibility for the article; after all he is only the mediator. <heading>Use of Images:</heading>The Paper version contains many images whereas the online version has only a few. Some of the images published are works of art harmonizing light and shadow with colour and texture. For instance, the front page photograph of the oil blaze at Hertfordshire, (12.12.05) here the billowing smoke and flames, juxtaposed with a yellowing sunset, behind a forefront of leafless, skeleton, trees is displayed. Others however are examples of rushed blurred snaps of press conferences or average photography. Images are used to attract reader attention and to break the monotony of the text however, they rarely give any additional information to the reader about the subject for example in the form of graphs. This is demonstrated by the image of Clostium difficile (21.12.05) the bacteria linked to patient deaths in hospital from the front page. It is a large artistic image taking up the same area as the text of the article. Contrasting blue and yellow the bacteria lie in a black setting accentuated by the single red oval in the middle of largest bacteria. This image would attract readers as it is well placed in the centre of the page and the colour scheme is very effective. However, the image is of no informative use to the reader. The actual shape and size of the bacteria are unknown as only part of the bacteria is displayed and so no scale is present. Consequently the image would not necessarily appeal to a biologist as much as it might to a person with no science background. There is a minimal use of graphs in the Guardian, simplistic graphs can be easily understood, provide a visual representation of the facts in the article and fulfil other requirements of a good image attracting readers and dividing up the text. In the Guardian Unlimited, although the articles themselves are usually image free, the title page contains images which are attractive and sometimes useful, for example a recent article on a new intercity electric stackable car (29.12.05) was complimented with clear image of the car stacked and un-stacked. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>The media is designed for the communication of social and economic issues as opposed to those scientific; this is demonstrated by the Guardian which was founded in response to a need in Manchester in 1821 for a liberal paper after the Peterloo massacre. Consequently when science is tailored for use in the media, some important aspects of science reporting such as the consideration of all variables and the conclusion of facts are lost. The Guardian caters for the public interest of the moment e.g. public health risk of factor x, however, science which is free of such constraints will struggle, when public interest lies in other spheres. The Guardian Unlimited online has a far greater positive impact on science communication than the newspaper version. This is due to it being larger, containing a wider range of articles and providing space for interactive science communication; also additional information can easily be accessed. The science and technology articles in the Guardian could benefit form a revision of structure and more effective use of images especially graphs. In conclusion the Guardian is a poor medium for the communication of science as the aims and styles of the media conflict with the aims and styles of science and consequently the science is distorted.. However, the communication of science is necessary and beneficial to all of society and consequently any is better than none. 