Asteroids are as natural as stars and have as much right to exist however we are not always welcoming of their presence and with good reason. If the trajectory of an asteroid passes near our planet gravitational attraction may encourage a life threatening collision. The earth is regularly struck by all manner of debris from outer space yet these are mostly harmless as it is the size of these bodies that determines the extent of the damage. The following data showing the average frequency of impacts is from the Dino Extinction Page at  URL . (14) <list>Pea-size meteoroids - 10 per hour Walnut-size - 1 per hour Grapefruit-size - 1 every 10 hours Basketball-size - 1 per month 50-m rock that would destroy an area the size of New Jersey - 1 per 100 years1-km asteroid - 1 per 100,000 years2-km asteroid - 1 per 500,000 years </list>Where asteroids are concerned the scientists have the data; it is they who are communicating the information to the public however, risk assessment is performed differently by these two parties. To define risk 'the likelihood of adverse consequences from any hazard' (2) The way the public asses risk is based on several factors; a risk is perceived to be greater if it is involuntary, inequitably distributed or unavoidable; additionally it is considered worse if it posses a threat to vulnerable groups such as children or pregnant women. Generally the public respond to outrage while the experts are more rational and respond to hazards. (2) The risk of an asteroid collision is a very specific one, the risk to civilization is unbounded and may result in our own extinction still, asteroid trajectories are predictable and additionally we now in principal have the technologies to mitigate this threat. For most the risk is not nearly so great as the risk posed by floods, earthquakes or tornadoes yet, for those of us who live outside the areas most prone to these types of hazards the unique threat of an impact is actually the greatest hazard. (5) Comets are composed of dust and ice along with frozen gases such as ammonia and methane. They originate principally from the outer regions of the solar system the main two areas being the Edgeworth-Kuiper belt (just beyond Neptune) and the outer Oort cloud. (9) When passing in the proximity of the sun, the intense heating experienced by the comet causes the ice to evaporate allowing streams of gas and debris that fall away from the frozen core giving rise to the well known comet tails. (3) They follow regular eccentric orbits (not entirely circular) usually around the sun and this is why some such as Haley's comet reappear every few years (76 in this case) when they pass by us. Asteroids are material left over from the formation of the solar system 4.6bn years ago. (14) Asteroids have many different forms and sizes; they are composed of many different materials including silicate (stone), iron and nickel. Primarily asteroids originate from the asteroid belt an orbit filled with asteroids running between those of Mars and Jupiter. We are most interested in the asteroids that have separated from this asteroid belt due to collisions and follow orbits that may intersect with Earths. These are called Near Earth Objects (NEO's). NEO's vary in size from over 1000 km across to those the size of pebbles. Asteroids that are on a collision course with Earth are called meteoroids. If the body successfully reaches the ground it is labelled a meteorite.(10) <heading>.</heading>The Torino scale is similar to the Richter scale for earthquakes, it is a set of values from 0 to 10 used to describe the seriousness of a potential collision. The seriousness of a potential collision is dependent on the its likelihood (dependent on the trajectory) and magnitude (dependent on size and speed). A value of 0 indicates that the likelihood of a collision is effectively zero and a value of 10 that a collision, capable of causing global catastrophe that may threaten the future of civilisation as we know it is certain. The values 1 to 9 are on a sliding scale between these two extremes. For example a 50m asteroid similar to the one that exploded above Tunguska, Siberia in 1908 flattening of about of pine forest (3), would merit a rank of 8. (9) The Torino scale is designed for public communication yet can also be used at different levels by scientists and science journalists. A more sophisticated scale is the Palermo, it works on a logarithmic scale and has no end boundaries. This scale is designed to increase the communication between astronomers and is not designed for public communication. (8) This scale reflects the urgency of the threat by considering its possible impact energy, the probability of collision occurring and the date of impact, it also takes into consideration the background impact level (normal state of affairs of asteroid impacts). The consideration of the date of impact is useful; for example, if a 200m long asteroid was set to collide with the Earth in 2045 it would obviously be of great concern to the public and governments and have a high Palermo value but, if it where only forecast in say 2845, the population anxiety level would not be perturbed and its rating would fall. If the same situation where to be considered by the Torino scale both of the above situations would have the same value. The risk of an asteroid colliding with the earth has been communicated to the public in via many different media such as books, of both fact and fiction, through films and TV, what we read in newspapers and magazines and discover on the internet. In order to asses these media correctly we must consider: What are the essential aims of that media? Is the information supported by correct facts and responsible representation? Different media are aimed at different sectors of the public. Newspapers play to a specific audience and consequently only reach a specific portion of the public. Readership numbers of all papers have declined and today the percentage of the population who are communicated to with this media are very few. The newspaper industry is a business, the companies need to sell papers and therefore only print stories that are newsworthy, that will sell because they are of public interest. Consequentially one expects much hype and exaggeration of the issues especially in situations involving risk as a public threatened will want to read all about it. Films are usually aimed at as wide an audience as possible targeting all sectors of the public and consequently are designed to be attractive to all. Books are usually written due to the whim of the author for the pleasure of all interested parties. Factual text books are written on the basis of research and therefore should contain accurate information (at the date of publication) and fiction, sci-fi in this case often blends fact and fantasy to the authors own preference and therefore may lead to misconception on the part of the public. Internet is a very useful tool for communication. Internet sites target interested parties. The internet is a public media it is open to contribution by all and therefore it is essential to know the source of the information too be certain of its credibility. For example let us consider a recent article (04.03.06) in The Sun titled, End of the World. The language is accessible to all and contains no obvious jargon. The article embodies typical media style with one sentence paragraphs. The title "End of the World" attracts the reader by instilling fear into him or her yet the sentence after, (also in prominent type), soothes the audience stating "don't panic folks...its not till May 4, 2102". This is confusing as while clearly instructing the reader to remain calm it suggests to the reader that the situation is worthy of panic. This is a common feature throughout the article, the phrases "nightmare scenario" and "date with Armageddon" are all closely positioned near phrases saying 'don't panic'. The opening sentence of the article it reads, "An asteroid with the greatest ever chance of hitting the Earth has been discovered by astronomers", this is in error as the Earth is constantly bombarded by asteroids. It indicates also by this sentence that all asteroids are large, destructive bodies of rock. The article contains a clear and accurate description of the immediate and long-term consequences of the possible collision. The article ends leaving the reader apprehensive by stating "Dr Morrison hopes it will miss....although it may confirm a date with Armageddon." It presumes that the audience know what an asteroid is and that they have a qualitative understanding of bomb power "a force equivalent to all the worlds' nukes". This article is extremely short and limited; the audience will gain no information as to the nature of asteroids or the general background threat, or the nature of the risk. (1) As an example of the pros and cons of communication by this media let us consider the recent film Armageddon. This film communicates the threat of an asteroid collision with the Earth as a concept worthy of consideration. The film itself is a visually and emotionally powerful sensory overload combining adventure, fear and love. It complements good quality acting, directing and special effects, and contains a mix of sincerity and jokes. Unfortunately in order to increase the blockbuster worth of the film, some situations were included which were scientifically erroneous. For example, the explosions and fire which occurred on the asteroid would not have happened in a the real world as an asteroids gravitational field is too weak to hold an atmosphere that might contain gasses capable of causing a prolonged fire. Consequently the viewing public would leave knowing what an asteroid is like when in truth they have only a false picture. It accurately depicts and explains the effects of asteroid collision with the Earth especially the effect asteroid size has on the impact. Books tend to do a better job of science communication they contain a broader spread information and give the public a full picture. An interesting case is "The Hammer of God" by Arthur C Clark, this story is set in the future and follows the fortunes of one Robert Singh, who captains a space craft assigned the mission of altering the flight path of a large asteroid in order that it will avoid collision with the earth. Although this is a work of fiction it contains much about the history of astronomy and the specific branch of the study of asteroids and consequentially is a mine of knowledge.(1) Books presume very little on the part of the public they are writing for as any assumptions made are usually explained within the text. However in this case it is "Thirty thousand tones of TNT...more than the total energy of all nuclear weapons on Earth", this phrase from the book Rain of Iron and Ice by J. S. Lewis describes the potential destructive force of a 250m diameter asteroid moving at orbital speed. (3)This indicates the presumption of the authors of the public knowledge of the strength of explosives and also an understanding of the prefixes such as 'mega' or 'giga' which occur throughout the text. The BBC website has a question and answer information page on the subject of asteroids, the questions are posed by the public and the answers by Duncan Steel the Vice president of Spaceguard. Here the information is clearly and accurately presented. The sentences are short, the jargon minimal, it is open to all types of audience. This page accurately portrays the risk for what it is and makes an excellent case for the expanding of the Spaceguard project or others like it. By its nature it has minimal presumptions about public knowledge of asteroids. Many of the internet sites examined presumed public knowledge of explosives as the effects of meteor impacts are described in this way. For example the Dinosaur Extinction page at  URL  (14) describes the force due to meteorite impact which resulted in the Barringer Meteor Crater in northern Arizona as "roughly equivalent to 3.5 million tons of TNT." The consequences of a collision are directly related to the size, density and composition of the impacting object, as well as impact velocity and location of collision e.g. land or sea. If the asteroid is particularly small it will burn up in the atmosphere before it reaches the ground. If an asteroid 1 or 2 km in diameter travelling 30km per second were to impact it would destroy an area the size of California. The resulting dust particles around in total would enter the atmosphere and block out the sun for possibly up to a year. This would cause the loss of a years crops and the subsequent death of 25 percent of the world's population. Such a collision is by its consequences considered a global catastrophe, on average it only occurs every 300,000 years. Such an cataclysm can best be described by considering the abrupt extinction of the dinosaurs via meteoroid impact about 65 million years ago. The evidence present today consists of a world wide layer of clay containing large concentrations of iridium. Iridium is only found in small concentrations on the Earth but the concentrations in this layer match meteorite composition. It was found that the layer thickens near the Caribbean basin and here crystals of what is know as shocked quartz (quartz that has been subjected to intense temperatures) was also discovered. This lead to the theory that a large asteroid had collided with the earth at the Chicxulub, Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico where this unusual layer was thickest and also a large crater about 180km large is present. (1, 3) When the asteroid collided a large explosion occurred as the kinetic energy of the asteroid forced dramatically into heat, light and sound. Most of the asteroid vaporised and a large magma filled crater formed. The heat radiated outwards causing wide spread fires and the shock waves resulted in earthquakes and tsunamis. A huge cloud of dust and debris rose into the air and spread through the atmosphere remaining there for several months, perhaps a year. During this time the sun was obscured and consequently the Earth cooled to a state we describe as a nuclear winter. Photosynthesis stopped and many life forms died due to starvation, hypothermia and the smothering effect of the dust. The high temperatures produced due to the initial collision caused some of the nitrogen in the air to burn and form nitrogen oxide. Via oxidation and reactions with water vapour large amounts of nitrous and nitric acid would have formed and rained down causing acidification of the oceans which killed many fish and plants. (3) People in earlier times found it difficult to believe that rocks fell from the sky, especially that they might be large and dangerous. However, over the course of time the evidence from sightings, the resulting meteors and their craters has mounted up into undeniable proof. (3) As our grasp of technology has increased so has our knowledge of asteroids. Initially observations could only be made by eye, but the development of telescopes and later computers has vastly increased our observation abilities. Much evidence has been gathered by the consideration of the many craters here on Earth. With the development of aerial photography and later space flight it became possible to study these craters from above and many previously undiscovered craters where observed. For example the pair of Clearwater lakes in Quebec, Canada which where formed approximately 290 million years ago respectively 33km and 22km in diameter. False theories on the origin of craters had to be disregarded, one of these was the belief that craters where formed by volcanic explosion. This idea was shown to be wrong by the discovery craters on the surface of the Moon, Mars and many other parts of the solar system open to observation. Pictures of the Moons surface were first obtained in 1964 by American spacecrafts Ranger's 7, 8 and 9. They depicted a detailed record of craters down to a metre or less in size, the lack of indication of explosive volcanism showed that they where the result of impacts. Evidence of craters on Mars was obtained from a series of Mariner probes which took photographs of the Martian surface and sent them back to Earth. (3) Further knowledge on the immediate effects of a collision has been obtained with the increased knowledge as to the nature of explosives, especially of nuclear bombs. The bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the Second World War were the first indication of the power of destruction of nuclear bombs. Further trials mostly conducted by the USA involving the explosion of various nuclear bombs throughout the world helped scientists realise the true destructive effects an asteroid can have. An impact of a 250m asteroid would generate more explosive energy than all the weapons on Earth only without the subsequent radiation. Consequently, collisions are usually described in terms of their explosive power. For example, in the book Our Final Century by Martin Rees describes the Tunguska meteorite which devastated a remote part of Siberia in 1908 as, "its impact packed the punch of a forty-megaton explosion".(5) At present there are several projects whose aim is to observe the sky in search of asteroids, to catalogue and name them and to calculate their orbits, the most well known and the one which has been running the longest is Spacewatch. It uses electronic detectors integrated with computes to analyse data. A certain portion of the sky is scanned two or three times on the same night and the images compared. The program identifies objects that have moved and brings them to the attention of the computer; these are then added to a database which over time calculates the orbits of the asteroids. Space watch discovers hundreds of 1km sized belt asteroids every observing run; it is so sensitive that it has also discovered some very small asteroids around 8 or 10m diameter (3) It is important that the consequences of an asteroid collision with the Earth be correctly understood so as to provide the best possible communication to the public. The risk has been communicated to the public through many different media at many different levels ranging from minimal information contained in news reporting to in-depth analysis in literature. Films like newspapers dramatise the situation in order to achieve a good story as does some literature yet, the situation is such that dramatising does not falsify the situation. This risk is not something to lose sleep over the chance of death due to asteroid collision is 1 in 20.000 compared to a 1 in 100 chance of dying in a car crash. However asteroid collisions about 50m in diameter that would destroy an area the size of New Jersey occur on average 1 per 100 years. The last, the Tunguska meteorite impacted in 1908 so on that front we are due another, additionally averages are not certain and nature is often surprising, there is no reason why an asteroid with globally devastating results should not occur tomorrow. The evidence supporting the consequences of a collision is factual, it has been developed over a long period of time, this time period has allowed for ample scrutiny for errors and therefore the theories have a good base and are, as far as we know, correct. The nature of the risk has in general been well communicated to the public. None of the information or method of representation in the media studied would have induced a state of hysteria into their intended audience. Some of the information presented by the media is incorrect yet this is essentially only the details, for example the false representation of the surface chemistry of an asteroid in the film Armageddon, would not have significantly effected the consequence of impact had it occurred. It is a confusing and complex subject as demonstrated by the precise nature of its jargon (asteroids comets and meteorite) and simplification (present in the article from the Sun) is bound to result in error a precise understanding of the terms is unnecessary for a good appreciation of the risk. 