Manydown farm lies around the village of Wooton St Lawrence in Basingstoke on 3500 acres of land. The farm lies on grade 3 land, with chalky loam soil and patches of clay. The larger loam fields are suitable conditions for arable production, the smaller, woodland enclosed parkland on the estate with clay soils create conditions for permanent pasture. Originally the farm business was based on two systems, combinable crops and beef. Today the heart of the business lies in the farm shop and the farm enterprises are primarily run to fit around the shop. The farm has diversified from its original arable and beef production and now includes a flock of 840 ewes, 4 large black sows and about 500 free-range chickens. The creation of the farm shop was due to the BSE epidemic, which hit the UK, and resulted in 80 of Manydown suckler cattle having to be slaughtered. This was the turning point at which time the farm manager Richard Stirling started to seriously think about more efficient ways of selling beef. Research methods about selling the farms own beef direct to consumers where there was a chance to add real value to the beef showed there was a gap in the market. Therefore the farm shop opened in 1994 to sell their beef direct to consumers, which is still its primary selling product. The suckler herd was created in 1937 to produce calves, which could then be fattened and sold. The herd has undergone much development in the last 10 years to intensify the system to solely produce beef for the farm shop. In undergoing the development 4 aspects, which Baker (1975) stated, have been addressed in great detail to make the herd produce specialised beef for the shop. These are: - <list>Financial resourcesPhysical resourcesDate of calvingBreeds of cattle</list><heading>Financial Resources</heading>The suckler herd was formed in 1937 when farming was thriving. Today this would be very hard to recreate due to financial restraints and the current state of agriculture. As the farm had already had a well-established herd they had the asset, which they could build on and grow to fit around the shop by altering the other 3 factors, physical resources, date of calving and breed of cattle. <heading>Physical resources</heading>The farm already had buildings and fields that were suitable for the suckler herd, but a few alterations has made sure that the physical resources are well adapted to producing quality beef for the farm shop. The recent erection of a specialised building has taken place to provide ideal handling facilities to sort beef cattle every week for slaughter and provide much more air around the cattle than the existing buildings. These provide the correct temperature for fattening beef cattle to ensure maximum efficiency, too much heat loss means that the cattle have to utilise feed to keep their body temperature constant and this means a loss in the energy that they could utilise into muscle production and growth. The farm also has a specialised herdsman who lives on site. This ensures that the herd are continually checked and any health problems are detected quickly. The benefit of this means that the herd remain healthy and there is always a continuous supply of beef to meet the beef demand of the shop. <heading>Date of calving</heading>In traditional suckler herds calving takes place in bulk in either autumn or early spring. This produces batches of off spring, which are the same age, and can be sold in groups, which promotes a better price. It is also an advantage to the herd owner as it takes less management and cows and calves can be fed one diet without over or under feeding individuals due to their large age range. Manydown calve differently to produce animals at different ages and therefore staggered slaughter times providing a constant supply of beef to the farm shop. They calve in spring, mid summer and autumn, which is three times a year instead of the traditional once. This development has been vital to providing the customers a continuous supply of beef with the same quality. <heading>Breed of cattle</heading>Traditionally the 180 suckler cows were Charolais, and Hereford Friesian cows. However 7 years ago Aberdeen Angus cattle were introduced in response to customer demand. Today the herd is made up of all Aberdeen Angus, with a nucleus of pedigree Aberdeen Angus. In 2201 17 cows per purchased from the Nightingale Herd. Different breeds of the cattle have different rates of growth and produce different carcass tissue weights at a given age. Aberdeen Angus are a "early maturing" breed which means they begin their fattening stage at an early age. Charolais however, which is a continental breed, are a "late maturing" breed. This difference means that the Angus reach slaughtering age quicker than the Charolais. This means the Angus would reach the peaks of bone, muscle then fat on the graph below before the Charolais would. However the Charolais has a bigger bone to muscle ratio and therefore is a bigger animal providing more meat once it has matured. <figure/>The important factors in beef production are the growth rate of the breed, therefore the live weight change of animal, the fat coverage and the efficiency of feed utilisation. The demands of Manydown farm shop consumers showed that there was a demand for beef with good eating qualities and butchery qualities. The Aberdeen Angus proved to give these qualities with not too much fat and marbling throughout the meat. The Aberdeen Angus cattle also suit the production system that Manydown have. They feed off the pastures during the summer, utilise the bi products of the arable production, barley, wheat and thrashed hay. The cattle can be finished on the silage that had been harvested and was economical for the farm instead of high volumes of concentrates. With this diet they put on between 1.2kg and 1.5kg weight per day, which was desirable for the quality meat demanded. Manydown were also looking for even coverage of meat not doubling muscle of heavy hindquarters. The Angus showed to be most suitable for this, as Charolais had a much bigger bone structure and had heavier hindquarters when fully matured. Manydown could use both sexes for meat production, and also sell the larger bulls to other herds such as dairies where there is a demand, thus providing extra income. Steers are slaughtered at around 600kg and heifers at 500-550kg. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The farm shop since opening in 1994 has had two extensions, and has a growth of turnover at 15% per annum. The shop has now diversified selling free-range chicken, lamb and sausages but its primary product still remains with the beef. The reason why the farm shop has been so successful is that the beef production has been specially designed, financially, physically, with careful selection of the breed and calving of the cattle to fit around continuously providing high quality beef to the consumer. The farm has total control of quantity and quality from conception to consumption. The high quality Aberdeen Angus meat which changed from Charolais after customer demand, with the RSPCA freedom food certificate, which shows the beef has been produced to the highest animal welfare and environmentally friendly, has set up a customer base where customers travel from miles around to purchase. This has and continues to make the farm shop a profitable venture. 