<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>A program will be written to find whether the atomic structure of melt-spun amorphous Dy7Ni3 can be modelled by a random packing of hard spheres, but including forcing the Ni atoms apart to the minimum distance found experimentally. In the program atoms will be placed randomly in a box, which will be surrounded by ghost boxes to prevent edge effects. The Metropolis Monte Carlo method will be used to produce a structure with the lowest total potential energy, initially for a random atomic packing and then with the minimum Ni-Ni distance increased. The parameters used will be optimised and the results processed so that they can be compared with experimental data. If there is a good fit with experimental data for the arrangement with increased Ni-Ni distance then a possible structure will have been found; it will be displayed visually so that any basic units may be identified. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>A study of the atomic and magnetic structure of melt-spun amorphous Dy 7Ni 3 was carried out by Alex Hannon in 1991.1 It may initially be thought that the structure of an amorphous material could be modelled by a random packing of hard spheres; however, it was found that there were no Ni-Ni contacts in the material, which would not be expected from such a model. A more ordered structural model is therefore needed which takes this into account. The aim of this project is to discover whether a possible atomic structure for Dy 7Ni 3 can be found using a model based on a random packing of hard spheres, but including forcing the Ni atoms apart to the distance found in the above experiment; or whether further modifications to this model would be needed to find a structure. I will write a computer program in fortran 95 to try to find a possible structure for Dy 7Ni 3. The topic is of interest because rare earth-transition metal glasses such as this have been studied little 1, and the structure of this material is still not understood. <heading>Amorphous metals</heading>Amorphous metals were first discovered in 1959 by Duwez and associates 2,3, who found that it was possible to form a glassy alloy by quenching a mixture of liquid metals. Since then many different amorphous metals (also called metallic glasses if they have been cooled from the liquid state 4) have been created. In order to prevent crystallisation, the liquid metal must be cooled very rapidly. In the melt-spinning technique, this is done by a jet of molten metal hitting a rapidly rotating copper wheel, so that it is cooled at a rate of around 10 6 K s -1, and a very thin ribbon of metallic glass is produced.2 Amorphous metals are almost always alloys; recently pure amorphous metals have been produced, but they crystallise well below room temperature so are of little practical use. Amorphous metals were the focus of considerable interest during the late 1970s and 1980s 4, because of their unusual physical properties: they are hard, ductile, not brittle and are relatively good electrical conductors 3. The magnetic properties of amorphous alloys containing ferromagnetic materials were of greatest interest, as it was found that they could be magnetised and demagnetised with little loss of energy.2 Despite this, amorphous metals have not yet found widespread practical application; the reasons for this include problems with cost and the difficulty of producing bulk blocks of the material. However, amorphous metals may yet be put to wider use, and the field is still one of interest which is not fully understood. X-ray or neutron diffraction studies are used to study the structure of amorphous metals. The data can be used to produce a graph of the partial correlation function t(r) against distance r for particular combinations of atoms, where t(r) is given by:  FORMULA  (1) where (r) is the average number density of relevant atoms at a distance r from any atom randomly chosen as the origin.3 This gives a one-dimensional representation of the structure, with broad peaks indicating the position of, and number of atoms in, shells of atoms surrounding any given atom. The radial distribution function, which gives the number of atoms of a particular type at a distance r from any atom, is found by multiplying t(r) by r. As the experimental data is one-dimensional, it is impossible to find a conclusive three-dimensional structure, but a possible structure may be found. These studies have shown that metallic glasses are very densely packed, and also that they have a higher degree of short-range order than liquids; this is shown by the second peaks of the partial correlation functions splitting into two 'shoulders'.3 Studies of metal-metalloid glasses have shown that metalloid-metalloid nearest neighbours do not occur, as would be expected in a dense random packing structure.5 This is the same feature that occurred in the Hannon experiment, with no contact between transition metal atoms. One suggestion for the structure of Dy 7Ni 3 is that the Dy atoms may be arranged in trigonal prisms, as occurs in the crystal form of dysprosium nickel. The Ni atoms would be in the centres of the prisms, and hence not in contact with each other. Randomly arranging these prisms would give a Dy:Ni ratio of 6:1, so in order for the atomic ratio to be correct, some Dy atoms would have to be shared between prisms. <heading>Potential energy</heading>In the program to try to find a structure for Dy 7Ni 3, N 'atoms' (70% of type Dy and 30% of type Ni) will be placed randomly in a 'box', of size determined by the density of the material (0.03938 atoms Å-3)1. N will initially be small (10-100), but in final runs will be increased to a large number, with the exact figure depending on the speed at which the program can be run. The interatomic potential energy (r) between two neutral atoms i and j can be calculated using the Lennard-Jones potential:  FORMULA  (2) where is the separation distance at which = 0, is the lowest value of the potential energy (which occurs at distance r 0) and r is the distance between the centres of the atoms. This potential gives a graph of the shape shown in Figure 1. r 0 and are related by Equation 3:  FORMULA  (3) Initially will be taken to be the sum of the hard-sphere radii of the atoms in question: r Dy = 1.6735 Å and r Ni = 0.969 Å.1 The potential energy i for one particular atom can be approximated as the sum of the potential energies between that atom and all the other atoms in the system. However, the Lennard-Jones potential is a very approximate representation of a complex system. It considers the forces between a pair of neutral atoms in isolation, which does not take into account the distortions from the other atoms, and from the electron cloud. This means that once the program is written, the parameters will need to be optimised so that the nearest-neighbour distance (r 0) produced by the simulation is the same as that found experimentally. Equation 3 can then be used to find the most appropriate values for for the three possible combinations of atoms: Ni-Ni, Ni-Dy and Dy-Dy. will initially be approximated by = 2 eV/molecule for all three values; again they will later be optimised to fit with experimental data. <figure/>The Lennard-Jones potential tends to 0 relatively rapidly with distance r, so that atoms further away from the relevant atom contribute almost nothing to the potential energy. In order to determine the radial distance around an atom within which atoms must be taken into account to determine its potential energy, a subroutine will be written which plots the Lennard-Jones potential against radial distance for the three combinations of atoms. A distance rmax will be chosen beyond which all three potential energies are negligible; the potential energy of an atom can then be calculated by summing over only the atoms within rmax. The total potential energy of the whole system, tot, can be found by summing the potentials between all the atoms in the box, taking care not to include each pair more than once. The lower the value of tot, the more stable the system. <heading>Ghost boxes</heading>The atoms will be moved around the box using the Metropolis Monte Carlo method (see below). If only one box was used, boundary effects would distort the model, as, for example, an atom at the edge of the box would only be surrounded by 25% as many atoms as one in the centre of the box. In order to prevent this, the main box will be surrounded by 26 'ghost' boxes: 9 boxes both above and below the main box, and 8 around its sides. Each ghost box will be the same size as the main box, and contain ghost atoms at the same co-ordinates, with respect to the origin of the ghost box, as the atoms in the main box. When an atom in the main box is moved, its 26 corresponding ghost atoms will also be moved by the same amount and in the same direction. When the potential energy of an atom is calculated, all atoms within a distance rmax will be taken into account, whether they are in the main box or the ghost boxes. All the atoms in the main box will therefore be surrounded by approximately the same density of atoms, so that boundary effects will not occur. As the atoms are moved around, some of them will move out of the main box. The ghost boxes system means that when an atom moves out of one side of the main box, another atom will move into the other side, changing from a ghost atom to a main atom. In order that the total number of atoms in all the boxes does not reduce, when an atom moves out of a ghost box at the edge of the system, it will move to corresponding co-ordinates at the edge of the opposite ghost box. There will be a repeating structure across the boxes, rather than the more random structure which would be expected in an amorphous material. In order to prevent this affecting the model, the side length of the boxes must be at least 2 rmax, so that there are no periodic effects within the distance used to calculate an atom's potential energy. <heading>The Metropolis Monte Carlo method</heading>Randomly moving the atoms around the box would mean that the total potential energy would rise and fall randomly, and it is unlikely that a global minimum would be found. To prevent this, the Metropolis Monte Carlo method will be used to decide whether a particular move should be accepted. At each possible move, the difference in potential energy of the atom in question between the new and old positions, , is calculated. If < 0, the move reduces the potential energy of the system, so it is always accepted. If > 0, a random number will be generated between 0 and 1, and compared to exp(-/k BT), where k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature of the material (room temperature). If the exponential is greater than the random number the move is accepted; if not, it is rejected. This tends to reject moves which result in a large increase in potential energy, but accept those resulting in only a small increase. This gives the opportunity to escape from any local minima which may occur. It also prevents the atoms overlapping - an atom will not move to a position too close to its neighbours.6 The method is summarised in Figure 2. This process will be repeated many times. At regular intervals, the total potential energy of the atoms in the box, tot, will be calculated. At first tot will be very high, because the random placing of atoms in the box will mean that some of them will overlap. tot should therefore initially reduce sharply, and then level out towards an asymptotic value. The final structure is the arrangement of the atoms once the point is reached where the total potential energy varies only very slightly with number of steps. Histograms of the radial distribution functions for the three possible combinations of atoms will then be produced by summing the number of relevant atoms at regular distances from each atom, so that the computational data can be compared with experimental data. <heading>Subroutines</heading>The first part of the project will involve writing the program. This will be done in sections or subroutines, with each subroutine being tested before another is added. This means that errors can be removed from each subroutine in turn, so that when they are linked together the entire program should work correctly. The planned order for writing the subroutines is as follows: <list>Calculate the Lennard-Jones potential between 2 atoms, and find rmax.Place N atoms randomly in a box.Arrange the 26 ghost boxes around the main box, containing 26 N ghost atoms. Calculate the potential energy for individual atoms.Calculate the total potential energy of the system tot.Move atoms around the box, shadowed by the ghost atoms.Monte Carlo subroutine.Produce data for three histograms of the radial distribution functions.</list>For lengthy runs of the program, it may be necessary to split the runs and continue at another time, starting with the arrangement of atoms at the end of the previous run. To enable this, a section will be added to give the option of starting with the atomic positions as they were previously (i.e. read from file) or to start again with them arranged randomly. Once the program is working correctly, it will be run to output the total potential energy against step number at regular intervals, so that it can be seen on a graph when the total potential energy has reached an asymptotic value. The maximum step length and the size of the intervals between which the potential energy is calculated will be optimised to give the best possible data within time constraints. For each set of conditions, the program should be run several times to check that a similar final structure is reached each time. <figure/><heading>Using the program</heading>The program will initially be written and run with contacts between all atoms allowed, to model a dense random packing of hard spheres. Histograms of the radial distribution function will be produced and compared to the Percus-Yevick data shown in Hannon's paper 1, which is based on a random packing of hard spheres. It will be checked that the program gives similar graphs to the Percus-Yevick graphs, and any obvious errors will be corrected if possible. The parameters and will be adjusted and optimised, using the histograms to see the effect of any adjustments. Production runs will then be done with as large a number of atoms as possible given time constraints. The graphs produced by the program will have much sharper peaks than the experimental data, due to the effects of experimental resolution and of thermal broadening (the vibration of the atoms in a real material). The computed data will be adapted using the program unitan so that it can be directly compared to the experimental data. The final structure with Ni-Ni contacts allowed will then modelled on the program Chem3D, which produces images of the arrangements of the atoms in the structure. This process will then be repeated with the minimum Ni-Ni contact distance increased to the value found by Hannon, so that the effects on the structure of altering the Ni-Ni distance can be observed. Data from the final structure, processed using unitan, will be compared with the partial correlation functions in Hannon's paper. If a final possible structure is produced which fits the experimental data, it will be modelled on Chem3D so that it can be compared with the structure found from random packing, and any basic units (such as trigonal prisms) can be identified. If a final structure cannot be produced which fits experimental data, suggestions will be made as to how the project could be modified so that a possible structure may be found. 