<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>As consumers, all of us engage in highly informal descriptive procedures everyday. We may denominate a food as being delicious, nondescript or unacceptable, which alone is a matter of simple description, but to arrive at that ultimate decision we go through a complex process, subconsciously for the most part, assessing several individual characteristics to make our simply expressed decision. In order to keep or improve the product's appeals to consumers in respects of both quality and sensory properties, many food industrial firms have been trying to mimic the descriptive procedures of consumers on the products during their decision-making process, particularly by setting up various descriptive sensory analysis on their products. In fact, the real value of descriptive procedures resides in those of a systematic nature. From them, we derive many practical benefits as well as fundamental knowledge of the relations between composition and sensory quality. The descriptive procedures to follow will be considered from four points of view: (1) procedures available; (2) practices allowed; (3) pitfalls to be avoided and (4) the potential for the development of uses or practices even more beneficial than those which exist at present. Nowadays, the most common approach by the food industry is quantitative sensory profiling (QSP) of products. The main principle of sensory profiling is to determine the nature and intensity of all the sensory characteristics of a food (i.e. appearance, taste, aroma, mouthfeel and aftertaste) or a particular product, through a series of events, including intensive descriptive analysis on each single sensory characteristic of a product, determination of the key attributes of each sensory characteristic through a group discussion, quantitative evaluation of each key attribute of the characteristics as well as the final statistical analysis of the results from the panel. There are many variants of QSP procedures. One of the major variants is quantitative descriptive analysis (QDA). In essence, QDA boils down to screening would-be assessors for possible membership on a panel, developing a list of descriptive terms, training judges, using sufficient replication so that the performance of the assessors, the effectiveness of descriptive terms, product differences and possible interaction effects may be isolated and evaluated by statistical analysis, and expressing the results graphically as well as numerically. <heading>OBEJECTIVE</heading>In this practical session, all the students are treated as would-be panelists and will be exposed to the method of QDA and 4 similar samples of a food product. The students are then expected to carry out the sensory profiling of the 4 samples by using the method of QDA as a group. In the end, they will be asked to analyze the results by implementing the relevant statistical analysis tool (i.e. ANOVA) and determine the ways in which the 4 samples differ by using graphical methods of data presentation, such as Spider diagrams or other statistical methods, such as principle component analysis (PCA). This practical session, in fact, helps to familiarize the students with the principles of sensory profiling and the approaching technique (QDA), also it enables the students to be capable of carrying out independent statistical analysis of the collected data and reaching to reasonable judgments by utilizing graphic and statistical tools. <heading>METHODS AND MATERIALS</heading><heading>Materials</heading><heading>Stock solutions (w/w in 1:1 ethnol/1,2-propane-diol)</heading><table/><heading>4 similar digestive biscuits</heading><heading>4 chocolate samples : ASDA, Cadbury's Dairy Milk, Galaxy Milk and Waitrose </heading>Belgian Milk <heading>Methods</heading><heading>Assessor Training</heading>Profiling typically requires 10-20 assessors who have been selected for aptitude and then highly trained. In this practical the class will be the assessors but in the time available it will not be possible to apply the normal selection and training procedures. Methods of selection and training were discussed in the previous practical class. The selection and training procedures the class went through during the first practical session included sensitivity and aptitude tests, taste thresholds test as well as adaptation test. In this class, a particular training will be undertaken relating to the method of GDA, which is the vocabulary development training on odour description. Basically, 10 smelling bottles of different odorant solutions will be presented to the class, which are coded as shown above. Then, all the class will go around and detect the nature of the odour in each bottle, while recording the descriptions. Following that, an informal discussion within the class will be held by the practical leader to gather all the descriptions from the class on the odorant nature of each bottle. Throughout the discussion, vocabularies on the odour descriptions are therefore developed by the class. In the end of this training exercise, the class will get a clear view on the vocabulary development procedure of the QDA method. The other training will be provided to familiarize the class with line-scaling technique. This is achieved by conventional profiling of the four similar digestive biscuits of different brands. Basically, four samples will be presented to each student of the class. Then each student will evaluate the samples in individual booth and carry out the ranking and line-scaling tests on three sensory modalities of each sample under 3 corresponding attributes respectively, while operating on the provided computer. The sensory characteristics include: Colour (browness); Taste (sweet); Texture (Hardness). Later on, a brief discussion will be held on the results gathered from the whole class. In the end of this training, all the class should understand the principles of conventional profiling, its advantages and disadvantages as well as the line-scaling technique. <heading>Development of Vocabulary</heading>The sensory attributes of the 4 similar chocolate samples need to be determined. These will include terms describing appearance, aroma, taste, mouthfeel and after-taste. Firstly, each assessor will be asked to evaluate the samples in the individual sensory booth and describe the sensory attributes in their own terms. Then the whole panel will discuss the appropriateness and meaning of all the terms used by the individual assessors with the sensory leader in order to obtain a consensus of attribute terms which all assessors agree can be detected in the products. (Typically 15-20 terms may be agreed). Apart from the role of the sensory leader being responsible for the preparation and presentation of test samples known to differ, he or she also facilitates the process of arriving at a consensus of terms which are appropriate and understood by the panelists, but rarely would he or she override decisions made by the assessors. Whether a term describes a major or a minor character note, and whether it is a key to discrimination of the products or not, determine how appropriate and valuable it is. In normal food industrial companies, standard flavours or relevant food samples may be provided by the panel leader to help assessors reach agreement on the meaning of the different terms, however, due to the time limitation in this practical, this step will be eliminated. <heading>Quantitative Assessment of Attributes</heading>As long as the attribute terms are determined by the class, each of 4 chocolate samples will be evaluated by each student and each attribute scored for intensity using a line scale. Several replicate panel sessions are necessary, and at each session all the 4 different types of chocolate samples are evaluated. In this practical, 2 replicates will be done within the class. <heading>Analysis of Results</heading>The results will be used to determine the way in which the 4 chocolate samples differ. Analysis of Variance will be used to show statistically which attributes differ between the samples. Separate ANOVAs will be carried out for each attribute with treatment (sample) and assessor as variables. Results will be presented in Tables of Treatment Means and Tables of Significance. In this way those attributes which differ between treatments can be shown and, within attributes, each mean can be tested to show which means are significantly different. The variability between assessors can also be determined. Graphical methods of data presentation, such as Spider diagrams, will also be used. Other statistical methods, such as principle component analysis (PCA), may also be used to help to interpret the data and determine the ways in which the Treatments differ. (In this practical class there time will not permit the use of PCA). Data are acquired on PCs using a sensory evaluation package (TASTE) which complies the data into a spreadsheet. The ANOVAs on this data are carried out in MS Excel using a macro designed for sensory analysis. <heading>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</heading><heading>RESULTS</heading>Attributes and anchors developed in the vocabulary development procedure by the class <table/>Based on the large pool of data collected from the sample profiling by the whole class, a two-way ANOVA with replication (Interaction) has been done for each single attribute with treatment (sample) and assessor as variables. All the results are shown on the appended table 1, named as "Two-way ANOVA with Replication (Interaction)". Combining the ANOVA results shown on table "1" with the sample means by attribute, another table is generated as referred to the appended table 2 with the calculated least significant difference (LSD) on as well. The table is named as "Table of Sample Means by Attribute". Based on the sample means by attribute and the LSDs calculated in table "2", a statistical analysis has been carried out for each attribute on the significance level of difference between every two samples of four. The analysis results are represented in the appended table 3, named after "Significance Level of Difference Between Every Two Samples" <heading>DISCUSSION</heading>Referring to appended table 2, it is clearly shown that the significant differences among the four chocolate samples are estimated to lie in 7 attributes, which are highlighted in red on the table. They are browness (appearance), shininess (appearance), Chemical (aroma), first bite (mouthfeel), melting (mouthfeel), mouth-coating (mouthfeel) as well as bitter (aftertaste). This conclusion is drawn by the fact that for all the 7 attributes the significance level of variance due to the samples is bigger than or equal (i.e. only for "bitter") to the significance level of variance due to the assessors. Consequently, it can be assumed that the differences among the means of the four samples on the 7 attributes are actually due to the nature of the samples (i.e. objective factor) rather than the assessors (subjective factor). In contrast, it can be seen that the significance level of variance due to the samples is all smaller than the significance level of variance due to the assessors for the rest of the attributes. Therefore, these attributes are not considered to be the key factors to differ the four samples. In order to discover the extents to which the four samples differ from each other, (i.e. to test which sample means by attribute are significantly different and which ones are not significantly different), a LSD value is calculated for every single attribute. Thereby, if the difference between any two means under one attribute is bigger than the corresponding LSD value, it is implied that there is a significant difference between the two means, and vice versa. However, it is important to notice that the LSD becomes meaningless and non-applicable when the attribute is not the key factor to differ the four samples, (i.e. when significance level of variance by assessors is higher than that by samples). Consequently, LSD values are only considered for the 7 key attributes. Referring to table 2, for instance of browness, the LSD value is 10.65. As the difference in means between Galaxy Milk and Cadbury's Dairy Milk is 10, which is less than 10.65, they are then not considered to be significantly different by browness. On the other hand, the difference in means between Waitrose Belgian Milk is 23.8, which is much bigger than 10.65, so these two samples can be treated to be significantly different by browness. The comprehensive analysis on the significance level of difference among the samples by each of the 7 key attributes is displayed on table 3, (i.e. the attributes in red). As shown on table 3, it is obvious that for the attribute of Browness, Waitrose sample is significantly different from all the other 3 samples, while the significance level lying greater in ASDA and Galaxy than in Cadbury's. Whereas, there is no significant difference between each two of the other 3 samples. For the attribute of Shininess, the only significant differences exist between ASDA and Cadbury's, and Galaxy and ASDA, while ASDA seems to be much more different from Galaxy than from Cadbury's. In the case of Chemical (aroma), only Cadbury's and Waitrose are found to be significantly different from each other, while the rest are not significantly different. Also the significance level between the two is quite high. For the attribute of First Bite (mouthfeel), ASDA is found to be highly different from both Cadbury's and Galaxy with the same extent. Additionally, Galaxy appears to be significantly different from Waitrose as well. The same case happens to the attribute of Melting (Mouthfeel), whereas all the significance levels of difference are lowered. Besides, ASDA seems to be the most significantly different from Galaxy. Referring to Mouthcoating (Mouthfeel), the exact same pattern of differences between ASDA and Cadbury's, Galaxy is observed. Furthermore, Cadbury's and Galaxy are both significantly different from Waitrose as well. By comparisons, both Cadbury's and Galaxy are more significantly different from Waitrose than from ASDA. Last but not least, in the case of Bitter (Aftertaste), again both Cadbury's and Galaxy are found to be significantly different from ASDA and Waitrose respectively. Besides, Cadbury's is slightly more different from ASDA than from Waitrose. As discussed so far, we have already known about the way and the extent to which the four chocolate samples differ from each other. However, in order to quantify the significant difference lying between samples, a Spider diagram has been plotted to offer you a clear view of the overall sensory characteristics of each sample by the 7 key attributes, as referred to the appendix-4. As shown on this diagram, Waitrose Belgian Milk turns out to be the brownest among the four samples, also it has the least mouth-coating effect in terms of mouthfeel; thereby, it is believed to have the thinnest texture among the four. Furthermore, it seems to possess the strongest chemical aroma among the four and a very strong bitterness in after effects, too. In terms of ASDA sample, it has the greatest after effects of bitterness and mouthfeel of first bite, so it seems to be the hardest in texture. Also it possesses the least browness and shininess in appearance and the least melting rate of mouthfeel. Again, it seems to be very thin in texture due to its low mouth-coating effects in mouthfeel. In contrast, in terms of texture, both Cadbury's and Galaxy Milk are the highest in the mouth-coating effects and in melting rate of mouthfeel. Consequently, they appear to be the thickest in texture among the four. Also, they turn out to be the softest in texture among the four due to the lowest values of first bite. In the sense of appearance, Galaxy Milk is found to be the shiniest and the least brownest among the four, while Cadbury's is fairly shiny and brown as well. Apparently Cadbury's has the least content of artificial content in the formulation due to its lowest chemical-note in aroma. Both of them are almost free from bitterness in after effects, which again possibly represent the natural characteristics of their formulations. Last but not least, the appended PCA plot represents us with a very general idea about what attributes virtually drive the significant differences among the samples. This plot is well in-line with the discussions so far. As seen from this plot, the attribute distinguish Waitrose from the other is browness in appearance, and ASDA stands out among the four due to its strong hardness and lowest melting behavior. On the other hand, Galaxy and Cadbury's are quite similar to each other due to their high degree of shininess in appearance and strong melting coating effects of mouthfeel. <heading>SUMMARIZATION</heading>A critical appraisal of the QDA method can be summarized as below: <heading>Advantage</heading>This method is very precise, as it is broken down to quite a few procedures. Particularly, the use of a graphic scale, which reduces that part of the bias in scaling resulting from the use of numbers; the statistical treatment of the data; the separation of panelists during evaluation; and the graphic approach to presentation of data are all the beneficial points of this methods. <heading>Disadvantage</heading>The panel, because of lack of formal instruction, may develop erroneous terms. For example, in this practical, just a couple of students developed the terms of bitterness in the after effects, however, there might be confusions among other students on this term. As the nature of bitterness can be various, some of them may imply artificial note, while some of them can imply other notes, such as medical note. In this case, different people might not have the same understanding on a particular term. Lack of definition also may allow a senior panelist or stronger personality to dominate the proceedings in all or part of the panel population in the development of vocabulary. The "free" approach to scaling can lead to inconsistency of results, partly because of particular panelists evaluating a product on a given day and not on another, and partly because of the context effects of one product seen after the other, with no external scale references. The lack of immediate feedback to panelists on a regular basis reduces the opportunity for learning and expansion of terminology for greater capacity to discriminate and describe differences. On a minor point, the practice of connecting "spokes" of the "Spider diagram" can be misleading to some users, who may expect the area under a curve to have some meaning. In reality, the sensory dimensions shown in the "web" may be either unrelated to each other, or related in ways which cannot e represented in this manner. 