The results of a 2006 Food Frequency Questionnaire, filled out by 86 eager first years at , show remarkably modest levels of alcohol consumption. This Questionnaire was part of a Dietary Survey used to establish the nutritional components of these students' diet over the previous 7 days. The results showed that all 86 subjects - 23 males and 63 females - had relatively well-proportioned, nutrient-rich diets with few significant deviations. Yet surprisingly it also revealed that they had an average alcohol consumption of only 17.2g per day. Based on Government figures this converts to 2 units per day - equivalent to a pint of ordinary strength larger such as Fosters. This would probably shock most of us as few would suspect that drinking more than one Fosters would be classed as "going on a binge". Binge or no binge, drinking is still thought to be a major part of a students' life. Yet, according to these recent figures, female students at  consume on average 2 units a night and males only 3 - both a unit below the national maximum recommendations. You would only need to go out once with a student to see that this level of alcohol consumption is grossly under-par. So what does it mean? Are  students truly as angelic as the figures imply? The truth is that there are many major inaccuracies associated with questionnaires such as these. Food frequency questionnaires are no exception. They are suitable for large-scale surveys and can focus on specific nutrients in the diet, yet they often have over-estimation of nutrients and under-estimation of unhealthy foods. Whether they are accurate or not these students still show alcohol consumption levels below the maximum recommended amount. Yet, compared with a 2003 National Diet and Nutrition Survey (NDNS), these students have daily alcohol intakes far above the national means. <figure/>This 2003 study recorded daily intakes of 21.9g of alcohol per day for men and a shockingly low 9.3g for woman. Comparing the University's 2006 figures for female consumption with the NDNS' 2003, it shows that students knock back the equivalent of a whopping 11 bottles of 40% vodka, or 141 pints of lager more per year. The best explanation for these differences is that this study is nearly 4 years out of date and doesn't take into account the nation-wide increase in alcohol consumption (especially in females) since then. This increase in alcohol consumption requires an increase in nutrient intake. This is due to alcohol's 'empty calories' - energy without nutrients. But are 's students doing this? Alcohol, as well as not giving any nutrients, also takes them away. God's gift to hangovers, Vitamin B1 (Thiamine), one of the many vitamins depleted by alcohol, was found in relatively high levels in  students' diet - almost twice the RNI (Reference Nutrient Intake) of it in males. RNIs are part of the government's Dietary Reference Values (DRV). These values are compiled to get an idea of an individual's nutrient requirement. RNIs represent the amount that meets the nutritional needs of most people. 's levels of Vitamin B2 (for those bloodshot eyes), Zinc (for alcohol metabolism) and Vitamin C (anti-oxidant fighting the baddies in alcohol) are all well above the RNIs. However the questionnaire also picked up on Potassium and Iron deficiencies (only in females) that would no doubt hamper the body in combating the effects of alcohol. A new area of research is investigating the effectiveness of Phosphorus in treating alcohol withdrawal symptoms. Funnily enough  students have abnormally high levels of Phosphorus in their diet. All subjects have more than double the RNI and males are even over the safe upper limit! Could there be a hidden message behind this strange discovery? Whether  Students are in fact recovering alcoholics or just misunderstood youths remains to be seen. Nonetheless,  students appear to be consuming more alcohol than the national means (for 2003), while still managing to keep their units per day below the maximum recommended amount. This paradoxical set of results leaves us questioning their accuracy - which, with the national trends showing huge increases in alcohol consumption, would not be a bad thing to do! Published November 25 2006 