<heading>Introduction</heading>This essay is based on Grand Challenge 2/4: Ubiquitous Computing: experience, design and science. In summary, this Grand Challenge [1] envisages a future where computers are everywhere. Ubiquitous computing is a broad field encompassing other fields such as distributed computing, mobile computing, sensor networks, human-computer interaction, and artificial intelligence. In this context, the definition of computer is far greater than simply the humble desktop PC. The definition includes the many "invisible" (embedded) computers that will/already exist, such as in our vehicles, in our homes, in our buildings, in our communications devices, perhaps even worn on our bodies and many other places besides. In the future these embedded computers will be even more powerful than they are now. Through the use of a multitude of sensors they will become inseparably interweaved with every aspect of our lives, able to detect, analyse and respond to changes/events in their surroundings. These computers will all be networked and interconnected and collectively form "a single Global Ubiquitous Computer". It would be impossible to cover every aspect of ubiquitous computing (or ubicomp) in detail so instead, this essay aims to give an overview of the field and explore what it could all mean for us. The essay will focus on the applications of ubiquitous computing and the ways it may be implemented. Also, it will briefly speculate on the possible problems associated with ubiquitous computing. <heading>Background</heading>The late Mark Weiser (July 23, 1952-April 27, 1999) is widely regarded as the father of ubiquitous computing [2]. He first proposed the concept of ubiquitous computing in 1988 while leading the Computer Science Laboratory at Xerox PARC (Palo Alto Research Centre) [3]. The following quote sums up the vision of ubiquitous computing: <quote>"Ubiquitous computing names the third wave in computing, just now beginning. First were mainframes, each shared by lots of people. Now we are in the personal computing era, person and machine staring uneasily at each other across the desktop. Next comes ubiquitous computing, or the age of calm technology, when technology recedes into the background of our lives." --Mark Weiser [4]</quote>Here the definition of the computer is broadened to include anything with computational capability. Weiser envisioned a future where we would be surrounded by computers that were so much a part of our environment and so well blended that we can just take them for granted not even notice them. Computers will no longer just be those which sit on desktops, they will also be worn and embedded into everyday things Thus, ubiquitous computing has concepts more in common with an augmented reality than with virtual reality. It involves moving towards a reality where the devices/computers/things we use in everyday life are context-aware and/or location-aware and operate as appropriate with regard to this new awareness. This awareness could be facilitated by a network of sensors in combination with RFID tags. The many changes in the way computers are used may also necessitate new ways of interacting with them so new HCI (Human-Computer Interaction) methods will be needed. In a talk on the "Computer Science challenges of the next 10 years" given in 1996, Weiser describes the principles of ubiquitous computing [5]: The purpose of a computer is to help you do something else. The best computer is a quiet, invisible servant. The more you can do by intuition the smarter you are; the computer should extend your unconscious. Technology should create calm. <heading>State of the Art</heading>While developments are being made, there is still some way to go before Weiser's vision of ubiquitous computing is fully realised. A somewhat crude and rudimentary ubiquitous computer already exists, in the form of the Internet and all the devices and computers connected to it. So we already possess a means for achieving the interconnectivity necessary for ubiquitous computing. The extent of this connectivity is further extended by other technologies such as 3G mobile phone networks (i.e. for mobile internet) and even shorter range methods like Bluetooth. However, the Internet is not without problems. Its greatest strengths can also be one of its weaknesses. It is the problem of governance. The Internet does not have an administrator as such- so who is responsible when something goes wrong? The issue of net governance [6] has been up for debate for some time. Currently, the main barrier to true ubiquitous computing lies in ubiquity and the extent of current connectivity. Computers are not everywhere and there exists a clear separation between humans and the machines. Computer technology and human society are still distinctly separate entities. This is demonstrated in the apathy expressed by some people towards computers. The vision of ubiquitous computing entails apathy of a different kind. It entails apathy where we don't think about computers not because we don't care but because we don't have to care. Whether for reasons of finance or practicality, not everyone has access to computing. For the vision to become a reality any Global Ubiquitous Computer must allow everyone in the world free and equal access- another hot topic of debate is net neutrality [7]. There is also the issue of interoperability. Our computers are not immediately compatible. This needs to change so that all computers are able to be connected to each other seamlessly. Computers are currently isolating in nature. This is in part due to the way we interact with our computers. Currently in this "personal computing era", our main means of interacting with computers is via physical hardware-based input/control devices such as mouse, keyboard and/or possibly graphics tablets. These input tools mean that computers are generally only used by one person at a time. Smartcards are already in everyday use, such as the Oyster card used for paying fares on London's public transport network [8]. The use of such electronic systems will probably only increase. No discussion about interconnected computer systems would be complete without the inclusion of the topic of privacy, given that at the most basic level, the purpose of any computer is to process data. In the UK, data protection laws govern how long data can be kept and how it is used [9]: <list>Fairly and lawfully processed Processed for limited purposes Adequate, relevant and not excessive Accurate and up to date Not kept for longer than is necessary Processed in line with your rights Secure Not transferred to other countries without adequate protection </list>With increasing interconnectivity, potentially increasing amounts information about us is shared between systems so data protection becomes increasingly more important. <heading>Future Possibilities</heading>Advances in technology and falling hardware prices may in time solve some of the problems of ubiquity and connectivity. Assuming these barriers can be overcome, the future has in store potentially wondrous possibilities. Some may be realised sooner than others. Healthcare can be enhanced if patients wear sensors, perhaps woven into clothing which are linked with a computer to constantly monitor readings- as the University of Technology in Sydney is investigating [10]. For patients with heart disease, such a system can monitor for signs of an impending heart attack and warn the patient, doctors and hospitals. In his article "Ubiquitous Computing", Weiser notes that one of the challenges of ubiquitous computing is dealing with mobility. People using computers will not be bound to a single location and their computer use may transfer between devices. "The X window system protocol [(a window system designed for networking)], for instance, makes it very difficult to migrate the window of a running application from one screen to another." Also, current networking protocols are based on the assumption that a computer's name and network address is constant. This will no longer be the case when devices are able to switch from network to network as users move from place to place. [11]. With ubiquity and having computers everywhere all around us, new HCI techniques may be needed. Futuristic interfaces similar to that seen in the Spielberg movie Minority Report could be the answer. These user interfaces would allow a more hands-on approach and operate based either on direct contact or hand gestures. These input methods would make computers quicker and more natural to use and may allow a computer or interactive wall to be used by more than one person at a time. This is a major improvement over existing methods of input. An example of this is Multi-Touch Interaction being pioneered by Jefferson Han of New York University [12], a "low-cost... very scaleable... and intuitive" touchscreen system which unlike existing touchscreens allow for multiple points of contact. Another example of this is the FlipTouch project [13] from the Office of Tomorrow Project of Digital Media which is based on an interactive transparent display and IR stereo tracking- essentially two infra-red cameras which in conjunction with computer vision algorithms allow the computer to 'see' what hand gestures the user is making on the screen. Intelligent spaces will become commonplace such as in smart homes. Smart homes are being built even today [14] and are part of the evolution of home automation concepts. In the future, potentially all homes may be smart homes. These intelligent spaces will learn the preferences of their users and customise the environment as appropriate. Problems may occur for homes or buildings which are not 'smart' to begin but are instead being upgraded to become 'smart'. In the paper "At home with ubiquitous computing: seven challenges",[15] Edwards & Grinter investigate the possible problems that ubiquitous computing may result in, in the context of smart homes. In it, the concept of "The "Accidentally" Smart Home" is discussed. The issue here is that where system designed to interoperate with other systems may do so but in an unwanted way. Ideally they should be "plug and play" but in practice the user will have to set up the device so that the correct network connections are made. Also, with such an array of different devices, it may not be a certainty that the interoperability that is required will occur at all [15]- therefore standard protocols will need to be defined. Reliability is also important. If there is some central computer co-ordinating all the other embedded computers within the home, that central computer must not crash- or at least crash only extremely rarely. So such a computer should have built in redundancies so that should anything wrong, it can continue to operate. Finally, computers operate in a binary fashion whereas the real world is analogue in nature [15]. Programming must be robust enough so that the system can cope with ambiguities. Even more mundane problems can benefit from an ubicomp approach. For example, the simple issue of what your "Online Status" is in an instant messaging program. The most basic implementations of this feature simply toggle the status between Online and Offline. Other implementations may allow selection from a number of preset statuses or alternatively allow you to type your own. "Online Status" is not typically an issue but now with the potential for instant messaging on the move from highly mobile devices such as phones, PDAs, Pocket PCs, the actual location of the user is now much more relevant. LUCI, the Laboratory for Ubiquitous Computing and Interaction of UC Irvine, has a project called Nomatic*Gaim [16]. Nomatic*Gaim is an instant messaging program which via sensors and a central will automatically determine the location of the user and the name of the location and display this in the program for other users to see. Another mundane application may be to ensure we (almost) never lose anything ever again. The Ubicomp Lab of National Taiwan University has a "Object location tracker" project [17]. This is a simple yet innovative use of RFID tags. Various objects are tagged and can be later located using an RFID reader with antenna. It makes use of another of their projects called Zigbee which is an indoor localization system based on radio sensor network. This allows any tagged object to be located. Ubiquitous computing will result in all systems being context aware. For this to work they will collect data about us, process it and share it with each other. This poses major privacy concerns. As long as this information is used only in the provision of the user experience, it is not a problem. The information collected can be highly personal and/or confidential but in using a ubiquitous computing system, there may be unwanted sharing of this information. Ideally all data about users should be erased as soon as its purpose is served but therein lies the problem, the information may be required for the ubiquitous computing to operate for us in the manner we require of it so it may be retained in the form of personal "profiles". The privacy issues will need to be resolved before broad uptake of ubiquitous computing is feasible. With greater use of smartcard systems, smartcard chips which allow for electronic payment may soon be widely incorporated into common devices- mobile phones in particular, as in Japan where smartcard chips in mobile phones can also be used for travel. Increased use of smartcards also raises privacy issues. If used as payment on transport systems, such as in the case of the Oyster card, the users travel patterns can be logged and analysed [18]. This has incurred the displeasure of civil liberties groups and new smartcard systems which operate similarly will no doubt do the same. Nevertheless, police in the UK are finding the information collected by Oyster cards useful in tracking criminals [19]. <heading>Conclusions</heading>Ubiquitous computing will make computing so much a part of our lives it will become as natural as reading a sign on a wall and feel just as effortless. It will allow us access to information seamlessly wherever we are. The promises of ubiquitous computing are great but there are also potential problems. These problems will need to be resolved before ubiquitous computing can be truly realised. Something like ubiquitous computing spans is so complex in nature and spans so many fields that I think it is difficult to say when this grand challenge will be fulfilled- though the Grand Challenges document cites a time frame of 15 years. However, seeing the beginnings of the global ubiquitous around me I am fairly certain that it will be fulfilled eventually. 