<heading>1. Introduction</heading>The 'Experiencing the Weather' field course took place during the weekend of 28 th - 29 th October 2006. It was based at Leeson House field studies centre at Langton Matravers, Dorset: <figure/>The weekend's activities included: <list>Launching several radiosondes and plotting their ascents on tephigrams.Taking part in instrumented walks in the surrounding area throughout the period (maps are shown in Appendix 2).Monitoring both Met Office synoptic charts and satellite dataAnalysing data from a fixed observing station at Leeson House and a meteorological mast at Durlston Head.Using all of this data to produce presentations and forecasts for the period</list>Please note that there is also some automatically recorded data in the days preceding the period from the mast at Durlston Head. <heading>2. Aims</heading>This report aims to both describe and explain the observed weather during the period 27 th to 29 th October 2006. It should link together observations from different sources to provide a coherent picture of the weather's evolution during this time. <heading>3. Analysis of Saturday 28th October (00:00 - 18:00 UTC) </heading><heading>3.1. General situation and surface observations</heading>The weather on Friday 27 th October started out calm and dry, as the country was sitting in a ridge of high pressure (figure 1 A1). However, by the end of the day a rain shower was recorded at Leeson House. This was possibly caused by an occluded front which may have moved across the UK (In figure 2, A1, the front is stretched between Belgium and Norway). Evidence for the rain is seen as a negative spike in potential gradient (figure 10 AC) and a rise in relative humidity (figure 11, AC). Initially on Saturday, there was a warm moist air mass over the South Coast with associated mild temperatures and high relative humidities (Table 1, AB). A tephigram launch at 0845UTC showed a layer of dry air at approximately 900hPa, which corresponds to early observations of a high cloud base which fell as the day progressed (due to water vapour falling into the dry layer until it became more saturated). As there was no synoptic change in pressure over the UK, this provided an ideal time in which to look at the relationship between atmospheric pressure and height. The results are shown in figure 8. If the relationship is given by  FORMULA  , where  FORMULA , then the scale height was found from the curve fit to be 7492m. There may be substantial error in this however as the equipment may not have been properly calibrated. At approximately 1400UTC, a weak warm front passed over the region, bringing in exceptionally warm moist air (figure 2). As the air was already warm and moist, the front was too weak to cause precipitation. However, the relative humidity increased enough for fog to be recorded on one of the instrumented walks (Table 1, AB). The walk data also shows a drop in temperature and a peak in the wind speed at 1400UTC. However, geographical location needs to be taken into account, the 1400UT measurement was made on an exposed ridge at the highest elevation during the walk whilst the 1300UTC and 1500UTC measurements were made in more sheltered locations. Therefore it is more likely that local effects caused the readings rather than mesoscale events. However, the data at Leeson House and Durlston Head also support the theory that a front passed at 1400UTC. A comparison of Leeson house and Durlston Head dry bulb temperatures for this time is given in figure 14 (AC). The correlation between the two measurements shows that the variations in temperature must be mesoscale in origin and cannot be down to local effects. Note, the temperatures at Durlston Head are damped compared to those at Leeson House due to Durlston Head's close proximity to the sea. The sea has a greater specific heat than land and therefore heats and cools more slowly. The relative humidity also increased at both Leeson House and Durlston Head; this would be expected if a warm front passed through the region (figure 11, AC and figure 15, AD). The potential gradient shows the passage of the front clearly (figure 10, AC). It shows a classic fog profile, which corresponds to the observations on the instrumented walks: <figure/>The solar flux also decreased sharply at 1400UTC, which could signify thick low cloud or fog (figure 12, AC). Finally, the pressure was at a minimum at approximately 1400UTC (figure 15, AD). <heading>3.2 Radiosonde Launches</heading>A radiosonde launched at 1503UTC on Saturday 28 th shows a thick layer of high ice cloud, with a cloud base of 500hPa. This corresponds to satellite pictures for Saturday afternoon in which a layer of cirrus can be seen following the jet stream (figure 20, AF). This also corresponds to observations made on instrumented walks. There is a thick layer of cloud extending to the ground that corresponds to the fog reported by the other sources of data. In addition, the warm front can be seen in the tephigram, as seen in the figure below: <figure/>After the front had passed, the region was in an exceptionally warm and moist air mass, which can be seen by the high relative humidity measurements in figure 11 AC and figure 15 AD. <heading>3.3. Weather phenomena: The polar jet stream.</heading>This can be observed as a striking feature in the satellite images for Saturday (figure 20, AF). Cirrus clouds are carried along by the jet stream, so a defined edge is seen in the cirrus at the edges of the stream. The strength of the jet stream can be seen in the 500hPa geopotential and pressure charts. Earlier on in the week, the jet stream was weak due to the large depression over the UK (figure 21, AF). However, by Saturday the jet had significantly increased in strength and caused the edge to the cirrus (figure 22, AF). <heading>4. Analysis of the evening of Saturday 28th October (1800UTC on 28/10/06 - 0600UTC on 29/10/06)</heading>During the early hours of Sunday morning, a cold front passed over the region. This is the more northerly front lying across the South coast in figure 3 (A1). It is a trailing cold front from a developed cyclone, which moved in from the West during the previous days. The passage of the front was observed as a sharp dip followed by a rise in pressure, recorded at 0230UTC at Leeson House observatory (figure 15, AD). The temperature also started to fall at approximately this time, suggesting a cooler air mass may have moved into the region (figure 15, AD). 2.5mm of rain also fell at Leeson House although the time is unknown. This is unlikely to be a local effect as rain was recorded at Bournemouth between 0000 and 0600UTC. A sharp change in wind direction was recorded at Durlston Head at approximately 0230UTC (figure 13 AC), this is consistent with the passage of a cold front. There is also a sharp dip in the potential gradient at this time (figure 10, AC). However as rain drops are negatively charged, the potential gradient should have dropped below zero if it had rained at Durlston Head. Therefore this is an indication that it might have been a weak front or that it didn't rain at Durlston Head. <heading>5. Analysis of Sunday 29th October (0600UTC - 1800UTC)</heading><heading>5.1. General Situation </heading>By the morning of Sunday 29 th the cold front had passed over, leaving the region in a cooler air mass. This can be seen in the charts for 1200UTC Sunday (figure 4, A1) and for 0000UTC Monday 30 th (figure 5, A1). Note, figure 4 is a forecast MSL pressure and thickness chart while the other figures shown are analysis charts. A large anticyclone can also be seen building over the entire region. This is associated with a stable air mass undergoing large scale sinking, which generally produces fine settled weather. The system is also causing the front to pivot clockwise off a point over Cornwall rather than following a conventional path. <heading>5.2. Surface Observations</heading>The situation is validated by the walk data, as seen in table 2 (A2). The pressure had risen noticeably since Saturday (seen in figure 9 (A2)) as would be expected in an anticyclone. Note, this pressure was measured with a digital watch, so the readings may not be as accurate as with specialist equipment. There are also errors in the altitude estimates used to calculate mean sea level pressure. The wind had also changed direction from South West to North East and its maximum speed during the morning was 3kt. This may be explained by the wind being drawn around the centre of the high pressure area over the UK, which would produce slack northerly winds (figure 4, A1). Note, local effects could have affected wind measurements as some readings were taken in more sheltered areas than others. The temperature was comparable to Saturday's measurements even though the region was in the cooler air mass behind the cold front. This is because there was much less cloud so more solar radiation could reach the surface. There was some stratus cloud reported, but this was at a higher level; cloud temperatures were approximately 8 oC compared to 14 oC on Saturday's walk. A layer of cirrostratus was also reported, as a halo was seen around the sun. The visibility had increased to over 20km as the Isle of Wight could be seen, an indication that the air mass originated over the ocean. <heading>5.3. Radiosonde launches</heading>Two radiosondes were launched on Sunday 29 th at 0930UTC and 1145UTC. The tephigrams for the 1145 launch can be seen in figure 17 (AE). This shows a layer cirrus cloud above approximately 400hPa (7200ft) but little lower cloud, corresponding well with the discussed observations. The profile is also exceptionally stable which would be expected in an anticyclone. As can be seen in the analysis charts for Sunday (figures 4 and 5, A1), the cold front which passed through the region is almost stationary over the English channel and by 0000UTC Monday 30 th, has been suppressed completely. As cold fronts slope backwards with height, the front can be seen on figure 17 as the sonde passed through the 2 air masses: A closer view of the tephigram is shown below, compared to one showing a typical cold front: <figure/>More quantitatively, the front can be seen in figure 17 by a jump in wet bulb potential temperature. This occurred between 600hPa and 700hPa, suggesting the sonde rose into a different air mass at this point (figure 19). The profile for an anticyclone is one of stable large scale sinking. As the atmosphere would sink approximately adiabatically, the mixing ratio is conserved and a tephigram profile would get 'drier' as an anticyclone developed, producing a subsidence inversion. This effect can be seen if the Sunday's two launches are compared (figure 18, AE). This is not an ideal comparison, as the sondes were launched only a few hours apart. For the effect to be clearly seen, a sonde would also have to have been launched late Sunday afternoon. The relative humidity measured by the met mast also started to drop on Sunday (figure 11, AC). <heading>6. Summary</heading>Saturday was characterised with warm moist air that was advected from the South West. This caused mild temperatures, high relative humidities and low visibilities. A warm front passed through the area at approximately 1400UTC. The polar jet stream was also strong and characterised by distinctive high level cirrus formations. Sunday had much clearer stable conditions due to an anticyclone building over Western Europe and a cold front passing through the region early Sunday morning. This led to reduced cloud and excellent visibilities. The front stayed over the English Channel before eventually becoming suppressed by the anticyclone. 