<heading>Introduction</heading>A diesel engine can be run on either mineral oil or a vegetable oil fuel, however the properties of the two fuels are different and so engine performance will differ depending on the fuel used. An experiment was set up to investigate the engine power output and efficiency of a diesel engine, run on diesel and RME (rape methyl ester) - a bio-fuel made from transesterification of rape seed oil. Several different parameters are used to asses the engine performance: <heading>Engine brake power, P</heading>Engine brake power is a function of the torque of the engine and the engine rotation rate:  FORMULA  (1) Where brake power P is in Watts, T is torque (Nm), and ω is engine angular velocity (rads -1), which is related to engine speed as follows:  FORMULA  (2) Where N s is the engine speed in r.p.m. divided by 60. <heading>Brake mean Effective Pressure, P b</heading>This is equivalent to the mean pressure as experienced by the piston that is needed to produce the same brake pressure as calculated by (1). It is obtained from  FORMULA  (3) Where P b is in Nm -2, L is the length of the pistol stroke, A is the area of the piston, and n is the number of working stokes per second. n= N s/2 for the four stroke cycle of the diesel engine. <heading>Brake specific Fuel Consumption, b.s.f.c.</heading>This is equivalent to the fuel consumption per unit of useful power converted by the engine. It is given by:  FORMULA  (4)  FORMULA is the fuel consumption rate (kg s -1), and b.s.f.c. is in kg kJ -1. <heading>Engine Efficiency, η</heading>Engine efficiency or brake thermal efficiency is a measure of the overall engine efficiency. It is the mechanical energy produced by the engine divided by the energy in the fuel input.  FORMULA  (5) Where L.C.V. is the lower heating value of the fuel. A table of the fuel properties can be found in appendix 1. <heading>Air/Fuel Ratio, A.F.R.</heading>This indicates the proportion of air to fuel that is used in the engine.  FORMULA  (6) Where  FORMULA is the air flow rate in kg s -1. <heading>Friction Power</heading>This is the power needed to overcome friction in the engine at a particular speed, and can be obtained from the graph of fuel consumption vs. brake power. <heading>Indicated Power, P i</heading>This is the brake power plus the friction power. <heading>Indicated Efficiency, ηi</heading>This is the engine efficiency calculated using indicated power instead of brake power.  FORMULA  (7) <heading>Exhaust Gas Losses,  FORMULA </heading>This is the energy loss of the engine through heat in exhaust gases.  FORMULA  (8) Where  FORMULA  is in W,  FORMULA (sum of the air flow and fuel flow rates), C p is the specific heat of the exhaust gas (kJ kg -1 K -1), T e is the exhaust temperature (K) and T a is the ambient air temperature (K). <heading>Air Cooling Losses,  FORMULA </heading>This is the energy loss through air cooling of the engine, calculated through use of energy balancing: chemical power in through the fuel must equal the sum of all power dissipated in the engine through mechanical work, heat, and friction losses.  FORMULA  (9)  FORMULA  is in W. <heading>Methodology</heading>A Petters ACI 7.2 bhp (5.4 kW) diesel engine was used to drive an electric dynamometer and a torque meter. Power from the dynamometer was dissipated in an air cooled resistance bank, which could be used to alter the load on the engine. The performance of the engine at several different loads was investigated for both fuels. At each load, the engine speed was set at 2800 rpm, and readings of the fuel consumption rate, ambient air temperature, inlet temperature, exhaust temperature, engine torque output, and air intake rate were made. Fuel consumption rate measurements were made by recording the length of time needed for the engine to consume a set volume of fuel: 2×10 -5 m 3 (20ml). The fuel consumption rate  FORMULA  was then calculated with:  FORMULA  (10) Where ρ is the density of the fuel (kg m -3) [see appendix 1], and t was the time taken (s). The three air temperature measurements were made by use of temperature sensors in appropriate locations. Engine torque was measured using a spring balance attached to a torque arm. The force delivered by the torque arm was calibrated by:  FORMULA  (11) Where F m is the measured force (N). The engine torque was then obtained through  FORMULA  (12) Where r is the length of the torque arm. In this experimental set up, r=0.248m. For the calculation of (3), L×A is equivalent to the volume swept by the piston. For the engine used, this was 3.04×10 -4 m -3. The air intake rate was measured using a calibrated orifice plate. The air passing through the plate orifice into the engine causes a pressure drop which is related to the volumetric flow rate by the calibrated equation:  FORMULA  (13) Where  FORMULA is the air flow rate (kg s -1), P a is the ambient air pressure in mmHg, T a is the ambient air temperature (K), and Δp is the pressure drop across the plate orifice (mm H 2O). The pressure drop is multiplied by a factor of 0.2 to account for the incline of the manometer used to measure Δp. Measurements of cylinder pressures and piston crank angle (a function of cylinder volume) were also made over several cycles at each load, and data-logged. Plots of pressure vs. volume can be used to analyse the indicated power of the engine, as this is the area under the pressure-volume curve. <heading>Results</heading>All graphs show the various engine parameters against brake mean effective pressure, which is a function of the load on the engine and increases linearly with increasing load (increasing engine torque),which can be seen by manipulating equations (1) (2) (3) (11) and (12). P b is therefore a suitable dependant variable. At low loads, the engine has a high fuel consumption proportional to the power that is being output (figure 1). The engine requires more fuel to produce a unit of power at lower loads when it is running on diesel than it does when using RME, however this is only true for small loads. <figure/>The fuel consumption per kJ output falls to a near-steady level at higher loads, and more RME fuel is needed than diesel to produce the same engine power at higher engine loads. The average amount more of RME needed per kJ output is ~4×10 -5 kg. <figure/>Engine efficiency (or brake thermal efficiency) as shown in fig. 2 compares the mechanical power output to the chemical power input. It is clear that the engine is more efficient when run on diesel. The lower brake specific fuel consumption of RME at low loads does not have much of an impact on efficiency, and the engine efficiency is similar for both fuels at low loads. At high loads, the engine efficiency appears to peak for both fuels. For diesel, this is at about 3kW of output, at 21% efficiency. For RME, the peak occurs at 2.7kW with an efficiency of 16%. <figure/>Higher air/fuel ratios mean that the engine requires more air to burn the same amount of fuel. Figure 3 shows that RME requires less air to burn. This is because vegetable oil esters comprise compounds which already contain oxygen with which to burn (HBLVA, 1996). The air fuel ratio for both fuels drops as the engine load increases, at roughly the same rate. The difference between the two ratios is roughly constant at 33. The friction power is obtained from the plot of  FORMULA  against brake power (fig. 4). The value of P where the regression line fit to the data crosses the x-axis is the friction power. For diesel, the friction power at 2800 rpm is 1.89 kW. For RME, it is 1.08 kW; the engine expends less energy overcoming friction when RME is used. The indicated power, P i, is the brake power plus this friction power. Since friction power is about constant at one engine speed, this translates to a constant difference between P i for diesel and RME, equal to friction power diesel - friction power RME = 1.89-1.08 = 0.81kW. So, the power converted by the engine on diesel is always greater by about 0.81 kW than the power converted by the engine on RME at any one load. <figure/>Indicated power is also shown by pressure versus crank angle graphs, as the area within the curves is equal to the indicated power. The volume of the cylinder is a function of crank angle, and so crank angle represents the changing cylinder volume in the four-stroke engine. <figure/><figure/>Figures 5 and 6 show that the area within curves is increasing as the load is increased; the indicated power is increasing with load. The difference in indicated power between RME and diesel is clearly shown; the areas are much smaller for RME. Note the small spike in run 16 near the compression stroke curve - this may be due to premature combustion in the cylinder. <figure/>The graph of indicated efficiency, ηi, (fig. 7) shows the efficiency of the engine when the work done to overcome engine friction is taken into account. In comparison to figure 2, it can be seen that indicated efficiencies are higher than brake thermal efficiencies, due to the friction power inclusion. The indicated engine efficiency at low loads does not approach zero, unlike brake thermal efficiency, again due to the inclusion of friction power. ηi at low loads is high, as the fuel energy is being used to overcome friction. This representation of efficiency therefore shows a smaller range of engine efficiencies, since work done overcoming engine friction is viewed as useful energy output. As before, the engine is more efficient on diesel, with more useful power being extracted per unit mass of fuel. The efficiencies for both fuels seem to peak at medium loads. The range of efficiencies for diesel is 32 - 37%, and 19 - 25% for RME. <figure/>Figure 8 shows the exhaust losses for each fuel. This is the heat energy that is lost through the exhaust. RME has higher energy losses through heat than diesel, so RME must be producing higher exhaust temperatures than diesel, at a faster air flow rate. The hotter the air, the higher its heat capacity, so more heat is lost at higher temperatures. The other heat loss in the engine is through air cooling. The amount of energy lost through air cooling is what remains after mechanical power and exhaust heat have been accounted for. See equation (9). <figure/>RME has greater air cooling losses than diesel. The air volume flow rate is also, in general, higher for RME, and so more heat can be transported away faster than for diesel. The majority of total heat lost is through air cooling of the engine, and this amount increases as load increases. At higher loads, the engine is producing more heat, and air heat capacity increases with temperature, so increasing amounts of energy are lost at higher temperatures. Figures 10 and 11 show the energy balances in the engine. Total heat losses are exhaust losses plus air cooling losses, and the figures show how most of the energy available from burning the fuel is converted into waste energy. Only a small amount of the total energy in is converted into useful power. At low loads, almost all of the energy available in the fuel is lost as waste heat. The energy used in overcoming engine friction is dissipated as heat. It may be that more accurate estimation of exhaust and air cooling losses can be made using the inlet air temperature instead of ambient air temperature. However, since the inlet temperature is only a few degrees higher than the ambient, this only makes a slight difference to the exhaust and air cooling losses. In general, the exhaust losses decrease by about 50 Watts, and the air cooling losses increase equivalently by 50 Watts. <figure/><heading>Discussion</heading>Each measurement was performed at one engine speed only (2800 rpm). A full investigation would require measurements to be made at different engine speeds in order to fully compare engine performance with diesel and RME. One thing to note is that the window of the lab was opened during the experiment, for the duration of the engine run using RME. This reduced ambient air temperatures and inlet temperatures, which may have had some effect on the results. RME has a lower Lower Heat Value than diesel (see appendix 1), meaning that there is less energy per unit mass of fuel. This means that the engine has a higher fuel consumption of RME to achieve same power produced by diesel. However, RME has lower engine friction, since RME is a better lubricant than diesel, meaning that less power converted in the engine is needed to counteract friction. This may be shown in figure 1, where RME has lower brake specific fuel consumption at low loads. RME loses more heat in exhaust losses and air cooling losses than diesel at higher brake mean effective pressures. It is likely that the 'extra' energy from lower friction in the engine with RME is lost at higher loads as heat. RME burns faster to provide same power output as diesel (since it has a lower fuel energy capacity), so fuel flow rates are faster for the engine running on RME, and this means faster air flow rates. However, the air/fuel ratio of RME is lower than diesel for a given load - this may be due to the chemical composition of RME in comparison to diesel. RME is an ester, which contains some oxygen. It could be that the oxygen content already in the fuel means that less air is required for RME to burn. RME has higher exhaust and air cooling losses. It could be that RME burns at a higher temperature than diesel, and so more energy is lost as waste heat. The higher heat losses could be due to the higher fuel consumption rates: more heat energy is being produced per second for RME. Figures 8, 9, 10 and 11 must be viewed as only qualitative representations, since heat capacity of air was only roughly estimated from a table of figures. Figure 7 shows the indicated efficiency of the engine on RME and diesel. There appears to be a peak in efficiency at medium loads, indicating that the diesel engine is best run at medium loads. In conclusion, diesel engine run on the biofuel RME will have a higher fuel consumption rate and a lower efficiency than the same engine run on mineral oil diesel. However, fuels must also be considered in light of their larger environmental impacts, and it is in this area that RME has advantages over diesel. 