Yogurt as a kind of traditional food has a long development history. Nowadays, with the evaporation of food technology, yogurt has been improved in many aspects. The fertility of nutrient and special texture is the main reason for why yogurt becomes a popular food. This essay will briefly introduce the processing manufacture and focus on the evaporation of microbiology of yogurt. There is no available record about the time of origin yogurt, but it is believed that yogurt is an important fermentation food operated by human. The name of yogurt came from a Turkish word "Jugurt" means "a product resulting from milk by fermentation with a mixed starter culture". (N shah, 2003). The processing of making yogurt can be divided into the follow steps:1) preparation of mix(standardization, fortification with skim milk power); 2)homogenization; 3)heat treatment; 4)cool to incubation; 5)inoculation with starter; 6)pack in retail container; 7)incubate; 8)cool. In the following, this essay will give some details about the above steps. <heading>Preparation of mix</heading>Traditionally, people use boiling the mike to increase the viscosity of product. (N shah, 2003) Due to the reason is that by heating the β-lactoglobulin structure opens and expose which is a suitable structure to combine with κ casein protein or αS2 protein to form a new structure which can hold water that is why milk can be fortified by heating.( A.Y. Tamime,1985). Nowadays, with the development of food industry technology, stabilizers can be added into milk to increase the viscosity. <heading>Homogenization</heading>The aim of homogenization is to avoid cream producing during the fermentation processing. Due to the reason that the diameter of fat globules in milk ranges from 1 to 15 μm, with a average of 3-4μm. After homogenization the diameter of fat globules can be 1-2μm by destroy the membrane. In case of lipolysis, if homogenization before pasteurization, the milk must be pasteurized immediately. (N shah, 2003) <heading>Heat treatment</heading>The purpose of heat treatment a) to kill the pathogenic micro-organisms which may be present; b) to kill the majority of other organisms in order to increase the keeping quality; c) to in activate naturally occurring enzymes.(J L. Rašic 1978) <heading>Cool to inoculation with starter</heading>This step is most important to yogurt manufacture processing. Cool the temperature to 42° in which temperature is suitable for microbiology growth. The first bacteriological study of yogurt was in 1905. Until 1974, Bergey, D.H gave the classification of microbiology in yogurt in two separate families, the Streptococcaceae and the Lactobacillaceae. With the development of research, the growth association between the two organisms (S. thermophilus and L. bulgaricus) of yogurt starter culture is termed a symbiosis. Pette and Lolkema (1950) indicated the rate of acid development was greater when mixed yoghurt cultures of S. thermophilus and L. bulgaricus were used as compared with the single strains .(Pette,J.W. 1950) By Tamime (1977) indicated the rate of acid development % lactic acid of L. bulgaricus after 8 hours incubation is 0.55 % and the rate of S. thermophilus develop lactic acid reached 0.7 %. But the mixed culture is more effectively which reached 1.2 %. The discussion about the symbol lasts many years. Bautista, Dahiya and Speck (1966) also investigated a theory about this phenomenon. They hold the point that S. thermophilus and L. bulgaricus by releasing gliding and histidine in to the growth medium and the histidine played a more important role than valine. The discussion did not stop, with the more research scientists did, the more theories about the symbiosis had been found. People began to observe the active of microbiology to explain the symbiosis phenomenon. According to Bottazzi with his colleagues (1971) found that the presence of formic acid which was considered as a stimulatory in milk can improve the ratio of rods to cocci at concentrations between 30 and 50 γ/ ml. So conclude the above findings, the release of stimulatory factors by yogurt starter cultures occur during the incubation period, and the factors can accelerate the rate of producing lactic acid effectively. In most fermenting processing, temperature should not be ignored. Suitable temperature can keep the ratio of ferment in a high level. Most microbes have different suitable growth temperature. In yogurt industry, the S. thermophilus and L. bulgaricus as the important microbe also have different suitable temperature. In 1977 Tamime, A.Y found the rate of acid development of S. thermophilus and L. bulgaricus increase with increase in incubation temperature up to the maxima of 40° and 45° respectively. And he recommended that , in order to maintain and / or achieve a ratio of 1:1 between S. thermophilus and L. bulgaricus, the organisms should be propagated to together at 42° using a 2% inoculation rate. (Tamime,A.Y,1977) <heading>Pack in retail container, incubate, and cool</heading>The followed step is package the yogurt and keeps the product's quality without spoilage. The equipment of manufactory should be hygiene to prevent foreign object attach the products. The kind of yogurt should decide the package methods. To keep the flavor of yogurt, the way of store, transport also should be considered. To sum up, the delicious and nutrient yogurt has to be produced during long producing process. With the development of food industry, people become more and more understand the theory of milk ferment and more and more use those theories to add the flavor and change the texture of yogurt. In the future, people will using the knowledge to produce more delicious and more nutrient yogurt. 