One way to determine the wholesomeness of the population is the dietary survey which reflects their energy and nutrients intake. The recent survey on the students at  (86 students aged 18-38 years old: 23 males and 63 females) during the first week of the autumn term of the 2006/2007 academic year, using the Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) method, revealed the following data. Despite their normal total energy intake, the saturated fatty acid intake of both men and women (15% and 12% of the total energy, respectively) is higher than the guided value 10% whereas the polyunsaturated fatty acid intake was more or less reached. Females rather than males seemed to have eaten enough carbohydrate (~48% of total energy intake) while protein intake in most of the students was more than enough to keep them from deficiency. All minerals intake statuses were fine in males except sodium and selenium. Excessive sodium intake was nearly double the amount they should have eaten (~1,300 mg more) while there were some that did not get enough selenium. The problem seemed to lie in female intake since only sodium, calcium, phosphorus, zinc and iodine were adequately eaten. None of the female subjects reached the guidelines for potassium and most of them did not get enough magnesium and copper from their diet. Some might get only half the amount of selenium they should be receiving while the iron intake too was not adequately eaten (10.2 compare to 14.8 mg/d). <table/>Vitamin A deficiency is unlikely to occur since the high carotene intake could provide a substantial amount of vitamin A by converting to retinol in the bodies, compensating the low retinol intake (483 and 263 mg/d for male and female, respectively). Little risk of vitamin E deficiency is expected since the intake amount exceeded the amount that would prevent such condition. Thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6 and B12, vitamin C and folate were consumed in the amount more than enough to prevent from any risk of deficiency. For pantothenic acid and biotin, the intake of both nutrients lied within the safe ranges of 3-7 and 10-200 μg/d, respectively. Alcohol consumption in both men (24.1 g/d) and women (15.7 g/d) were higher than the average UK intake (22 and 9 g/d, respectively). But the actual consumption of university's students is likely to be higher. From table 1, phosphorus is the maximum minerals eaten by both men and women. The high amount of intake probably due to the fact that phosphorus exists in virtually all foods especially in dairy products, cereals and vegetables, and meats (20-30%, 25-35%, 25-35% of daily phosphorus intake, respectively). High phosphate food, i.e. processed foods and the carbonated soft drinks consumed by teenagers could significantly increase their phosphorus intake. About 60-70% of dietary phosphorus intake is efficiently absorbed at the small intestine. Approximately 85% of phosphorus in our bodies exists in the bone where it forms a complex with calcium, giving bone rigidity and strength. The remaining is in the soft tissues and blood as phospholipids, phosphoproteins, nucleic acid and as part of the energy-rich compounds associated in our metabolism. Deficiency is rare since phosphorus occurs in most food and body can increase the absorption and decrease the excretion rate accordingly. But excessive level of phosphorus in plasma could contributes to the reduction in bone mass by increasing the parathyroid hormone level which in turn promotes the resorption of calcium from the bone. However, this is likely to occur only when calcium intakes are low which apparently not the case in this survey. After all, most of the students had enough nutrients to keep their body healthy and away from diseases. No nutrients appeared to be over consumption to cause the adverse effect. Even though the results were not 100% accurate and tended to be overestimated as they rely on the individuals' report of their food but FFQ is considered an appropriate method for dietary assessment for such a large number of respondents and in a short period of time. 