<heading>1. Introduction</heading>This report summarises the weather observed during the 2006 "Experiencing the Weather" field weekend. The following datasets were gathered over the weekend and shall be referenced throughout the report: <list>Measurements taken by students using hand-held instruments;Data from an automated mast at Durlston Head;Data from an automated weather station at Leeson House;Radiosonde data from launches at Durlston Head;Synoptic charts and satellite imagery provided by Ross Reynolds.</list>The weekend was held near Swanage, Dorset in southern England (see Appendix 1 for map), between Friday 27/10/06 and Sunday 29/10/06. All times given are in UTC, so as to correspond with synoptic charts and satellite imagery. <heading>2. Surface Observations: Walk and Mast Data. </heading>Five groups of students undertook walks within the study area, taking meteorological observations at regular intervals. On the Saturday morning, a group led by Giles Harrison walked from Durlston Head to Leeson House, via Dancing Ledge (see map, Appendix 1). The observed temperature and humidity data are plotted in figure 1. <figure/>The most striking feature of the temperature graph is the marked drop in the dry bulb temperature (-0.8°C), rise in the wet bulb temperature (+0.8°C), and the resulting increase in relative humidity (+9%) that occurs between the 0800 and 0830 readings. The corresponding time series for the automatic weather station at Leeson House (fig 3.a) and the automated mast at Durlston Head (fig 3.b) do not show such a signal. <figure/>This suggests that the fall in air temperature and the rise in relative humidity observed was not the result of any sudden atmospheric phenomena as it was not captured by either of the automated masts. The 0800 readings were taken at Leeson House, and the 0830 readings at Durlston Head. It would seem that the different observation locations are responsible for the change displayed in the data. This would therefore suggest that the coastal site (Durlston Head) was slightly cooler and more humid than the inland site (Leeson House). Reconsidering figure 3, it would seem that Durlston Head experiences a smaller temperature variation throughout Saturday 28/10/06 than Leeson House. These observations may indicate the thermal 'damping' effects of a large water body (in this case, the English Channel). Water has a greater heat capacity than land, thus it gains and loses heat at a slower rate than the land. Therefore, measurements made inland can be expected to show a greater diurnal temperature variation than measurements near large water bodies. However, it should be noted that this signature within the data may result from the use of incomparable instruments at each site, or even the specific siting of each instrument. It is interesting to note that this does seem to be a general effect, with temperature data gathered by groups on coastal walks (figure 1) showing less variation than the Leeson House measurements (figure 3a). <figure/>Another interesting feature reflected in some of the walk data is the drop in air temperature at about 1400 on Saturday 28/10/06 (figure 4). It should be noted that the data in figure 4 was taken at the same location from 1330 onwards, so the effect of temperature varying with elevation or location can be discounted. This drop in temperature, of approximately 1°C is also present in the Leeson House and Durlston Head mast data (figure 3). It is possible that this is due to the passing of the trailing cold front belonging to the weak frontal system shown just to the south west of the UK in the 0600 analysis chart for 28/10/06 (Appendix 2b). This would introduce slightly cooler air into the study area, as reflected by the temperature data. This system also appears to slightly reduce the air pressure on Saturday 28/10/06 (figure 5). The pressure appears to rise again as the high pressure systems reassert themselves early on Sunday 29/10/06 (Appendix 2c), just prior to the end of the pressure observations. <figure/>Figure 6 shows the data gathered by the group led by Ken Spiers. This group took an inland route from the Isle of Purbeck Golf Club to Leeson House (Appendix 1). Although the readings cover a shorter period of time than for other groups, there is an interesting phenomenon captured by this group's observations. <figure/>Of particular interest is the coincident drop in temperature and pressure and subsequent recovery that occurs in this data. This signal is not found in any other dataset. The route taken by this group was unique in that it crossed a large ridge (Appendix 1). Closer inspection of the data reveals that the lowest pressure and temperature readings were made at the highest elevation (~200m above sea level), as would be expected. The subsequent rise in temperature and pressure coincides with the group's descent from the ridge on the approach to Leeson House. Although other groups experienced temperature and pressure fluctuations associated with changes in elevation, none were as marked by such a large range in altitude. It is also interesting to note that the humidity is highest at the greatest elevation, likely due to the group being closer to the low cloud base at this point <heading>3. Vertical Atmospheric Profiles: Radiosonde Ascents. </heading>Each group launched a radiosonde from Durlston Head during the weekend. An additional launch was undertaken by the Department of Meteorology staff on Friday 27/10/06. It is immediately obvious from all the tephigrams (figures 7, 9, and 10) that the atmosphere was generally stable throughout the weekend, thus convective uplift would have been inhibited. This is reflected in the observed cloud patterns, dominated by stratus on Saturday 28/10/06 and high-level clouds on Sunday 29/10/06, and with minimal occurrence of cumulus throughout the weekend. The tephigram for Friday 27/10/06 (figure 7) shows a reasonably constant air temperature between 900 and 800 hPa (approx. 1-2km). There is also a region of low relative humidity between 950-600 hPa (500m - 4km). This would suggest that there is little low and mid-level cloud present during the radiosonde ascent. Comparison with radiation data from the Durlston Head mast (figure 8) and satellite imagery (Appendix 3) confirm this suspicion. The inversion at ~250 hPa (~10km) in the tephigram suggests that this is the level of the tropopause. This feature is not visible on the other ascents carried out during the weekend (figures 9 & 10). A lower tropopause on 27/10/06 would imply higher pressure on this day. This is confirmed by the pressure data recorded by the Leeson House mast (figure 5). It is therefore valid to suggest that the pressure drop during the evening of 27/10/06 is associated with the vertical expansion of the troposphere. The frontal system that moves through the area on Saturday 28/10/06 is forcing warm air upwards, thus raising the height of the tropopause relative to the Earth's surface in this region. <figure/>The tephigrams for Saturday 28/10/06 (figure 9) show a generally moister profile. The sky was obscured by low stratus clouds throughout the day, as observed by all students whilst on the walks. Both tephigrams suggest a low lifting condensation level, and thus low cloud bases. This is also consistent with observations, which generally estimated the cloud bases to be ~600m-700m. The field calculations used an approximate lapse rate (6K/km) for ease of calculation, and hence slightly overestimated the cloud base heights. The later tephigram also suggests that the cloud base rises slightly throughout the day, as noted by the field observations. It is interesting to note that the observations of improved visibility seem to coincide with the lifting of the cloud base. <figure/><figure/>Since the cloud is not convective, as established by the stable atmospheric conditions and field observations, it must be formed by frontal mechanisms. The synoptic chart for 28/10/06 at 0600 (Appendix 2b) shows a frontal system to the south west of the UK. It is possible that the stratus observed throughout 28/10/06 was associated with this system. The warm air flowing from the south west would have been forced over the surrounding cooler, denser air, thus providing the vertical lifting mechanism. The observed stratus clouds may have been caused by the associated warm fronts, whose shallow gradients would have resulted in condensation over a wide area causing complete obscuring of the sky. This scenario is consistent with the observations and the surface analyses. <figure/>It is interesting to note that no passing warm front (indicated by a rapid temperature rise) is detected by the automated masts (figure 3). This would suggest that the warm fronts passed close to the study area, but did not actually pass across it. However, a small drop in temperature is recorded between 1400 and 1500. As previously mentioned, this suggests that the cold front of the system did pass over the study area. Given the relatively small temperature drop, and lack of any associated rainfall, it would seem that this is a very weak front, with low temperature contrast between the two air masses. The tephigram of 1502 suggests the presence of such a feature, as indicated by an inversion at ~950mb. This may be the signature of a warm air mass being undercut by a cooler one, as occurs at fronts The tephigram for 29/10/06 (figure 10) shows the lower atmosphere to be less humid than the preceding day. Some cloud is present, in the form of cumulus (probably formed by the second passing cold front - see chart) as well as high-level clouds (cirrus, cirrostratus - see Appendix 3). The tephigram does not suggest the presence of such clouds. This is most likely due to the vertical resolution with which it was plotted (50 hPa). Any variation over smaller pressure scales will be overlooked at this resolution, and this effect will become more severe with increased height. The high level clouds observed are typically associated with a distant warm front. In this case, this would be the warm front to the south of Ireland at 0000 (Appendix 2c). <heading>4. Conclusions</heading>The weekend was dominated by a high pressure system, with the passing of a weak frontal system on Saturday (28/10/06). The weather was relatively warm throughout, mainly due to a dominant south-westerly airflow drawing warm air from lower latitudes. There was little cloud on Friday (27/10/06), but almost complete cloud cover on Saturday, associated with the weak frontal system moving over the English Channel. The trailing cold front of this system appeared to pass over the study area between 1400 and 1500 on Saturday. Sunday (29/10/06) was clearer than Saturday, and there was evidence of another frontal system approaching. Interestingly, the pressure appeared to rise early on Sunday (figure 5), perhaps as the region of high pressure over France began to extend north-westwards (Appendix 2c). 