<heading>1. Introduction </heading>Second Language Acquisition (SLA) can be defined as the process by which "people learn a language other than their mother tongue, inside or outside of a classroom" (Ellis, 1997: 3). Describing and explaining how people acquire a second language is a fascinating challenge for researchers in many disciplines, not only from a theoretical point of view but also from a practical one. For instance, a deep understanding of learning mechanisms can assist teachers in adopting the efficacious methodology, or it can help learners in developing effective strategies for learning a second language. In approaching this question, I shall be focusing on the role of input, output and formal instruction according to the main theories on acquisition, relating them to my experience of learning Persian and pointing out the main reasons that led me to a failure in mastering the target language. <heading>2. Different views of the role of input, output and formal instruction</heading><heading>2.1 The role of input and interaction</heading>The role of input is of crucial importance in understanding the process of second language acquisition. Many theories during the decades evaluated this variable and considered the efficacy of the information given to the learner. Researchers' first attempt was to construct a model to explain systematically the nature of a child's first language acquisition, but sooner they extended their interests to adult second language learning assuming, sometimes quite carelessly, direct global analogies between first and second language acquisition (Brown, 1994). The first approach I would like to introduce is known as behaviourism. This theoretical position conceives language learning as a process of habit formation, which is environmentally determined and controlled from the outside through a stimulus-response conditioning. Learners imitate models of language, producing responses which receive positive reinforcement if they are correct and negative reinforcement if they are incorrect. The attention is put on observable data (i.e. the input received by the learner and the learner's own output), while no account is taken for what happens in the learner's mind. In other words, for behaviourists "the environment is all, and the role of the organism is considered insignificant" (Johnson, 2001:43). As a reaction to the behaviourist approach, which provided inadequate explanations to certain phenomena, an opposite theory emerged. The mentalist (or rationalist) theory claims that human beings are equipped with a language acquisition device (LAD), an innate faculty which is responsible for the language acquisition process. This genetically inherited faculty is regulated by pre-existing properties: the principles, which are 'wired in' to the brain and the parameters, which can be set in a way or another depending on the language. Whereas for behaviourists, the environmental input is everything, in the mentalists' view linguistic competence cannot be acquired from social interaction or from imitation of the sentences heard (the so called 'poverty-of-the-stimulus argument'). External samples of language are needed only to show how principles are instantiated and to trigger particular parameter settings on which knowledge of language can be built (Johnson and Johnson, 1998). Within the mentalist/rationalist framework of SLA studies, other theories developed during the 1980s, acknowledging the importance of both input and internal language processing. Krashen's 'monitor model' is a complex theory based on the distinction between acquisition and learning, the former being responsible for a creative construction process, the latter being only a secondary process of monitoring the output (sometimes occurring after the performance as a self-correction). The strongest part of Krashen's theory is the Input Hypothesis, which claims that humans acquire language by receiving comprehensible input. In particular, learners move forward in the acquisition process by being exposed to comprehensible input which contains structures that are a bit beyond their current level of competence ("we move from i, our current level, to i +1, the next level along the natural order, by understanding input containing i +1" - Krashen, 1985: 2). Comprehensible input is "the essential ingredient for second-language acquisition" (Krashen, 1985: 4), but it is not a sufficient condition. Krashen's model acknowledges the existence of an 'affective filter' (the Affective Filter Hypothesis) which can act as a mental block preventing the input from reaching the LAD. When the filter is 'down' (i.e. the acquirer is confident with the language, she considers herself member of the group, she is not anxious, etc) acquisition is successfully achieved. Michael Long and other interactionist theorists still consider comprehensible input necessary for language acquisition, but they go one step further in their investigations, pointing the attention to conversational interaction and its role in second language acquisition (Long, 1996; Gass, 2003). According to the Interaction Hypothesis, conversations between native speaker and non-native speaker or between non-native speakers with different level of proficiency involve a process called 'negotiation of meaning', which is an adjustment affecting the input (linguistic form, conversational structure, message content) in order to achieve an acceptable level of understanding. Moreover, interactional adjustments imply an increment in frequency and salience of target forms, which are more likely to be noticed by the learner. In general, "the increased comprehensibility that negotiation brings helps reveal the meaning of new forms and so makes the forms themselves acquirable" (Long, 1996: 452). Another component needs to be taken into consideration during the acquisition process through interactional input. In order to progress in their learning of the second language, learners need to switch their attentional focus from message to form, identifying mismatches between target language forms and learner-language forms. Attention, awareness and noticing are thus fundamental mechanisms for extracting items from linguistic input and storing them in long-term memory, i.e. making progress in second language learning and acquisition. <heading>2.2 The role of output</heading>In the previous section of the essay, I partly considered output as learner-language forms produced during the interaction and I discussed its role together with input in the process of negotiation of meaning. In this part of the discussion, I would like to focus more on how output can be effective in second language learning and acquisition. Swain (1985, 1995) argues that output plays a crucial role in the development of a second language and that it is not just a means of practising already existing knowledge or a way of enriching input. For this reason, she introduced the notion of comprehensible output as the need for a learner to be "pushed toward the delivery of a message that is not only conveyed, but that is conveyed precisely, coherently, and appropriately" (Swain, 1985:249). She bases her 'output hypothesis' on the idea that understanding language and producing language are different skills. Through language production learners are stimulated "to move from the semantic, open-ended, non-deterministic, strategic processing prevalent in comprehension to the complete grammatical processing needed for accurate production. Output, thus, would seem to have a potentially significant role in the development of syntax and morphology" (Swain, 1995: 128). Producing language is acknowledged to serve several functions in second language acquisition (Swain, 1995; Gass and Selinker, 2001). As far as fluency is concerned, a sensible improvement is noticed through practicing, while concerning accuracy three functions of output have been suggested. The first one is the 'noticing/triggering' function, which refers to the role of output in raising consciousness in learners about the gaps in their knowledge of the target language. Moreover, noticing can also trigger cognitive processes that generate new linguistic knowledge or consolidate the existing one. The second function is the 'hypothesis testing'. The production of output is a way of testing hypotheses about the comprehensibility or the well-formedness of new structures. The hypothesis testing 'strategy' is made evident by the fact that learners modify their output after receiving instances of negative feedback, such as clarification requests or confirmation checks. Self-correction is another piece of evidence. The third function of output is a metalinguistic one. Learners reflect upon language making hypotheses on how something should be said or written. Swain (1995) recognizes in this linguistic behaviour a particular kind of negotiation which she defines as 'negotiation of form', since the topic of the discussion is the language itself. The output produced through collaborative dialogue supports learners in outperforming their competence and in developing their interlanguage (Donato (1994) talks of 'collective scaffolding'). Thus, reflecting on output will result in language learning. <heading>2.3 The role of instruction</heading>Another important aspect to consider in SLA studies is the role played by formal instruction in the learning process. A first distinction between 'form-focused instruction' and 'meaning-focused instruction' needs to be made. The former refers to "any planned or incidental instructional activity that is intended to induce language learners to pay attention to linguistic form" (Ellis, 2001: 1); the latter emphasizes the need to provide learners with real communicative experiences without any direct teaching of grammar (Ellis, 1997). Here, I shall concentrate on form-focused instruction trying to outline a classification and to point out links between research and pedagogy. Three different types of form-focused instruction have been proposed (Ellis, 2001; see also Long and Robinson, 1998): 1-Focus-on-FormS; 2- Planned Focus-on-Form; 3-Incidental Focus-on-Form. In the first approach, the target language is treated as an 'object' and it is presented as a series of pre-selected grammatical items that the learners are required to focus on. The process of acquisition is conceived as a gradual accumulation of rules until the whole structure of the language is completed. The learning process can either have the form of explicit instruction, deductively or inductively addressed to learners, or it can follow an implicit pattern with a total absence of awareness of what is being learned. This approach is evident in traditional grammar teaching based on a synthetic syllabus and it is mainly directed at language production, creating opportunities for learners to practice the target structure. However, an alternative instructional method involves structured input, which is specially designed to draw learners' attention repeatedly on a preselected linguistic feature. Planned Focus-on-Form instruction still relates to both input and production, but this time the primary focus is on meaning rather than form. This kind of instruction makes use of enriched input, which like structured input consists of a large amount of exemplars of the target language. Learners are required to respond to the content of the input through tasks which are communicative in nature, in order to induce noticing of the target form in the context of meaning-focused activities. Furthermore, focused communicative tasks elicit the production of a specific target feature and facilitate its incidental acquisition. The third type of form-focused instruction accounts for incidental focus-on-form, which can arise either because of a problem of communication or because of the occurrence of a form which is perceived as problematic. In these cases, the attention of the learner (or the teacher) switches from the meaning-focused communicative activity to features of the linguistic code. This process of noticing is triggered by the negative evidence (feedback) provided by teachers in response to learners' errors. In particular, it is implicit negative feedback, in the form of recasts or request of clarification, which seems to enhance noticing and assist the acquisition process. As it is clear from the brief description above, form-focused instruction plays an important role in second language learning and acquisition, especially from a pedagogic point of view. Indeed, studies on this topic can be very useful for the developing of effective materials and supports which will assist teachers in educational activities. <heading>3. Comments on a learning experience: the Persian language</heading>In this last section of the essay, I shall be describing my learning experience of the Persian language, trying to relate it to the theoretical framework presented above. The value of input, output and formal instruction will be evaluated and the main reasons of failure in mastering the target language will be outlined. The learning experience has been developed on a period of ten weeks and it has been almost entirely based on self-study through a guided textbook and audio cassette. Three additional one-hour sessions of classroom practicing with a native speaker have been scheduled. <heading>3.1 The textbook</heading>The first issue I would like to concentrate on is the textbook, describing the overall organization and assessing its effectiveness in meeting the learners' requirements. The book is divided into sixteen units; each of them is focused on a different communicative task, which is brought in by an introductive dialogue available both as a text and on the tape. Four different kinds of input underlying different aspects of the language are available in each chapter: dialogues, linguistic information (phonetics, morphosyntax, and pragmatics), lists of words (vocabulary), and exercises. The dialogues, which appear at the beginning, in the middle and at the end of the unit are especially useful for the learner and serve different functions. The first dialogue aims at introducing the topic and it is an example of positive evidence that can be valuable for the learner to identify certain structures of the target language. The same is valid for the closing dialogue (Comprehension dialogue), whose degree of complexity is a bit beyond the learner's level of competence in order to facilitate the acquisition of certain forms (see Krashen's theory of comprehensible input). Particularly interesting is the dialogue in the middle (Role play dialogue), in which the learner has to perform the turns of one of the party. The exercise not only stimulate oral production (which enhances fluency (Swain, 1995)), but it also provides the learner with feedback. In fact, the right utterance is given after the learner's attempt and it operates as positive evidence (if the learner gave the right answer) or as indirect negative evidence (if the learner was wrong). This second form of feedback (recast) is believed to be effective in triggering noticing in the learner and in assisting the learning process (Long and Robinson, 1998). Despite this apparent orientation of the textbook towards a meaning-focused approach, a more thorough analysis reveals its strong tendency to formal instruction. A great part of each lesson is dedicated to linguistic information, focusing on various aspects of the grammar and of the pragmatic use of the target language through explicit grammatical rules. Furthermore, the exercises (mainly matching of forms, recombination and 'fill in the gaps') are designed to present and practice single linguistic rules, reflecting the traditional approach of synthetic syllabi. The application of Focus-on-FormS instruction has been heavily criticized, especially by rationalist/mentalist theorists of SLA, although a timid acknowledgement of its positive role under certain circumstances has been suggested - - for example, formal instruction can be the primary source of comprehensible input, especially for beginners who may find 'real world' input too complex to understand (Krashen, 1985); or the application of Focus-on-Forms instruction can enable improvement in oral production, providing opportunity for frequent oral practice (Sheen, 2005). In my opinion, the exercises proposed to the learner are one of the weak points of the textbook. They are primarily based upon grammar translation and heavily focused on morphosyntactic forms and paradigms, without any attempt to improve the spontaneous use of the language and the fluency. As far as I am concerned, despite the frequent practice of grammatical rules, the learning process ended in a mere memorization of formulaic expressions and other chunks of language, as a result of the exposition to samples of natural language contained in the dialogues. <heading>3.2 The interaction in the classroom </heading>The most interesting and effective part of the learning experience has been the conversation in class with the Persian native speaker and other learners. The interaction gave a valuable contribution to my learning process, mainly because it acted as a stimulus to the production of well-formed utterances in target language (comprehensible output). Through the interaction, I could notice structures of the language different from the ones taught in the textbook, especially when comprehension problems emerged and the native speaker reformulated the utterances to enable us to understand (comprehensible input). Furthermore, few cases of collaborative dialogue took place among the students in my group (collective scaffolding). An additional advantage of real interaction is the possibility of feedback. Undoubtedly, positive feedback (in response to utterances successfully produced) and negative feedback (both as explicit correction and as recasts or requests of clarification) played a central role in assisting acquisition. The former contributed to transmit positive feelings about the language and the learning experience, enhancing my motivation; the latter led my attention to certain structures of the Persian language. <heading>4. Conclusion</heading>From the analysis of the experience of learning modern Persian, it emerges that interaction played a crucial role in the process. Conversations among learners and native speakers gave valuable contribution, encouraging the production of comprehensible output and enhancing the noticing of structures of the target language through comprehensible input. Furthermore, the presence of a native speaker was an important source of positive and negative feedback, which effectively assisted learning. Nonetheless, interaction and practicing in the classroom were limited to three hours and the learning experience heavily relied on the textbook. From its part, the text provided samples of natural language through dialogues recorded on audio cassettes, but the overall organization of exercises, based on formal instruction according to the traditional approaches of synthetic syllabi, prevented the learner from developing an autonomous mastering of the target language. 