<heading>Introduction</heading>This paper addresses one of the fundamental objections to Naturalist Moral Realism (NMR). The argument runs that NMR moral judgements do not cohere with practicality requirement of morality and Humean picture of beliefs and desires. The first part of the essay explains the nature of the problem and a possible solution, as argued for by Michael Smith in his book Moral Problem. An important role in this plays his analysis of normative reasons. The second part of the essay evaluates Smith's solution in reference to Brink's and Copp's papers. They try to challenge Smith in various ways. I consider four, in my opinion most influential, counter-arguments. These arguments challenge Smith's analysis of normative reasons; in particular, it seems to ignore a fundamental level of human cognition. Moreover, they question the connection between moral judgements and motivation he defends and the definition of 'full rationality', which he provides. If Smith succeeds in making a link between moral facts and beliefs about normative reasons, and showing that normative reasons and rationality can be beyond reasonable doubt shown to affect how people are motivated to act, we can say that it possible to be a naturalist moral realist without denying that there is a connection between moral judgements and motivation. <heading>Naturalist Moral Realism</heading>To begin with, the paper explains naturalist moral realism. It has in essence three main premises. Firstly, realism believes that there are moral facts. These facts are natural facts. They are determined by circumstances and observable by science. Finally, moral judgements are beliefs about these facts. <quote>P1 There are moral facts. P2 These facts are natural facts. P3 Moral judgements are beliefs that are true when they are accurate to the moral facts.</quote><fnote>Copp, David 1997 'Belief, Reason, and Motivation: Michael Smith's "The Moral Problem"' Ethics, Vol. 108, No. 1. Pg. 35 </fnote>Thus NMR aim at objectivity, objective in the sense that 'it is possible to converge in our moral views." Moralizing in normative ethics has to determine what the objective moral facts are; it supplies us with normative reasons about what morality requires us to do. Moral judgements are based on our beliefs about what we have reason to do. <fnote>Smith, Michael 1991: 'Realism', chapter 35 of Peter Singer (ed.), A Companion to Ethics. Basil Blackwell. Pg. 399 </fnote>At this point, it is necessary to make a distinction between beliefs and desires. According to D. Hume, beliefs represent the world and can be subject to rational criticism. Desires, on the other hand, are about 'how the world is to be' and cannot be assessed in terms of truth and falsehood. Discoveries about the nature of the world, i.e. beliefs about natural facts, have no effect on what we desire. Therefore Hume claims that desires and beliefs are independent existences. <fnote>Ibid, Pg. 401 </fnote><quote>P4 Desires and beliefs have independent existence.</quote>Another feature of moral judgements we need to take into account is that moral judgements also have an influence on our actions, i.e. the practical implications of our moral judgements. It is a conceptual truth that if an agent judges an action to be right, he is also motivated to act accordingly. According to Hume, a motivation requires two things: a desire to act and a means-ends belief. An agent is motivated to act in a certain way if he desires to act in that way and believes that the action in mind is a means to his desire. It follows that when an agent believes that an action A is right, he also desires to A. <quote>P5 If an agent A judges A's B-ing to be right, he would also be motivated to B-ing. P6 An agent is motivated to do a particular action B, if and only if he desires to B and believes that the action A is a means to his desire to B. P7 It is a conceptual truth that if an agent A believes that A's B-ing to be right, he also desires to A.</quote>However, the problem of NMR becomes clear once we consider both objectivity and practicality of moral judgements together with Hume's picture of desires and beliefs. Since the rightness of an action is determined by beliefs about the world, the moral judgement is also essentially just a belief. The problem is that while we might believe that a certain act is right, it is not clear how this belief about the natural facts is supposed to guarantee a desire ergo motivate us to act accordingly. "The Humean picture [in P4] therefore appears to imply that a belief that one would be right to do a given thing could not guarantee motivation, even if we hold "other things equal", since nothing guarantees that the belief is accompanied by an appropriately related desire." Objectivity and practicality of moral judgements seem to be inconsistent in NMR as the former fails to make sense of the latter. <fnote>Copp, David 1997 'Belief, Reason, and Motivation: Michael Smith's "The Moral Problem"' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 35 </fnote><heading>Smith's solution </heading>Now that the nature of the problem of NMR has be explained we can set on to answer the question, whether it is possible to be a naturalist moral realist without denying that there is a connection between moral judgements and motivation, i.e. whether there is any solution to the conflict between objectivity and practicality. It has to be noted that M. Smith is right to assert that practicality of moral judgements is not always the case. An agent does not always have to have the desire to act, even if he recognizes the rightness of the action. For example, clinically depressed or otherwise apathetic individuals can sincerely judge an action right and yet entirely fail to be motivated. Thus a modification of P7 seems to be in order. <quote>P7' If an agent A believes that A's B-ing to be right, were he fully rational, he also desires to A.</quote>Michael Smith "aims to solve the problem without denying any of the three propositions [P3, P4, P7'] by developing a rationalism that is consistent with Humean doctrine." An analysis of normative reasons is the base for Smith's solution to the problem. "The core of the idea is that facts about our normative reasons for action - that is, facts about what is desirable for us to do - are facts about what we would desire ourselves to do if we were perfectly placed to give ourselves advice." In other words, normative judgements tell us what a perfectly rational copy of ourselves would do in the given circumstances. "What we have normative reason to do is what we would desire that we do if we were fully rational." In this sense, they are normative as they tell us what is required to do. <fnote>Ibid, Pg. 36 </fnote><fnote>Smith, Michael 1997 'In Defense of "The Moral Problem": A Reply to Brink, Copp, and Sayre-McCord' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 88 </fnote><fnote>Smith, Michael 1994: The Moral Problem Basil Blackwell Ethics, Pg. 150 </fnote><quote>P8 A has a normative reason to B if and only if a fully rational version of A, would want the A to B and B-ing is an act of the substantive kind.</quote>In Smith's analysis, normative reasons are also practical as they cause agents to hold corresponding desires. "Normative reasons are practical in the sense that someone who believes that she has a normative reason to act in a certain way in certain circumstances will have a motivating reason to act in that way in those circumstances," other things being equal. The core of idea is that if A believes that A has a normative reason to B, if A were fully rational he would desire to B. A desires B in virtue of A's believing that he has a normative reason to B. <fnote>Smith, Michael 1997: 'In Defense of "The Moral Problem": A Reply to Brink, Copp, and Sayre-McCord' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 88 </fnote>Psychological coherence of agents is the basis for another way to understand this connection between normative judgements and desires. "Beliefs about normative reasons, when combined with an agent's tendency to have a coherent psychology, can thus cause agents to have matching desires." In Smith's account, normative reasons cause and therefore explain rational desires, as having beliefs about reasons makes it rational to have corresponding desires. <quote>P9 It is conceptually true that if A believed he has a normative reason to B, were he rational, he would desire to B.</quote>This account of normative reasons also seems to be in accordance with Humean theory about desires and beliefs. Also the theory does not state any constraints on having the desires, i.e. whether they can be held in virtue of normative beliefs. Therefore, practicality of normative reasons coheres with P4 - P6. The last part of Smith's solution is in connecting moral judgements with normative reasons. Given that the function moral facts is "to provide us with objective reasons for acting," i.e. to tell us how we are required to act, moral facts can be analyzed into beliefs about normative reasons. Thus "whenever someone believes that an act is morally required, what they believe is that there is a normative reason to perform that act," and facts about moral requirement are facts about normative reason. For example, if I believe that it is right to uphold my promises, I have a normative reason to uphold them. <fnote>Ibid, Pg. 107 </fnote><fnote>Smith, Michael 1997 'In Defense of "The Moral Problem": A Reply to Brink, Copp, and Sayre-McCord' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 107 </fnote><quote>P10 A's right if and only if A has a normative reason to B.</quote>To put it all together "since our beliefs about normative reasons give rise to corresponding motivations, at least absent practical irrationality, it follows that if moral facts can be analyzed in terms of facts about normative reasons then our belief about what we are morally required to do must also give rise to corresponding motivations, at least absent practical irrationality." This solution accommodates also P1 - P7 as normative reasons are both objective, practical and cohere with the Humean picture. It seems that Smith's solution to the problem is valid. <fnote>Ibid, Pg. 110 </fnote><fnote>"If there exists any normative reason at all then, under conditions of full rationality, we would all converge in the desires we have as regards what is to be done in certain highly specific circumstances." Ibid, Pg. 106 </fnote><heading>Criticism of Smith's solution</heading>The second part of this paper addresses the counter arguments to Smith's solution and evaluates Smith's solution. One way to challenge the picture Smith has drawn is to refute P9, i.e. the idea that "what we have normative reason to do is what we would desire that we do if we were fully rational." The problem with this is that it is not clear whether the normative reason is a pro-tanto (contributing) reason or an overall (overriding) reason, i.e. whether it only applies to overriding reasons or also to pro tanto ones. For example, I can have a pro-tanto reason to keep my promise and meet my friend Joe. If I, on the way to the meeting, see a drowning man, I will have a stronger normative reason to save him rather than keep my promise to Joe. This shows that it is fully rational agent can have a pro tanto normative reason, which overrides a different one. One might understand P9, as "a claim only about overriding reasons and that it says nothing about reasons that are overridden." However, Smith's aim is supposed to explain what moral reasons are. To do this P9 needs to say more about pro-tanto level of cognition in relation to desire. In particular, Smith's solution needs to specify in what sense of rationality I am rationally required to desire what I believe about my pro-tanto normative reason. <fnote>Smith, Michael 1994 The Moral Problem Basil Blackwell Ethics, Pg. 150 </fnote><fnote>Reasons which need to be weighted against each other in order to get the overall reason which tell us which particular action to choose. </fnote><fnote>Copp, David 1997 'Belief, Reason, and Motivation: Michael Smith's "The Moral Problem"' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 46 </fnote>One can further argue that the analysis of normative reasons in P8 completely fails to make sense of the pro tanto level of cognition. In a given situation an agent can have a pro tanto reason to do A, but if A is overridden by a stronger pro tanto reason to B; it would not longer make sense for a fully rational copy of the agent to want him to desire to A. Given the definition of a normative reason in P8, the defeated reason to A ceases to be a reason at all. Yet we can say that we still have pro tanto reason to A. Thus, we can see that Smith solution fails to capture the pro tanto level of cognition about moral requirements. There is also a problem with P7'. P7 assumes that moral requirements are authoritative but Brink argues that moral requirements can well conflict with other requirements of rationality, e.g. prudence, and non-moral requirements can override moral requirements. He has drawn an example of principled amoralist who is indifferent to moral requirements but not because of "a psychological interference with normal process by which results of practical deliberation affect an agent's motivational set," but because of principles he accepts. Thus, he need not regard morality as having authority over other requirements of rationality and yet be fully rational. Even if we make sense of what our moral requirements are, they can just play the role of pro tanto reasons. While it still does not refute the idea of the principle that normative reasons carry motivational power, it does pose problems to Smith's formulation and to the idea that moral judgements need to have motivational power. "Whereas the motivational efficacy of moral judgement reflects that many regard moral requirement as authoritative, the principled amoralist shows us that this assumption is open to challenge" <fnote>If an agent A believes that A's B-ing to be right, were he fully rational, he also desires to A. </fnote><fnote>Amoralist is someone who recognizes moral requirements yet remains indifferent. </fnote><fnote>Brink, David O. 1997 'Moral Motivation' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 18 </fnote><fnote>"To judge that an action of course is morally required is to judge that we would desire to act that way if we were fully rational, where the act in question ' is an act of substantive kind.'" Copp, David 1997 'Belief, Reason, and Motivation: Michael Smith's "The Moral Problem"' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 43 </fnote><fnote>For example, when an agent understands morality as a product of a given society or culture and it is hard for him to see why it has to be authoritative. </fnote><fnote>Brink, David O. 1997 'Moral Motivation' Ethics, Vol. 108, No. 1., Pg. 30 </fnote>Moreover, there is a problem with P8 and the definition of 'fully rational'. It is necessary for Smith's theory to work that he specifies what it means. Two Smith's ideas come to mind. On the one hand, in order to have a normative reason an agent has to be fully rational, which is a "state that we are in when we are immune from reason criticism." In particular, fully rational agent's set of desires has to be "maximally informed and coherent and unified." One should note that this account of full rationality is naturalistic. On the other hand, for an agent to be practically rational, i.e. so that his normative reasons guide his desires, he has to be a "good and strong-willed person." While this is not necessarily, what Smith means by fully rational it is clear that he considers these features essential for an agent to make moral judgements, which conform with NMR argument. This account is non-naturalistic. <fnote>Smith, Michael 1997 'In Defense of "The Moral Problem": A Reply to Brink, Copp, and Sayre-McCord' Ethics, Vol. 108, No. 1, Pg. 91 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, Pg. 91 </fnote><fnote>Copp, David 1997 'Belief, Reason, and Motivation: Michael Smith's "The Moral Problem"' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 48 </fnote>The problem becomes clear once we take a closer look at both of these definitions. If Smith specifies full rationality in naturalistic way, it is not clear whether "by seeing what we would desire in a possible world in which we had a maximally informed and coherent and unified set of evaluative beliefs," we get a morally right set of desires. Smith's definition is vulnerable to an Open question argument. In practice, one can argue that it makes sense to ask whether a Smith naturalistically defined 'fully rational' set of desires is a morally good set of desires. Full rationality need not equal rightness. The problem with the non-naturalistic account is that it transfers Smith's NMR into a covert non-naturalism theory. If Smith wants to find a solution to NMR, he cannot rely on non-naturalist moral realism. Consequently, Smith is wrong to rely on a non-naturalist definition in his solution to the problem. <fnote>Smith, Michael 1997 'In Defense of "The Moral Problem": A Reply to Brink, Copp, and Sayre-McCord' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 99 </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>The nature of the problem is defined by the inconsistence of the three theories. If we keep the Humean picture of desires and beliefs, then moral objectivity, as defined by NMR, is inconsistent with practicality of moral judgements. It seems that in order to be naturalist moral realist we have to deny that there is a connection between moral judgements and motivation. Smith also recognizes the problem. His way out of this is a more sophisticated form of NMR, which keeps both objectivity and practicality of moral judgements but avoids the trap of Humean picture. He makes a very intricate connection between desires and beliefs, which coheres with Hume. The essence of his solution lies in an analysis of normative reasons and connecting moral facts with normative reasons. The resulting normative moral reasons seem to have motivational power required and are objective. While Smith analysis of normative reasons seems to be coherent, there are various objections to the solution. Firstly, his it is not complete as he fails to specify how pro tanto normative reasons fit into the picture, in particular, their connection with desires. In addition, the way they cohere with the full rationality criterion. Yet these challenges need not refute Smith's solution, as they just require further explanation. Another problem is the motivational power of normative moral reasons. Copp's principled amoralist challenges to authority of moral requirements and shows that "a rational moral agent may believe she is morally required to do something without being motivated to do it." Authority of moral requirements is at least an open question. This objection effectively challenges the practicality of moral judgements. If it succeeds then there is no need for Smith's solution in the first place. <fnote>Copp, David 1997 'Belief, Reason, and Motivation: Michael Smith's "The Moral Problem"' Ethics, Vol. 108, Pg. 53 </fnote>The decisive problem of NMR, which Smith fails to solve, is the definition of rightness. Smith tries to avoid the issue by claiming that fully rational set of desires would also be necessarily right. This is not obvious and more needs to be said. Two accounts of full rationality, which I found in his work, can be considered. However, the naturalistic one does not avoid the Open question argument and the non-naturalist one is not a viable option for NMR. Smith needs to find a way around these challenges if his solution is to provide a plausible connection between moral judgements and motivation. 