<heading>Introduction</heading>This paper essentially analyzes just how much of relativism is left when we critically examine the theory in the light of the objections that have been made to it,. The paper thus aims to establish a defensible form of relativism. In particular, I look at objections to and consequently forms of epistemological relativism (ER). The essay starts with clarifying the theory of relativism in general and clearly stating what form of ER is used in the essay. The rest of the essay looks at the objections which can be made to this version of general form of ER. Each objection, and to what extent is it able to withstand the objections which were made against relativism. The objections suggest that ER is mistaken as: it suggests that reality is shaped by our conceptual framework, the thesis of relativism--is true in some non-relativistic sense, the ER collapses into subjectivism and that it cannot evade that there is, after all, an absolute notion of truth. The project aims to refine the theory so that it coheres with our intuitions. This is mostly done by specifying aspects of the form of relativism which have been criticised. The last part tries to sum up what is left of relativism after all objections are considered, and thus preset the viable / defensible form of ER. <heading>Epistemological relativism</heading>To begin with, more needs to be said about the relativist theory. Any relativist theory is a version of the main idea of relativism: "For all X-judgements, some feature, F, of an X-judgement is relative to Y." This essay considers cognitive or alethic version of relativist theory, where the scope of relativism is limited to relativism about truth variable of a judgement. The truth of a judgement is then relative to the conceptual framework of the thinker's epistemic community, which in other words is the domain of the judgement. <quote> (AR) "The truth of any judgement is relative to the conceptual framework of the thinker's epistemic community." (Preston 1992:61)</quote>In other words, whether something is true really only depends on the epistemic framework, ie the concept scheme the thinker has. Truth variability of a judgement then does not only depend on how thinks are but also on what things mean. Relativised truths can consequently tells us something about the epistemic framework. One very useful argument to demonstrate how the theory is supposed to work in practice is the argument from paradigms. One can understand the argument in the flowing way, if one start with different proposition or standards of what counts as a good argument, it is obvious that one will also come to different conclusions. <fnote>R.Harré & M.Krausz, Varieties of Relativism, (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996) </fnote><heading>Objections</heading>One of the fundamental objections to AR, as argued by Whyte, is based on the distinction between what we hold for true and what really is true. AR asserts that truth of a proposition depends on the conceptual framework, i.e. the concepts which one holds. But this contradicts the equivalence principle (EP: "for any proposition 'p', the assertion that p is true if and only if p"), as relativism would grant that people were true about various astronomical theories, e.g. the geocentric model of universe, which then turned out to be false. Consequently, if relativism about truth has an unrestrained scope to which proposition it applies, then a relativist must hold that while geocentric model was true in the times of Copernicus, Heliocentric model is true in our times, which is a blatant contradiction as only one of them can/could obtain. Relativism also needs to make sense of epistemic transitions, i.e. why people decided to abandon believes which were truth. Another incoherence which follows from AR + EP is that since in 14 th century it was held to be true that the earth is flat, then people in that time must have lived on a so called Discworld©. If, as EP holds, reality copies truth and, as relativism argues, truth changes with our conceptual framework, then it would follow that  reality is shaped by our conceptual framework. This, in the light of examples mentioned, seems counterintuitive, as it has inconsistent consequences. <fnote>Whyte 1993 </fnote>What is truth - Kirk argued that "holding a particular belief, or thinking in terms of a particular theory or system of concepts, does not make that beliefs or theory true." It seems that relativism in this sense amounts to coherence with the system of beliefs in question. But "for us to have that system of beliefs is one thing; whether or not the system is true is something else." <fnote>R.Kirk, Relativism and Reality: A Contemporary Introduction, (London: Routledge, 1999). Pg. 36 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. Pg. 36 </fnote>There are a few ways how relativism can respond, i.e. forms that it can take to avoid that this objection applies. In particular, a relativist can question whether the EP applies to relative truths as defined by the ER. While EP seems to hold for truths of absolute nature in certain areas, relativism on the other hand redefines the concept of truth in a way that makes it meaningless to apply EP. As ER subverts the concept of 'true' for 'true for', i.e. "p is the case relative to that person's conceptual scheme", "absolute categories are inapplicable." But for this to be possible, AR needs to limit the scope of judgements it applies to, or at least exclude the areas where EP clearly applies, e.g. physics, which tries to describe world as it is, in contrast to relativist world which is always relative to our framework. Thus a defensible form of ER would hold that p judgement is true in a specific way, namely p true for the thinker if it is true relative to the conceptual framework of the thinker's epistemic community, where this excludes knowledge where EP applies. Aesthetics is an area where ER can be applied without worries about inconsistency. <fnote>J.M.Preston, 'On Some Objections to Relativism', Ratio, vol.5, 1992, pg. 60 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, pg. 60 </fnote>Second objection to relativism, as presented by Putnam, is the charge that total ER is inconsistent or self-refuting. This is based on the idea, implicit in Relativist theory, that absolute truth, i.e. truth that is valid in every framework, is not possible, as any thinker can only / is able to make statements regarding his own epistemic framework. This however leads to inconsistency problem for the relativist thesis. "If I assert that all judgements are only true relative to some non-privileged standpoint, the objection runs, I am implicitly claiming that this judgement--i.e. the thesis of relativism--is true in some non-relativistic sense." The argument is based on the inconsistency of two statements: <fnote> URL  </fnote><quote>A1 There are no absolute truths, i.e., no consistent point of view is more justified or true than any other. B2 It is absolutely true that (A1). </quote><fnote>G.C.F.Bearn, 'Relativism as  Reductio', Mind, vol.94, 1985. Pg. 390 </fnote>The problem of the relativism is that the relativist thesis "is itself something absolute". Relativists have no other way to deny absolute truths but by making a statement which itself has to be taken as an absolute truth. <fnote>Putnam, pg. 121 </fnote>There are two possible ways to respond to this. First, we can try to redefine the concept of absolute truth. A defensible form of total relativism would hold that absolute truths like the relativist thesis itself are possible in the world as painted by relativism. Absolutely true statements, in the sense that they are valid for every framework, are coherent with the relativist thesis / idea. For a statement to be valid / true for every framework, it would have to be true relative to each of the epistemic frameworks. This is possible if the statement is based on a part of the framework which obtains in every framework, this can be called the shared framework in the sense that each shares this part with every other epistemic framework. Thus a defensible form of ER redefines the notion of absolute truth, into truth which is true relatively to the shared framework. This changes the picture form a number of separate frameworks to a web of frameworks which share a common middle ground. While this means that a total relativist thesis does not necessarily have to be self-refuting, a redefinition of absolute truth does not mean that the shared framework is a sufficient base for the thesis. The shared framework, or the middle ground, needs to sufficiently complex so that ER can be told to be true for it. For this to work, we would have to take a closer look at what actually obtains as a shared epistemic framework. The whole project of total relativism would thus rely on being able to asses from one's own framework what holds or is part of another framework. However, it is not exactly clear how we can access other frameworks. Other frameworks might be unintelligible for us, as they might hold different paradigms of rationality. Diverging secure attunements, i.e. "the places where the community draws the limits of rational discourse," will produce differences in what counts as a reason and consequently disagreements, as to what exactly is true relative to which framework. It seems that this project cannot avoid "the spectre of unintelligible complexity." Yet if this can be solved, R would be coherent with the concept of absolute truth, which is the main objection used against it. <fnote>Bearn, pg. 402 </fnote><fnote>Preston, pg 70 </fnote>While supporting the very concept of absolute truth seems to undermine the relativist project, one has to keep in mind that only a limited part of any framework will be the shared framework or middle ground. Thus many areas remain isolated to the possibility of any absolute truth, as all that can be said about these is that a judgement can be true for a particular framework. Further way to respond to the self-refutation objection is by denying the notion of absolute truth at all. This would make the ER thesis true for relativist framework only, which s could make the whole Relativist project less attractive, as relativists seem to have "no prospect of converting anyone else." However, this is not necessarily true. Even if R loses the option to appeal to the notion of absolute truth, it does not mean that "there can be no rational grounds for coming to be a relativist." Relativists can convince non-relativists by "showing inadequacies in their beliefs". This would still require that relativists and non-relativists are able to make intelligible conversations, and have the same notion on what counts as a reason. Thus a defensible form of ER would "presuppose the possibility of rational alteration of belief." This however, among others requires that relativists are able to make a distinction between being right and merely thinking that we are right. <fnote>Preston, pg. 62 </fnote><fnote>Preston, pg. 62 </fnote><fnote>Preston, pg. 62 </fnote><fnote>Preston pg. 62 </fnote>Additional objection presented by Putnam, which based on Wittgenstein's Private language argument, denies this distinction to the relativists. "Wittgenstein denies him the distinction between being right and thinking he is right." In his sense, AR collapses into subjectivism, as his judgement amount to beliefs only, which have little appeal and are self-refuting in the same way as subjectivism. This point is further demonstrated by what Putnam calls 'Garfinkel's one-liner'. If AR fails to present any objective notion of rational acceptability, then there really is no difference between being right and thinking that one is right. If this is the case and Garfinkel thinks that R is false for him then it really is false for him. Any unconstrained form of subjective relativism thus seems to be self-vitiating. <fnote>Putnam, pg. 122 </fnote><fnote>Putnam ,pg. 119 </fnote>However, this does not mean that any form of relativism has to degenerate into subjectivism. A defensible form of ER would have to be constrained a rationalist criterion which would guarantee that a distinction between 'being true' and 'thinking that one is true' can be made. "Objective relativists don't seek to deny that there is objective knowledge, but rather to give an account of what that objectivity consists in." Objective reasons are possible within the standards of the framework itself, as "the application of its standards is objective and does not depend on what people think." The standards themselves are in turn equally justified for every framework, as there is no point from which anyone would be able to assess and judge them according to some objective criterion of rationality. This is based on the argument that all justification has to at some point run out of reason, i.e. reach the "places where a community draws the limits of rational discussion." These limits are not themselves justified, rather "they are matter of training or enculturation." While this seems to make the notion of objective rationality completely arbitrary, it is sufficient to make the distinction between being right and merely thinking that one is right. As for 'Garfinkel's one-liner,' it is by no means clear whether it is in any sense objectively true that relativism is false for him, as all his argument now amounts to is the 'I think that...' and not 'it is true for me...' <fnote>Preston, pg. 63 </fnote><fnote>Preston, pg. 63 </fnote><fnote>Bearn, pg. 402 </fnote><fnote>Preston, pg. 63 </fnote>In addition, Putnam objects that "if statements of the form 'X is true (justified) relative to person P' are themselves true or false absolutely, then there is, after all, an absolute notion of truth (or of justification) and not only truth-for-me, ..., truth-for-you, etc." It seems that Relativism has to concede that there are some absolute truths, as it is hard if not unintelligible to relativize the judgement that 'X is true relative to P'. To relativise the 'true for' concept would be open complexity objections, e.g. Reducito ad absurdum. Therefore to make AR possible, a relativist has to embark on the project of described above. He has to find a way to make some form of absolute truth consistent with relativism without making the relativist project abundant or too complex. A defensible form of relativism would thus describe how or at least whether a shared framework is possible, and whether it is sufficient so that AR can claim that its thesis is true relative to this shared framework. . <fnote>Putnam, pg. 121 </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>So what is left of alethic relativism, or what form does it have to take. The first objection shows that AR needs to specify the relation between reality and our conceptual framework by explaining the concept of 'true for'. This requires that AR limits the scope of areas in which it applies. To avoid the self-refutation objection, AR can either become limited and deny any notion of absolute truths, or try to redefine the concept of absolute truth in a way which is coherent with relativist picture. While the former solution seems to avoid the objection more easily without too much complexity, the latter way seems to be necessary once we look at what Preston calls the "most successful of Putnam's objections." The charge that AR cannot evade absolute notion of truth, the statements that X is true for a person P is itself absolute. Moreover, the collapse to subjectivism can be avoided by imposing an objective criterion of rational acceptability. In this sense, a defensible form of epistemological relativism has to be limited in scope, objective and total (cohering with the concept of an absolute truth) Yet for the project of shared framework to work, a lot more needs to be known about exactly how much of rationality is left in the shared framework. 