<heading>Introduction </heading>This paper takes a closer look at the claim that semantic value of linguistic expression can be analyzed in terms of ideas in the mind. In particular, it looks for a defensible interpretation of the central claim that meaning of an expression is an idea in the mind. The paper proceeds in two parts where the first part gives a brief description of the basic interpretation in the form of Locke's theory of meaning, then discusses central objections to it and looks for solutions which would refine the interpretation and make it more defensible. The central thesis is that Locke's claim is essentially faulty as it fails describe the concept of meaning in its complexity. Any interpretation of the claim will fail as ideas are not sufficient to provide meaning for expressions. Central objections to the claim address the referential problem of the theory for both words as well as sentences. Further objections are based on understanding meaning as a public phenomenon, logical privacy of ideas and intentional content of expression. <heading>Locke's theory - classic interpretation</heading>To begin with, the claim "Meaning of an expression is an idea in the mind" needs some illumination. There are several aspects which will be examined in this part. Firstly, it is important to look at how ideas give meaning to particular words. The classic interpretation of Locke is that words stand for or signify ideas and it is in virtue of this connection that ideas give meaning to words. We use words as markers of the ideas we have and ideas in turn do the job of providing meaning. Locke goes as far as arguing that "words in their primary or immediate signification stand for nothing but the ideas in the mind." (Locke) For example, if I say the word "red", I also have an idea of redness where the word "red" signifies this idea. So there is an intimate relation of significance between words and ideas which serves as the basis for the claim in question. Moreover, we need to look at how ideas can provide us with meaning in the first place. Here it's necessary to look at Locke's theory of ideas where ideas are content bearing mental states. Locke has been associated with the imagination theory where ideas are images or image like mental states, which arise from sensible experience and perceptions. So we have the picture of image like mental states which stand as markers of particular words. In this account, particular names like sunflower correspond to the image of a sunflower where this image is the meaning of the word. Thirdly, we explain communication or use of words in terms of the analysis just provided. Saying something is like expressing our thoughts which can be broken down to ideas, which in turn mark the words we expressed and thus give them meaning. Others take words to be markers of ideas in our minds. Here it's necessary to say something about privacy of ideas. Ideas are mental states and by its very nature logically private and impossible to be discovered or known by anyone else. As a consequence of this we can distinguish between speaker's meaning and hearer's meaning, where the former uses words and makes them stand for his own ideas and the latter also makes the words stand for his private ideas. It follows that meaning on this account is a private phenomenon. <heading>Objections to the claim and possible solutions </heading>One of the objections to Locke's claim addresses the referential problem. The connection or relationship of significance between words and ideas does not hold for all words. While for many words we can think of an image corresponding to them, it is not true for all words. Words like "as" and "then" have no mental images associated with them but we nonetheless considered them to be meaningful. (Lycan 2000: 79) This undermines the claim that all words mark an idea; consequently words can have meaning without necessarily calling an image to the mind. One way to reinterpret the central claim is by changing what we consider as the basic unit of communication (Lowe 1995). While Locke takes words to be the units of communication, it would be easier to defend a view where sentences are the most basic units. Words in turn will get their meaning in reference to their role in the structure of the sentence thus "as" will have its meaning in nature of its role in the sentence where it is used. A defensible understanding of the claim thus holds that sentences alone signify ideas and individual words get their meaning in virtue of the sentence meaning as a whole. Another problem with the Locke's claim is the existence of meaningful sentences that don't get their meaning in nature of an actual idea in anyone's mind. We can think of several examples of very obscure sentences which have never been uttered before but still we would consider them to be meaningful. For example, "Lenin and Stalin enjoyed wearing pink under flip-flops" is highly unlikely to have been uttered before still they had meaning before we uttered them (Lowe 1995) However, once uttered or thought of we also have an idea associated with them. Still the argument can be made that there are sentences are meaningful despite lack of a corresponding idea in anyone's mind. Therefore linguistic expressions don't necessarily require ideas to give them meaning. One way to avoid this criticism is to take Locke's claim normatively (Lowe 1995) and claim that unuttered or not-thought-off sentences should not have meaning as there is none to understand them in the first place. On this understanding, we could say that the sentences don't really matter because they have not been used in communication and therefore don't need to be understood or none needs to explain how they are to be understood in the first place. However, as we are trying to give an account of meaning rather than understanding alone, this line of counterargument is not very persuasive. It seems that there is no way to interpret the central claim to avoid this line of critique. Furthermore, we can object to explaining a public and social phenomenon like meaning in terms of subjective entities like ideas. We hold that words mean the same thing for "for entire community of the particular language speakers,"(Lycan 2000:79) but ideas are subjective and differ for every person. Ideas are a reflection of mental framework and background. Thus we can argue that subjective image like mental states /entities cannot account for sameness of meaning across a particular language community. Therefore ideas won't do the job of providing meaning for expressions without ignoring the public aspect of the concept of meaning. But when we talk about words as having the same meaning we don't necessarily mean that each language user shares the same image. All Locke needs to keep the argument running is that the ideas we have are relevantly alike. Surely, if we consider the idea of a pen, not every member of the community will have the same image of a pen. What we are looking for here is sameness in concept, rather than sameness in Locke's imaginational ideas. To avoid this line of criticism we complicate the account of ideas and allow for concepts rather than just percepts. Concepts arise from reflection of the mind about ideas it has. This way of understanding the central Lockian claim avoids objections based on meaning as a public phenomenon. An additional central line of criticism addresses the privacy of thought conveyed by the theory. Locke argues that "unless a man's word excite the same ideas in the hearer which he makes them to stand for in speaking, he does not speak intelligibly." (Locke) But how can we ever know that speaker's meaning is the same as hearer's meaning if we can only be in indirect contact with other people's ideas. Locke's account of meaning only gives us access to words as sounds and our own ideas which we associate them with. As a consequence, we can argue that we can never be sure that what we mean, the idea our words signify, is understood by the hearer. Logical privacy of thoughts seems to undermine the prospects of successful communication. One way to understand the theory and make it defensible to the last objection is by limiting the cases of meaning he talks about. If we interpret the claim as only applying to speaker's meaning, ie cases where we only give account on how the speaker understand his words then it seems to hold. But surely this is not enough and a theory this limited and unable to account for use of expression in communication looses a great deal of attractively. Thus even if we can make a defensible interpretation of the claim it is not a very attractive one. Another objection can be made once we consider proposition with intentional content. Understanding of some expressions requires communication of intentional content. (Ayer 1991) For example, 'desire to eat chocolate' cannot be accounted for only in terms of sensible images on our mind. Quasi-physical images cannot hold intentional content of thoughts we try to express. Thus ideas alone are not able to account for intentional part of meaning in communication. There is little an ideational account of meaning can do to explain intentional content of our expressions. <heading>Conclusion </heading>In conclusion, several objections can be made to the classic interpretation of the claim that meaning of an expression is an idea in the mind. There are defensible ways to understand the claim which avoid some of the objections. In particular, we can take sentences as the basic units of communication which give meaning to words as some words lack the appropriate idea to mark. However, it seems that not all sentences need to mark in idea in order to be meaningful. Also it's possible to provide a defensible interpretation to the problem based on understanding meaning as a public phenomenon by making the theory of ideas more complicated. However, the claim is ultimately faulty and impossible to defend once we consider logical privacy of ideas and the intentional content of expression. Ideas are thus not able to give meaning to expression when we consider all aspects of the concept of meaning. 