<heading>Introduction</heading>This paper analyzes the Representative Theory of Perception. It starts by giving an account of a general form of the theory and then proceeds with objections to representativism. In particular, I consider the sceptical 'veil of perception' objection, which holds that representativism undermines its intelligibility and that it collapses into phenomenalism. Another objection denies that R represents a common sense view of perception and thus is less attractive as has been thought of. The connection representativism has made between sense data and the physical world is also judged as false. And the last objection refutes the idea that sense data alone can explain all perceptual experience. The objections are also evaluated in light of possible R replies. In the end, I try to make some conclusion about the plausibility of the theory on the whole. The main thesis of the essay is that even though the Representative Theory of Perception has serious weaknesses, it is not the sceptical objections that pose the biggest problems to it. <heading>Representative theory of perception explained</heading>To begin with, it is necessary to give an account of the representative theory of perception (R). Its' basic and a very simple thesis is that what we see resembles the world, as it is. This seems to be quite a common sense approach to explain/identify/analyze our perceptual experience. This is also one of the attractive features of the theory. R could be called the "picture-original theory of sense-perception" (Mackie 1976:37) which implies that we get to know how things look "out there" (meaning how things look outside our mind) by looking at so called pictures of the physical objects. The name of the pictures varies with authors, e.g. Locke calls them ideas or precepts. I am going to use the term sense-data (SD). The idea of sense data was introduced by the Argument from Illusion which aimed to prove that all we ever have direct access to are the sense data. In other words, the mind can attend to the SD only. To understand this better we need to look at the R metaphysics of perception. R works with three distinct parts or concepts. Firstly we have the world of physical objects where each of them has their own individual qualities (E.g. Tomato has the quality of being red and round). Secondly we have the perceiver or the mind, i.e. us, with our sense-perceptual experience to account for. R adds the sense data to this picture. They act as intermediaries between our mind and the external world. In R account they are truthful picture of physical world and their qualities. For instance, if we see a tomato, in reality we are directly aware of a sense data which has the qualities of a tomato, i.e. redness and roundness. In this sense SD have the qualities of the physical objects, which are being perceived (red object -> red sense datum). An important feature of R is that it is an indirect theory of perception. Since all we all directly aware of / perceive are Sense data, the external world stays hidden behind a "veil of perception" and consequently all information we have about the physical objects and external world are indirect and mediated by SD. SD act as intermediaries which stand between us and the perceived. We become directly aware of the nature of objects only through the SD. The existence of intermediaries between us and the perceived has been established by the Argument from illusion, which R relies on. This invites the question about the nature of sense data. At this point, two possibilities, or version of them, are viable. They can be "physical real pictures somewhere inside one's head" (Mackie 1976:42) or "mind dependent in the sense that they exist in and by one's awareness of them." (Mackie 1976:42) Both of these have implication for plausibility of the theory as a whole, which I am going to explorer in the next section. <heading>Objections evaluated:</heading>The sceptical 'veil of perception' objection poses two problems for R. This objection is mainly based on the idea that there is a veil or sense data between us and the reality, which has implications for overall coherence of the theory. The first problem concerns the meaning of assertions about the physical world and heavily relies on verificationism. Since all that the R picture grants us a "direct acquaintance with ideas" (Mackie 1976:55), A. Quinton has argued that this destroys the intelligibility of expression about the nature of physical objects (Jackson 1977:138). Verificationism "requires that a (non-analytic) meaningful sentence be either verifiable or falsifiable." But if we never get into direct contact with physical objects, then there is no way to verify or confirm their truthfulness. Thus one can argue that R makes it impossible to meaningfully express our speculations about the physical world. (Jackson 1977:138) <fnote> URL  </fnote>It seems obvious that a reply to the problem of meaning depends on one's theory of meaning. If we accept the verificationsit thesis, which is by no means unproblematic, then the solution to the problem would depend on whether we can prove or at least justify that the external world exists in the first place and consequently whether our statements are thus verifiable. This issue will be covered shortly. As for V itself, one of it's' problems is that it is self-refuting. If we accept its thesis then there is in practice no way to verify whether it is true and thus the thesis itself is meaningless. Thus objections based on an unsound theory of meaning are bound to have the same problems. If we hold a non-verification doctrine, e.g. empiricist and natural constructive theory of meaning, then the limits on what is meaningful don't exclude speculations about physical objects.(Mackie 1976:58; Mackie 1985:220) As Mackie and Jackson argued, once we drop the verificationist criterion, which is not an essential part of the R theory, then this objection is refuted and R does not destroy "the conditions of its own intelligibility"(Jackson 1977:138) by granting only indirect access to the external world and physical objects. The second problem concerns the justification of R project. Sceptics argue that R is not justified in claiming that the physical objects in the external world really resemble the picture which we get from the sense data in our mind. In particular, S attack R leap from SD to certainty in claims about the indirectly perceived physical world. Surely, just because we can and normally do make direct judgements about the external world, this does not mean that the picture we get truthfully resembles the original. If all we ever directly perceive are SD (as proved by argument from illusion), "how shall the mind know that they agree with things themselves?"(Mackie 1976:39) The R theory is thus vulnerable to a total scepticism, as we cannot be even sure whether the world which is supposed to stand behind the SD exists and whether "sensory states ever represent the objective realm?" (Mackie 1976:52) If this objection succeeds, R might be forced into phenomenalism as reality becomes "a logical construction out of appearances." (Mackie 1976:51) One way R have tried to respond is by incorporating a Causal Theory of Perception into R. Locke asserted that the only possible explanation for our direct awareness or perception of SD is a causal relationship between them and an external world. They "must necessarily be the product of things operating on the mind." (Mackie 1976:39) Thus a world which conforms to the picture of SD is necessary to make sense of our awareness of the SD. This refutes a total scepticism argument, as we have established the existence of the originals for our pictures. But Mackie argued that even if this is true, it still leaves space for a limited form of scepticism. "Causal immediateness introduces real possibility of systematic differences between appearance and reality." (Mackie 1976:44) Therefore, SD still might not resemble how things really are. Another way to respond to the sceptic objection is by appealing to "inference to the best explanation". The best explanation, that is, the one most likely to be correct, is that "the perceptual experiences are caused by and, with certain qualifications, systematically reflect the character of a world of genuinely independent material objects, which we accordingly have good reasons for believing to exist." There are two features which point to the sense-data model. Firstly, "its involuntary character, i.e., the fact that it simply occurs without any choice or control on the part of the person having the experience," points towards causality of perceptual processes, which further supports Locke. Another feature is the "systematic order or coherence of that experience." While other coherent formulations of explanations of the details of our experiences are available (e.g. Descartes evil demon and God hypothesis (see Mackie 1976:144)), "no such rival hypothesis yield nearly so good an explanation of all the details of our experience." (Mackie 1985:220) Also, as Mackie has argued, no one has been able to back up the claim "by actually giving in detail an alternative hypothesis." (Mackie 1985:144) Our common sense also seems to embody a realist view. (Dancy 1988:93) <fnote> URL  (12 of 21) [8/7/02 1:55:26 PM] </fnote><fnote> URL  (12 of 21) [8/7/02 1:55:26 PM] </fnote><fnote> URL  (12 of 21) [8/7/02 1:55:26 PM] </fnote><fnote> URL  (12 of 21) [8/7/02 1:55:26 PM] </fnote>Additional objection to the theory, and to the best explanation reply in particular, disagrees with the idea that R represents a common sense view of perception. The main appeal of R is in the idea that the physical world resembles what we normally perceive. This is an ordinary account of perception, which many take to be true by common sense. However the second feature of R theory, the SD, is not what we normally consider when talking about perception. The idea of perceptual intermediaries and an indirect theory of perception, both essential parts of R, seem to be quite alien to the way we normally understand our perceptions. In everyday language, watching television is understood as a form of indirect perception, but one of the reasons why seeing [something alive] is believing, is because we take this perceptual experience to be direct, while R don't. Therefore R cannot be taken to represent a common sense approach. While this does not necessarily undermine the theory, it can make it less attractive as the "best explanation" available and therefore make the appeal to "inference from best explanation" argument less plausible. Another objection denies that Sense data are able to resemble the physical world, i.e. have the characteristic of the physical objects. Armstrong has argued that "any characteristic that sense impression have is a characteristic that physical object cannot have." (Mackie 1985:139) His argument was based on a false premise that physical objects and therefore also their characteristics/qualities cannot be directly perceived. I want to argue that the conclusion of his objection holds but for different reasons than he suggested. I would like to do so by looking at two possible ways the SD can be understood/described, either as physical causal intermediaries or as mind-dependent entities, and then showing that both of these accounts are ultimately incoherent, which undermines the whole R theory. The first possibility of SD, as "physical real pictures somewhere inside one's head" (Mackie 1976:42), is easy to refute. An example of causal intermediaries are retinas. The problem arises when we consider that R requires that we are directly aware of the SD, and thus perceive the qualities directly. On this account, when I have a perceptual experience of a square object, my SD is also square. But this seems to be impossible in the case of retinas. "My retinas won't be square, since retinas are always curved" (Mackie 1976). The causal intermediaries will not do as SD because they just don't have the right sort of properties. (Mackie 1976:47) Thus it is incoherent to assert that SD are physical intermediaries. The second account of SD, which takes them to be "mind dependent in the sense that they exist in and by one's awareness of them," (Mackie 1976:42) also runs into problems. In this version we don't see objects, but only our ideas of them. R requires the SD to have the same kind of qualities as the objects they are supposed to resemble/represent. But it is hard to conceive that mind dependent entities can have qualities of physical a kind. For instance, if I see a tomato, R would require that I have a round and red idea. This account of SD is thus incoherent and as R fails to produce a plausible account of SD, which would also suit the R theory itself, their whole project seems to be problematic. Additional objection to the theory refutes the idea that sense data alone can explain all perceptual experience. As Hanson argued, there are examples where two persons can be said to have same/different sense data and different/same visual experience. For instance, two persons can perceive a rabbit-duck figure and one judge it to be a rabbit while the other a duck. Thus "it is meaningful to speak of situations in which two observers having indistinguishable visual sense data nonetheless have disparate visual experience." (Hanson 1972:188) It seems that there is more to our perceptual experience than SD only. But this refutes the picture R tries to make, as we can show that "perceptual experiences can't be captured in terms of sense data."(Hanson 1972) The objection proves that there is a degree of relativity or subjectivity about the kind of perceptual experience we get from the SD, which is ignored by R. It can be argued that this is a direct consequence of our interpretative power, i.e. the power of the mind to shape the content of our experiences. It has to be noted that even thought this undermines the representative theory; it does not lead to total scepticism, as all we are able to deny is that SD alone can do the job R wants them to. Even if argument from illusion is true for perceptual experience, SD can still exist. This project invites us to a discussion of more relativist account of perception, where the resulting theory would keep SD, which would truthfully resemble the physical objects qualities. The new theory might allow relativism in interpretation of the qualities. Not in the sense that we the qualities of the SD can be individually interpreted differently but rather that the perceiver can make different conclusion from the sum of the qualities he perceives, i.e. different conclusion about what we perceive on the whole. Such a theory would allow same/different sense data and different/same visual experience. (This might also help to make sense of why crazy people "see" things differently.) Thus it seems that a more sophisticated version of R could cope with the problem, but ultimately it would depend on whether we can make a coherent relativistic version of representativism. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>In order to evaluate the theory I have considered several objections to the theory. Each takes a different approach in trying to refute the Representative Theory of Perception. Firstly, I have tried to show that the 'veil of perception' objection fails in both of its attack. It does not show that R cannot meaningfully speculate about physical object and also there are good reasons which R assertions/speculations about the physical world despite that we are only in indirect contact with them. Yet the theory is not as simple and common-sensual as some of R promoters have argued. This is mainly due to the complications caused by the SD. Sense data are the main weakness of the theory for two reasons. They are a very problematic concept as neither their physical nor mind-dependent version evades incoherence. In addition, SD alone are not enough to capture and explain the perceptual experiences. This is proved by the 'same/different sense data and different/same visual experience' example. While the latter might be solved by a more sophisticated version of R, which would incorporate relativism to account for interpretations, the former, i.e. the concept of SD, undermines the whole project as an essential part of the theory is incoherent. 