<heading>Introduction </heading>This paper aims to establish what connection, if any at all, can be made between truth conditions (TC) and meaning of questions and commands (Q&C). Consequently, we look at whether the connection is sufficient for us to maintain that knowing the truth conditions in question is sufficient for meaning. The paper is divided into several parts. A brief account of the Davidsonian Theory of meaning seems the best starting point as it aims to explaining meaning of all sentences in terms of truth conditions. Furthermore, the theory provides a framework for the rest of the essay. Secondly we examine what exactly is problematic when analysing meaning of Q&C in terms of TC. Consequently, several solutions trying to show how a truth conditional theory of meaning can explain meaning of questions and commands are suggested. We start by looking at ways to interpret Q&C in order to make the TC account applicable. Secondly, we look at the truth-like bi-polar values of Q&C and lastly, we try to use the concept of inference to deal with semantic multi-polarity of possible answers to Questions. The thesis of this paper is that it seems common sensual that assertions made by Q&C are not assessable in terms of evidence or truth conditions and therefore wither need to be interpreted or we need to rely on a different tool to make sense of them. Ultimately TC account is problematic. <heading>Davidson's theory </heading>This section give an account of the Davidsonian project (Davidson 1979) as it argues that "knowing the truth conditions is knowing the meaning." It is a good starting point as it aims to deal with all sentence, Q&C included. The broad idea of the theory is that we can explain meaning of language by accounting for meaning of individual sentences. Meaning of individual sentence is explained in term of their composition or semantic structures. Individual words only have meaning as parts or compositions of a sentence. For Davidson, "providing a theory of meaning for a language is thus a matter of developing a theory that will enable us to generate, for every actual and potential sentence of the language in question, a theorem that specifies what each sentence means." <fnote> URL  </fnote>An important distinction is between object language (OL) and meta-language (ML). The language under discussion, i.e. language which is analyzed is called the object language and the language in terms of which we provide the analysis and meaning of the object language is called meta-language. Davidson's theory provides us with a theorem for each sentence in the natural object language with a sentence in the meta-language which accounts for meaning of OL sentences. This approach does not match meaning as an entity with expressions in questions, but rather the "theorems will relate sentences to other sentences." In this sense, the latter spell out the meaning of the former. <fnote> URL  </fnote>The theorem has the following form: "s is true if and only if p" where s is given in the object language while p is supposed to spell out truth conditions of s. D's theorems match OL sentences with what would serve as evidence for a proposition being true. If the evidence obtains than it entails the proposition in question as true. This brings us to D's reliance on Tarski's theory for analysis of individual sentence for extraction of TC and accounting for compositionality of sentences. As sentence meaning is a function of its semantic structures, Tarski's theory of truth provides the necessary framework to deal with composition of natural language in order to identify truth conditions of individual sentences. In this sense, D's theory of meaning directly relies on a theory of truth for an account of truth conditions. <heading>The problem with questions and commands </heading>This section gives a brief explanation why the TC approach to meaning fails to make sense of Q&C. The theory relies on a general feature of language and declarative sentences in particular. All declarative sentences make a statement which asserts a proposition describing certain state of affairs. We can analyze the sentence to determine what has to obtain for the proposition to be true in other words its truth conditions. However, this approach seems to fail when applied to interrogative and imperative sentences as they don't identify the eveidence which would make them true. The former request information and the latter make a demand. Since questions ask for information about a certain state of affairs we can't exactly ask what would have to obtain in order for that request to be true. Commands also pose a problem for the theory as they demand that certain state of affairs obtains, which again fails to describe how the state of affairs is. It seems counter-intuitive to ask for truth value of Q&C assertions and hence Tarski's theory of truth doesn't help in analyzing their truth conditions. <heading> Possible solutions and comebacks - discussion </heading>The rest of the paper discusses possible solutions to the problem of the theory. One way of thinking about this problem is trying to interpret Q&C into declarative sentences which would be descriptive and fact stating. Davidson had dealt with ambiguous sentences by providing an interpretation for every possible meaning of the sentence and then making a theorem for each of this options. (Evnine 1991) By giving meaning of each possibility, he provided an account of meaning for ambiguous sentences based on truth conditions. If we interpret Q&C in a sensible way we should be able to use the TC approach to determine their meaning where the meaning of the Q&C in question would be a function of the interpretation. For example, "Is the sky blue?" can be interpreted as "The speaker of the sentence wants to know whether the sky is blue." This would lead to the following theorem: "Is the sky blue?" is true iff the speaker of the sentence wants to know whether the sky is blue. "The speaker of the sentence wants to know whether the sky is blue" is a fact stating declarative sentence which can be understood in terms of the TC approach. It also spells out meaning of the question. An example including a command (""Go home!" is true iff the speaker ordered me to go home.") also seems to work as the interpretation/translation approach seems to provide us with translations of Q&C which in turn can be analyzed using the D's theorems. The problem now seems to be that we need to base our interpretation on something. A correct translation or interpretation is a translation which is meaning preserving. (Miller 1998) But if we want to maintain that the translation is correct we need to rely on something to guarantee this. Here we could rely on compositionality again but we still need to make sense of the 'what, when, where etc'. To make a correct translation we need to rely on understanding of the meaning of Q&C in the first place. But we have no way of justifying that our understanding is correct. Thus more is needed to show that a truth conditional theory of meaning can make sense of Q&C. Lycan proposes a different way to deal with the problem. (Lycan 2000) One of his arguments suggests that at least some Q&C have bi-polar truth-like semantic values as they describe a certain state of affairs which may or may not be true. Q&C have bipolar values in the sense that questions can be answered by "yes" or "no" and commands can be obeyed or ignored. Thus they can have positive or negative semantic value. These can be used in a semantic analysis as truth-values. Consequently, we can analyze Q&C with bi-polar truth-like values in terms of the TC theory of meaning. However, this solution does not apply to all types of questions as not all of them have bipolar truth-like values. Questions like 'what, where, when etc' can be answered by a range of answers and thus take a number of different semantic values. Multi-polar questions however cannot be analyzed in the same way as questions with bipolar semantic value. Thus we now need a way to deal with multi-polar questions. Still it seems that commands at least can be dealt in this way as commands can only be obeyed or ignored and therefore can be associated with a bipolar semantic value. One way to deal with multi-polarity of sentences is to accept that there are several possible semantic values a question can take and try to rely on inference to solve the problem. We still rely on Tarski's approach to make sense of fact-stating declarative sentences, but we make sense of question by inference based on the possible set of answers. The meaning of a question and consequently understanding it would thus be a matter of knowing the possible answers to it. This does not require knowing the correct answer. If someone asks us for time we normally have to check our clock to give him the correct answer. We infer meaning of the question as we know the possible answers to it and understand these based on the TC approach. This avoids the multi-polarity problem but only at the cost of indirectly relying on TC approach and introducing the notion of inference which clearly needs a detailed account. However, we still need a tool to identify the correct sets of possible answers so that we can infer the meaning of the question itself. It does not really solve the problem as it is not clear how in particular are to infer from knowing about the set of answer that the question asks for one particular of them. <heading>Conclusion </heading>As I have shown in the first two sections, the traditional TC approach associated with Davidson fails to answer the question of how is that questions and commands have meaning? The ultimate problem is that assertions associated with Q&C cannot be assessed in term of truth conditions. Essentially the problem can be associated with the inability of formal theories like Tarski's truth theory to deal with certain aspects of natural language. The suggested solutions looked at ways to interpret Q&C in order to make the TC account applicable. But even though we can think of translation in the form of fact-stating declarative sentences, we can only base the interpretation on our previous understanding of the question. But this would be circular. Secondly, an analysis based on semantic bipolarity associated with Q&C had a degree of success with commands, but not all questions can be answered in terms of "yes" or "no". And a different strand of solution relied on using the concept of inference to deal with semantic multi-polarity of possible answers to Questions. Knowing the possible set of answers toa question seems to be a good enough inferential basis to understand the question. It is however not clear how a question identifies this set in the first place. An approach based on formal theories of truth try to deal with natural language in a too simplistic way, which ignores that not all of its features are so easily explicable. In this sense, utility of truth-conditional approach is limited to dealing with fact-stating declarative sentences and possibly commands. 