<abstract>48 Simmental x Holstein-Friesians (mean bodyweight 424.2kg) were fed a mixture of grass and maize silages ad libitum (100% grass, 33:67% maize: grass, 67:33% maize: grass, 100% maize) during the finishing period. Crude protein was calculated, and compound feed added to provide all steers with isonitrogenous diets. Once the liveweight of 560kg was reached the animals were slaughtered and compared against the pre-treatment slaughter group of 8 steers. Using ANOVA, there was a significant increase in dry matter intake and metabolisable energy with diets based on maize silage (P<0.001). The number of days on trial decreased with the use of maize silage, by approximately 6 weeks (P<0.001). There was also an increase in daily carcass gain (P<0.001) and killing-out percentage (P=0.05). There was no significant difference in the daily gains of meat or bone tissue between the diets. Fat deposition per day increased with maize silage (P<0.001), with the colour becoming less yellow, and more of a whitish-cream (P=0.004). There was no change in meat colour or pH change with the diet changes. This experiment shows that using maize silage as the main feed for silage produces a higher carcass weight in a shorter time period, with more appealing visual characteristics of the beef product </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>When comparing grass silage with maize silage, maize can have a benefit over grass when feeding as forage to beef cattle. Such examples are that as maize matures, the digestibility remains relatively constant at around 70% as the grain develops. Whereas grass on the other hand, looses its digestibility as the grain develops (Jones, 2001). Another example is that currently the British weather has a sunnier, drier summer periods, which can cause grass to burn and wilt in the hot weather. Maize tends to cope better in this heat due to the plant's origin in Mesoamerica. The use of maize instead of grass can cause different rates of gain in cattle due to the different nutritional values of the types of silage. Figure 1 shows the different chemical make-up of the two types of silage on a percentage basis. The column chart shows that grass contains a higher proportion of neutral detergent fibre compared to maize. This is due to the higher cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin composition in grass silage. Grass also contains lower, or no starch content compared to maize silage which has a high proportion of starch. The lower NDF and higher starch leads to higher intakes of dry matter in maize is provided as the main source of fodder. The high dry matter also ensures that there is a rapid drop in pH when put into silage, aiding the fermentation processes. There is however, a lower proportion of crude protein in maize silage. Therefore, a higher concentrate is needed to supply the same amount of crude protein that is present in grass silage. When contemplating the change to a different feed source, it is best to ensure that the composition and appearance of the final beef carcass will not deter the consumer from purchasing the product, which will cause a reduction in the carcass price. <figure/><table/>A 2004 survey carried out asked the consumer to identify and rate each of the qualities by which they might choose beef products on a scale of 1-10. The results are shown in Table 1. The top priority is that of safety (e.g. sell-by date, and any damages to packaging), which has always been the top selling point in regards to food products. The next four priorities are to do with the preparation, cooking, and eating satisfaction, which the consumer cannot be provided with at the point of purchase. Therefore, the middle priorities on the scale are the most informative decisions that sell the product. The visual characteristics such as the colour of the meat and fat, and how much fat is shown are therefore very important in selling the beef to the desired consumer market. To assess the difference in finishing beef cattle with either grass silage, maize silage, or a mixture of the two, the following method was used. <heading>Materials and methods</heading>Fifty-six Simmental cross Holstein-Friesian beef steers (with a mean start weight of 424.2kg) were split unequally into six pens into similar bodyweight groups. Ten steers were put into four pens, and eight steers put into another two pens. Two random steers from each of the pens with ten cattle in were then removed to form the pre-treatment slaughter group (PTSG). These PTSG cattle were analysed by a full or sample dissection to identify the proportions of muscle, fat and bone tissue present in the thoracic limb. The channel, thoracic, kidney knob, and cod fat depots were also measured. The forty-eight remaining steers were divided up within the pens so that two steers in each group were fed either a whole grass silage, whole maize silage, or a mixture made up of 33% maize to 67% grass, or vice versa. The silage mixtures were regularly analysed, and the average composition can be seen in Table 2. Diets were made isonitrogenous by calculating the amount of nitrogen present in the silage and adjusting using different compound feeds to allow all diets to provide 140g CP/Kg DM. The feed analysis for the compound feed can be seen in Table 3. <table/>All steers were fitted with an electronic tag, which activated only one gate into each feeding trough. This allowed each steer to only eat the type of silage mixture it was allocated, and to measure intake and refusal. The steers were kept in the indoor, rubber mat-based cubicles and were measured bi-weekly until they reached approximately 560kg, where they were transported to the University of Bristol and slaughtered using a captive bolt followed by exsanguination. Once slaughtered, the internal thoracic and abdominal viscera were removed, but the fat depots were left intact, similar to the PTSG. The lean tissue and fat colour were also recorded using a chromameter. The PTSG results gave the estimated start proportions of the final forty-eight carcasses. This allowed a general linear ANOVA to be used to compare the different tissue gains, as well as overall carcass weight and killing out percentage. A significant difference is regarded when P<0.05. <table/><heading>Results</heading><heading>Changes in bodyweight</heading>Table 4 shows the intakes of dry matter. It significantly shows that as the amount of maize silage replaces grass silage, the dry matter intake increases- a mean increase of 1.41kg extra of silage from complete grass to complete maize. The increase in dry matter intake reflects the increase in liveweight gain with an extra 363g of tissue laid down on the steers fed maize compared to those fed on grass. The animals fed on the maize diet reached the desired slaughter weight of 560kg quicker than that of the animals fed on the other diets, especially the steers fed on the grass silage which took, on average, an extra 6 weeks on the trial to reach the target liveweight to be slaughtered. Once slaughtered, the beef carcasses had a linear increase in carcass size with a significantly higher killing-out percentage as the amount of maize increased in the diet. The daily carcass gain of the steers fed maize silage was approximately 285g more than the grass silage-fed steers. These results would indicate that the use of maize silage increases the liveweight and carcass gain of finishing beef steers when compared to those fed on a whole grass silage. <table/><heading>Tissue gains</heading>Table 5 shows the depositions of lean muscle, fat deposition and bone growth over the experimental period. Numerically, there is a negative trend in lean muscle gain as a total gain per day, when the amount of grass silage decreases. This would show that less lean tissue growth occurs with the inclusion of maize silage in the diet. However, lean muscle gain by day increases linearly from a grass to a maize diet. Neither of the sets of results are statistically different. Bone gain as a total approaches significance (P<0.1), but the linear relationship isn't clear. The results show that a diet with complete grass silage produces a higher rate of bone growth, but there is a large drop in growth when a third of the grass is substituted for maize silage. There is then a positive trend as the amount of maize increases. This may suggest the mean value given for the bone gain in a grass diet may be erroneous- and the large standard error may support the proposal. The total amount of fat that was deposited in the thoracic limb produces a significant linear increase as the silage changes from grass to maize. Fat gain per day is even more significant, with a very low standard error, showing that fat deposition is highly effected by the intake of maize silage. <table/><heading>Fat Deposits</heading>There was no significant increase in weight of the channel or thoracic fat depots between the carcasses from the different diets. There was a numerical increase in lipid accumulation in the kidney knob as the maize silage is increased. The main increase in weight was that of the scrotal cod fat depot, which increased significantly. Between diets of grass and maize silage, there is approximately 778g more cod fat in the steers fed maize. Table 6 summaries the results. <table/><heading>Appearance and pH of carcass </heading>Table 7 shows the colour determinants of the tissue types. There is no significant difference to the lightness of the meat or the fat when samples were analysed. There was also no difference in the muscle HUE or saturation- determinants of the colour of the tissue. There is, however, a significant increase in fat HUE with increased maize substitution, making the appearance of the fat less yellow, and more of a creamy-white colour to the naked eye. The saturation of the fat had a significant difference between the diets. However, it is not possible to judge any correlation between the saturation and changes of diet, due to the values fluctuate as the amount of maize silage increases in the diet (Figure 2) <figure/>Muscle pH is also shown in Table 7. The results show that there is no significant change in the pH value of the meat, and between the diets, the values stay within 0.03pH. <table/><heading>Discussion and Conclusion</heading>Replacing grass with maize silage increased the dry matter intake and lead to increases in metabolisable energy intake, daily liveweight gain, and thus carcass gain. This can be attributed to the nutrient composition of maize silage. The reduction of neutral detergent fibre, and increase in starch content, in maize silage leads to an increase in dry matter intake providing more energy for digestion, and therefore, growth- all in a shorter period than a grass silage diet. The energy that is provided to the steers is used for lean tissue growth first, with the excess being stored in the fat depots. Forrest and Vanderstoep (1985) found that all carcasses fed a maize diet received the highest carcass classifications, whereas only 80% that were fed on grass-based silage received the same standard. This supports the results given of a higher carcass weight, and killing out percentage, producing a higher carcass standard in maize-fed steers. The results showed no significant increases in lean tissue between the diets, indicating that the steers were provided with enough energy- with all the diets producing layers of fat. In the case of maize, which is high in energy, a larger proportion was stored in the cod depot. Although higher fat deposition in these steers, the appearance of the fat may have become more desirable to the consumer by the whitish-cream appearance. Knight et al. (1998) found that the carotenoid concentration in fat accounted for 60% of the variation, and not by the fat depth of the depots. Therefore, the low carotenoid concentrations present in maize silage may have resulted in the whiter fat. The level of marbling in the lean tissue was not measured in this experiment. Albrecht et al. (2006) concluded that Holstein- Friesian cows had a more numerous, finer level of intramuscular fat than other breeds of cattle that were studied. Consumers visually prefer both low and high levels of marbling in beef- depending on individual preferences (Killingeral. 2004). Therefore, the amount of intramuscular fat that was present in the meat from this study would still be desired by a certain consumer market.The low bone growth can in all the diets is due to that the steers were being finished-off, therefore were reaching maturity and most bone growth would have already occurred prior to the experimental trial. Any small bone growth would have been in a lateral direction to strengthen the bones of the steer. The experimental results showed no change in the pH of the lean muscle tissue. This shows that the change in diet doesn't result in a loss of glycogen stores that are available to be converted to lactic acid and reduce the pH to the acceptable range of 5.4-5.7 once the steer has been slaughtered. A low pH would have also resulted in the colour of the meat to darken. However, the trial concluded that there was no change in the colour of the lean tissue content. As low glycogen levels would be an indicator of stress or poor nutrition (MLA, 2006), the change from grass to maize silage during the finishing period doesn't affect the well-being of the animal. This experiment believes that where geographically possible (such as southern Britain), growing maize as the main source of silage will give an advantage in carcass yield with a decrease in weeks to finish that steers would have to be on. This would give a higher profit to the farmer, and maintain consumer acceptance of the final meat product. 