The groundnut (Arachis hypogaea) is the 13 th most important food crop in the world, the 4 th most important source of edible oil and the 3 rd most important source of vegetable protein, ICRISAT (2006). Therefore, it is not only of local importance to the countries in which it is grown, but also global importance due to demand for the raw and derivative products. Developing countries account for 96% of the groundnut production land area and 92% of the world production. In the global context, Africa contains 38% of the land area cultivated and accounts for 25% of the total production of groundnuts, ICRISAT (2006). With annual rainfall figures of between 600-1000mm, suitable climate and sandy Alfisols and Oxisols soils, (Virmani & Singh, 1986), West Africa provides ideal conditions for groundnuts to be sown in June/July and harvested in September/October. Labour constraints pose a serious problem to production, as do the plethora of pest and disease problems which threaten yields. The following points will be addressed: <list>Environmental, social and economic factors affecting groundnut production in West AfricaConstraints to growing groundnuts in West Africa Proposals for improving the groundnut agricultural system in West Africa</list><heading>Environmental, social and economic factors affecting groundnut production in West Africa</heading><heading>Climate</heading><figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/>Figure 1 highlights the geographic area of West Africa and also shows the location of the inter-tropical convergence zone (ITCZ), which is an important circulation of air that causes climatic variations around the equator, tropics and subtropics. This circulating air pattern is known as the Hadley Cell, which is a series of rising and falling air masses which create areas of low and high pressure between 30° north and 30° south of the equator (Wikipedia 1, 2006). The basic cause for this phenomenon is known to be linked with the variation in solar radiation receipt with latitude, which explains the seasonal variation of the ITCZ, due to the movement of the sun throughout the year. However there is a lag time of 6-8 weeks. In July, the ITCZ is at its most northerly point and at its most southerly point in January (Dennett, 1984). Figure 1 shows the position of the ITCZ over Africa. In West Africa the movement of the ITCZ results in seasonal rain patterns, which then affect the type of agriculture which can be carried out. In figures 2, 3 and 4, annual rain patterns at three sites in West Africa are shown. Although there are small differences, the general pattern is clear, which is that from November to March there is a dry season where there is little or no rainfall and potential evapotranspiration is also high. For the other months of the year, there is more rainfall and rates of potential evapotranspiration are lower, allowing this period to be the growing season. Potential evapotranspiration is a concept introduced by Thornthwaite (1948), where it is described as the amount of water that could be transpired or evaporated in conditions of unlimited soil moisture and complete vegetation cover. This varies throughout the year with the change in climate, and is known to peak between March/April and October/November in West Africa. ETo values of more than 7mm/d can cause plant water stress which can lead to stomatal closure and a reduction in growth rate (Kowal & Kassam, 1978). <heading>Soils</heading>There is a mixture of soils present ranging from vertisols to ferrisols and ferrallitic soils, but by far the most extensive soil type in West Africa is the ferruginous tropical soil, covering 60% of the region. These ferruginous tropical soils are highly weathered soils that have developed under 500 to 1200mm of annual rainfall and suffer large losses of clay through the profile which results in a compact subsoil and a sandy surface soil, low in organic matter and base exchange capacity (Kowal & Kassam, 1978). <heading>Social & economic factors</heading>Figures for 2006 estimate the total population of West Africa to be 252 million (Wikipedia 2, 2006). Figures for infant mortality and death rates, which have previously been high, have decreased, although not to what could be deemed an acceptable level, but this has aided population growth. West Africa has an annual population growth of 2.7% and an increasing percentage of its population, currently 35%, is moving to live in urban areas and this is predicted to rise in the future (Evergreen, 2004). The world's media sporadically reports on the HIV/AIDS situation in Africa and although there hasn't been mention of this is recent months, the problem facing an increasing number of people with this disease still remains. In sub-Saharan Africa, which covers some West African countries, the number of people with HIV/AIDS accounts for 60% of the worldwide cases of this disease (25 million HIV/AIDS cases out of a worldwide total of 39 million, UNAIDS, 2004). These numbers are rightly sobering, and even more so when it is appreciated that 53% of the economically active population are involved in agriculture (Kormawa, 2005). The constraints this has on production will be highlighted in a later section. In summary, the agricultural sector in this region provides employment to a large number of the population. However, due to out migration of people from the rural areas to the urban areas, an ever increasing demand for food, declining soil fertility, overgrazing and soil erosion the supply of produce, in this case, groundnuts, is restricted (Kowal & Kassam, 1978). The only way forward in this situation is to bring new areas of land into production, but there will come a point were no more land is available and it is questionable whether the land they are beginning to use is in the best condition to start with. With regard to groundnut, it is a tropical crop well suited for this area, and although yields vary from season to season, the average is about 1000kg ha-1 (Ishag,1999). The optimal growing conditions for groundnuts is 30°C (Ishag, 1999), and 600mm of rain for good pod filling performance (Boote & Ketring, 1990), and these conditions are seen to be present in the data for three countries in West Africa (Figures 2, 3, 4, for rainfall and 5, 6, 7 in annex 1 for temperature). <heading>Constraints to growing groundnuts in West Africa </heading><heading>Climatic</heading>As has been mentioned above, one serious constraint to groundnut plant growth is potential evapotranspiration. However, water supply is also important, as it is required for the pod filling stage of growth. <heading>Labour</heading>Labour constraints are a major problem in this region, as this determines the amount of land that is cultivated. At subsistence level, mechanical cultivation equipment is uncommon due to the capital investment required for this. Therefore, hand labour is most commonly seen and this is usually from family members, as employed labour is expensive (Kowal & Kassam, 1978). The afore mentioned problem with HIV/AIDS causes serious labour shortages, not only those suffering from this disease, but also family members whose time and valuable resources are spent on caring for their loved ones (FAO: focus on Gwanda, 1997). In years of low productivity, seed quality and seed supply for planting can be a constraint to following growing seasons. Groundnut seeds are also prone to reduced viability during storage, or complete loss if insect and pest damage is high (Nautiyal, 2002). <heading>Disease</heading>There is only one bacterial pathogen which affects grounds nuts, Pseudomonas solanacearum. This causes wilting of stems and foliage and can progress to total death of the plant, which would then have adverse affects on yield (Middleton et al. 1994). The pathogen has a wide range of hosts, making it hard to control and prevent. However, crop rotations provide some control, especially when rice is included in the rotation (Kelman & Cook, 1977). Rice though is not a crop common to West Africa, and therefore simple rotations with different crops and their individual management conditions imposed for each crop provide significant improvements to continuous groundnut production on the same area of land (Middleton et al. 1994). Groundnut is subject to a number of viral diseases, such as peanut mottle virus (PMV), peanut stripe virus (PStV), peanut stunt virus (PSV), peanut clump virus (PCV), and groundnut rosette virus (GRV). All these viruses are transmitted by aphids, infected seed or the soil and are not exclusive to groundnuts, therefore making control by intercropping difficult (Middleton et al. 1994). There have been developments in producing seed that is resistant to the rosette virus, however only for late maturing varieties, which could prove a constraint in years with less rainfall. Early maturing varieties are being developed, which will make this less of a problem. In all of the above diseases, yield is affected either by stunted growth of the plant or reduced ability to produce high quality groundnuts. For example, PMV causes a reduced seed size, but does not reduce seed number, whereas PStV can present with altered seed flavour characteristics following infection (Ross et al. 1989). Other problems, such as early leaf spot, late leaf spot, rust, phoma blight and powdery mildew to name a few, are caused by fungi that damage the foliage of the groundnut plant (Middleton et al. 1994). Obviously, any damage caused to the leaves interferes with photosynthesis and therefore plant growth and seed production. However the presence of such fungi is dependant on environmental conditions, almost all requiring 25-30ºC and high relative humidity, all of which are unfortunately common in West Africa. Middleton et al. (1994) proceeds to mention more fungal problems which affect stems, roots and pods. Lastly, nematodes can be problematic, causing pod and root-knot disease, pod and root-lesion disease and yellow patch disease, which commonly occurs in West Africa, where it causes reduced leaf size and canopy development. Nematicides are applied to help control the problem as there is no groundnut variety which is resistant. Studies carried out by Germani et al. (1985) and Germani & Gautreau (1976) have shown that applications of nematicides have increased groundnut yields by as much as 100% and reduced nematode populations in the soil. <heading>Pests </heading>The information available regarding insect pests in groundnut stands is extensive, however this knowledge requires further investigation as to the exact ecology of the pest species and their interactions with the plant (Middleton et al. 1994). For simplicity, insect pests fall into three categories, soil insects, insects that live on the leaves and flowers and the insects which cause problems post-harvest. Relatively simple things can help aid groundnut farmers, such as rainfall (which can wash aphids off the plants), and the presence of natural enemies aids control naturally. Insecticides are used, however some pest species have become resistant. <heading>Proposals for improving the groundnut agricultural system in West Africa</heading>Regarding the control of pests, integrated pest management (IPM) offers great potential to these developing country farmers. IPM can be defined as "a pest management system that, in the context of the total environment and the population dynamics of the pest species, utilizes all suitable techniques and methods in as compatible a manner as possible and maintains pest populations at levels below those causing economic injury" (Glass, 1975). This essentially means preventing the establishment and spread of insect pests, controlling established infestations, or maintaining already existing pest/disease outbreaks at a level which causes minimum damage Lynch et al. (1986). Educating farmers to the possible benefits of IPM a) protection of the environment b) reduction of costs c) residue-free products, would undoubtedly be a good thing. With groundnut being a cash crop and a legume, its importance to the grower is great. Its use as an intercrop with cowpea and other cereal crops is important in maximising the output from the small areas of cultivated land and also in spreading the risk of loss, if disease/pest damage occurs in one of the crops planted. More extensive use of the intercrop system would clearly be advantageous and a government-funded grant/aid scheme for the purchase of low tech mechanical cultivation equipment would help on every level, ie: area of land cultivated, labour constraints and urban demand. Rain harvesting and/or irrigation systems would help reduce the reliance on seasonal variation in rainfall. The introduction of a locally distributed seed programme to supply affordable high quality seed to growers, which would, in turn, if successful, be self-sustaining. Reliance on a centralised seed supplier and associated problems would be avoided. This has been successfully achieved in Malawi with the help of UNICEF and ICRISAT and the distribution of CG 7 variety of groundnut (Nautiyal, 2002). Post harvest problems could be partly addressed by improvement in drying procedures and low cost storage facilities at farm level. 