This literature study will explain the reasons for carrying out this research project and highlight why it is necessary and relevant to today's scientific audience. The following points will be addressed: <list>Problems associated with an organic farming system Weeds and techniques used in their controlSmoke water and its applicationsConclusion</list><heading>Problems associated with an organic farming system</heading>The success of an arable production system rests on many important stages within the cultivation process, such as disease and pest control, sowing rate, fertiliser application, seedbed preparations and the control of weeds. For conventional farmers, the degree to which they are able to influence these processes is far greater than farmers who farm in an organic system, where there are restrictions on inputs. Hodges (1982) defines organic agriculture as "a system of agriculture that attempts to provide a balanced environment, in which the maintenance of soil fertility and the control of pests and diseases are achieved by the enhancement of natural processes and cycles, with only moderate inputs of energy and resources, while maintaining an optimum productivity." Whereas Lamkin (1990) defines organic agriculture as "a production system which avoids or largely excludes the use of synthetically compounded fertilisers, pesticides, growth regulators and livestock feed additives. To the maximum extent feasible, organic farming systems rely on crop rotations, crop residues, animal manures, legumes, green manures, off-farm organic wastes and aspects of biological pest control to maintain soil productivity and tilth, to supply plant nutrients and to control insects, weeds and other pests." These two definitions both share the aim of producing crops and raising livestock with minimum input and non-reliance on man-made, synthetic inputs and agree that the requirements for crops and livestock should be sourced 'naturally', however to successfully achieve this and expect the same results as conventional farmers is not possible. Due to the restrictions organic farmers face on inputs, problems arise in combating disease and the following from Lampkin (1990) highlight other difficulties: <list>- Reduced yields (crops)- Reduced output/ slower growth (livestock)- Weeds- Pests- Prices of output products - Labour requirements- Fertiliser application and releaseSource: Lampkin (1990)</list>For the purposes of this study, the concerns over weeds from the above list will be discussed by looking at the current techniques used to control weeds and then propose and explain a possible new technique for the control of weeds in organic arable crops. <heading>Weeds and techniques used in their control</heading>A weed, simply, can be defined as a plant that grows where it is not desired (McGinley, 1996). However, a more comprehensive explanation is giving by Roberts (1982) who stated that weeds: <quote> "- Establish themselves without deliberate action by man, and when present are difficult to eradicate - Tend to be competitive and adaptable - Capable of exploiting habitats created or modified by man - Can form extensive populations that interfere with agricultural activities - Have efficient reproduction combined with mechanisms that permit survival under temporarily unfavourable conditions"</quote>In agricultural terms, a plant that is growing within the crop for example; poppy (Papaver rhoeas) is not where is it desired because by it being there it is ultimately causing a threat to the yield of the crop. Studies such as Nielsen et al. (1993), and Patriquin, et al. (1986) both suggest that the presence of weeds in a crop significantly reduces yield, however, the reliability of Nielsen et al. (1993) should be viewed with caution, as no control plots were used in their studies. Although the above studies found a relationship, no quantification has been made on the impact of weeds on a crop (Rasmussen, 1995), apart from Nors (1993) and Nielsen et al. (1993) who suggested crop yield losses of 20% due to weeds. Although this is undeniable, the simplicity over a weed plant being present, by choice or not, it should also be considered in context. A 'weed' plant that is present on an intensive arable farming system could be deemed as undesirable, however, in an organic arable farming system, the presence of a weed may well have benefits, ie; biodiversity within a field, which could contribute to the long-term sustainability of that farm. Therefore, the total eradication of weeds in an organic system shouldn't be the objective of the farmer, rather a tolerance of weeds, but not at the expense of the crops viability. Obviously, weeds shouldn't be allowed to grow freely, therefore weeds in an organic system can be controlled through the use of the following processes, such as: rotation, tillage techniques, seed rates, stale seedbeds, inter-row hoeing, harrowing, hand weeding (Rasmussen, 1995), catch cropping, and a manure application (Rasmussen, 2006). The single use of one of the above weed control measures would not avert weed problems but conversely the use of a number of techniques in a holistic approach would achieve the best results, due to some of the processes above suppressing weed seed germination and emergence (stale seedbed and seed rates), and other processes removing the weed seeds that have emerged (Inter-row hoeing and harrowing). In the paper Rasmussen (2006) wrote, he goes on to conclude that the soils on individual farms present different challenges to farmers converting to organic, saying that a combination of techniques may be effective in reducing weed biomass at one location, however not effective, or to a lesser degree at another location. Therefore farmers need to plan which techniques would produce the best results, however suggestions for doing so were not mentioned. A stale seedbed is the tillage technique used to deplete the soil seed bank. This occurs by forming a tilled seedbed, but not planting a crop, and due to the disturbance of the soil weed seeds are promoted to germinate. These weeds can then be eradicated before setting seed and then the crop is drilled. For the purposes of this study the stale seedbed technique will be investigated, which as Rasmussen (2003) concluded proved effective in reducing weed seed numbers in the soil seed bank. However, a further development, smoke water, for this application will be investigated. <heading>Smoke water and its applications</heading>Stimulation of seeds by smoke has been observed for many years, however it hasn't been until the last six to eight years that discovery and experimentation of the chemical within smoke has been studied and the product 'smoke water' been created. Initial work has been carried out in Australia, which is one of a number of countries that is prone to natural fires, and it is due to this that scientists have observed the stimulation of plant seeds. There are known to be 170 plant species from 37 families, which show germination enhancement by smoke derived from plant material (Roche et al. , 1997). At the time of publication Adkins (1997) was unable to identify the compound in smoke, however it was mentioned that Keeley et al. (1985), Keeley & Pizzorno (1986), Baxter et al. (1994), & Enright et al. (1997) knew the compound was produced by the combustion of plant matter. In later articles, Adkins et al. (2001) & Adkins et al. (2003), products such as 'Seed Starter', 'Regen 2000' and 'Kirstenbosch Instant Smoke Plus Seed Primer' are mentioned as marketed products of smoke solution used in their studies. 'Regen 2000' is said to "increase germination rates, resulting in stronger, healthier seedlings with improved and uniform germination" '(Regen 2000' website, 2006). Marketing jargon aside, the product information does align with the literature sited above. In Flematti et al. (2004) and more recently Merritt et al. (2006), the compound which is responsible for promoting germination is named as butenolide, 3-methyl-2H-furo[2,3-c]pyran-2-one. This synthesized chemical in the above studies has acted at a level similar to smoke water and its ability to remain stable at high temperatures, be soluble in water, and be active at a variety of concentrations is proof enough for the authors to conclude this is the active germination stimulating chemical found in smoke water. Work on developing this concept has been driven by scientist's vision to use this application in the restoration of native habitats. Wok carried out by Keeley et al. (1998) and Van Staden et al. (2000) show that many species of plant have adapted their strategies for germination, where by the cue for germination is associated with fire. Therefore in such countries as America and Australia particularly, where natural fires occur and plant species has adapted, the restoration of habitat in, for example urban areas or derelict land could be successfully implemented by the use of smoke water. Research has been carried out to investigate species that would respond in such a scenario, however little work has been commissioned to investigate the agricultural application. Stimulation of arable weed seeds by smoke water was investigated by Adkins et al. (2003) when a number of weed species were investigated and it was noted that half of the species that responded originated from countries that contain fire prone habitats, however some species which didn't originate from such areas also responded. Earlier work by Adkins et al. (2001) demonstrated, with varying degrees of success, that some species (Avena sterilis - monocot) responded positively to a smoke water application and others (Sinapis arvensis - dicot) did not respond at all. The physical differences mentioned of those species above and their contrasting responses to smoke water is something is of interest and the knowledge of such a phenomena may prove important information for this project. <heading>Conclusion </heading>In summary of what has been said, the purpose of this study is to investigate a new application, smoke water, to enhance the stale seedbed technique used in organic farming systems to reduce weed populations within the crop. Although work has been carried out using smoke water and its effects are know for many species, it is apparent that its relevance and application for such in an agricultural context are not known of. From what is know and has been mentioned above, the theory of the suggested title for this project should deplete the soil seed bank through more weed seeds geminating and therefore a more successful stale seed bed produced, within the stipulated regulations for organic farmers. 