Archaeologists seek to find remains of the dead not simply because it is fascinating but also because it provides an authentication to people's past lives. The physical remnants of the dead, for example: bones, hair and skin provide more details about the life of the individual rather than their actual death. In this essay, I will attempt to understand past funerary practises, and why they were enacted in the ways that they were. I will also talk about the discoveries made by archaeologists, their interpretations of the evidence, and also draw a conclusion as to how all this helps us, the modern day humans, in developing and shaping our own societies. In general, archaeologists study the material traces of the disposal of the dead to make inferences about ethnicity and identity, religion and ideology, status, wealth, social hierarchy, as well as gender relations, health and diet, location and movement. When examining the dead, archaeologists make inferences through the evidence given to them by means of studying bones and tissue remains. We can find out "how long they lived, what sex they were, what illnesses or diseases they suffered, how tall they grew, what genetic ancestry they had, what sorts of foods they ate, what injuries they sustained and whether they were deliberately deformed, bound, tattooed, body-painted or even scarified." (Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999) Mortuary analysis teaches us that sex, gender, age, cultural or ethnic identity, and various roles in the society help determine the type of burial, its associated ritual and the selection of objects buried with the dead. One of the main factors which tells us about the individual and the way in which s/he was buried, is the position in which the body is found. "Bodily positioning is an important part of the body's manipulation. Rigor Mortis sets in within 12 hours of death and the dead body is normally arranged in some way while it is still flexible." (Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999) The body may be curled up, laid on its side or flat on its back. In arranging the body in a particular way, the living might have had a special purpose in doing so. It could have been to differentiate between social groups (mainly gender and age groups.) One of the ways in which they did this in the Early Bronze Age was to bury males on their right sides and females on their left. Another important factor includes orientation. The direction which the corpse faces highlights what body positioning symbolises. <quote>" The body is not simply a biological entity but is a carefully crafted artefact, further worked and transformed after the moment of death. It is used to convey representations of death and the afterlife, of society's boundaries, of the nature of humanness, and of the ordering of the social world. "</quote>The archaeological remains of the body are the culmination rites of passage which serve to separate the dead from the living and install them within another dimension of human understanding." (Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999) There is another type of social differentiation apart from age and sex which appears in the Mesolithic cemetery of Oleni'Ostrov in Karelia. <quote>" 'Wealth' of grave goods (the number of grave goods in a grave) tended to correspond with the presence of tooth pendants: bear with the 'wealthiest' (mostly with adult men), then elk or beaver (mostly with mature men and women of all ages), and finally those burials with no pendants (mostly old men). They interpreted these differences as markers of physical prowess perhaps linked to food procurement. There were also special status positions."</quote>Generally, men's grave goods tended to have more bronze and gold than women's. Klavs Randsborg, in his analysis of social differentiation during the period of the Bronze Age, concluded that graves which contained more metal gave an indication as to the individual's social status; thereby implying that men were on a higher level. When examined, the skeleton remains of the dead will disclose the gender and age at death of each individual, and perhaps any dietary deficit or other pathological condition. It is hard to distinguish which grave goods go with which dead corpse because it is difficult to interpret, given the fact that they will be from communal or collective burials. This is where more than one individual is buried. Thus, it makes it easier to learn things from an individual grave rather than a communal one. <quote>"A close analysis of grave goods can reveal much about disparities in social status. One must take into account that what is buried with the deceased person is not simply the exact equivalent either of status or of material goods owned or used during life. Burials are made by them to express and influence their relationships with others still alive as much as to symbolise or serve the dead." (Renfrew C.& Bahn P. "Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practises" - 8 th edition)</quote>By analysing the remains, it would show the differences in male and female burials and help us evaluate whether the differentiation between the two signify a division in terms of wealth and status. One other aspect of rank and status involves the age of the individual. We must therefore establish whether this factor changed the way in which the deceased was treated in terms of grave goods. <quote>"The archaeologist must ask, from the evidence available, whether the case in question is one of achieved status, or involves instead status ascribed through birth. One useful criterion is to investigate whether children are in some cases given rich burial goods and other indications of preferential treatment. If so, there may have been a system of hereditary ranking, because at such an early age, the child is unlikely to have reached status through personal distinction." (Renfrew C.& Bahn P. "Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practises" - 8 th edition)</quote>When analysing the remains of a body, we can find out the diet and general health of an individual by carrying out forensic tests. There are several useful methods of investigation, one of which includes a focus on humans bones. Isotopic analyses of the skeletal remains of a population can show the types of food in the individual's diet as well as indicate the differences in nutrition between the wealthy and the poor members of a society. <quote>"Dietary and health studies from human remains have significant potential for opening up new avenues of research into differential social status, when conducted hand-in-hand with other methods of analysis." (Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999)</quote>The placement of the dead is another complex factor when it comes to burying the deceased. During the period from the fifth to the third millennia BC, agricultural communities in western Europe constructed a variety of timber and stone monuments that were associated with the disposal of the dead. Hundreds of these monuments are preserved to varying degrees to the present day. These monuments give us a little bit of information about the societies who built them. <quote>"Where to put the remains of the dead is generally not a matter of functional expediency. The place of the dead in any society will have significant and powerful connotations within people's perceived social geographies." "Placing the dead is one of the most visible activities through which human societies map out and express their relationships to ancestors, land and the living." (Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999)</quote><quote> "External burial structures and cemeterial organisation were arguably more effective than grave goods because of the lasting visibility of many of these features. Mound or chamber graves or restricted cemeteries served as exclusive markers of status in this world and the afterlife and conveyed to their audience, information about the hierarchical principles of that community." (Effros B. "Merovingian Mortuary Archaeology and the Making of the Early Middle Ages" 1965)</quote>Effros argues that while mortuary deposits played an important role, monuments and tombs were more effective in terms of spatial communication. <quote>"Awareness of death and the marking of its occurrence among our fellow humans is supposedly something which is specific to our species. We might consider our awareness of this aspect of the human condition as a fundamental defining characteristic of what it is to be human, at the very core of our being and self-consciousness." (Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999) </quote><quote>"The human race is the only one that knows it must die, and it knows this only through its experience. A child brought up alone and transported to a desert island would have no more idea of death than a cat or plant." - VOLTAIRE</quote>Taphonomy describes the complex processes that affect an organism after death and ultimately determine if and how it is preserved. It is "the assessment of what has happened to a bone between its deposition and its discovery. Although bones have a better chance of preservation than plant material in most soils, they nevertheless survive only under special conditions- for example, if they are buried quickly, or deposited in caves." (Renfrew C.& Bahn P. "Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practises" - 8 th edition) For my case study, I will illustrate how bog bodies are an important part of burial preservations. It is the most well-preserved body in the entire world. Found in 1991 near the Similaun glacier by German hikers, at an altitude of 3200m. The body was the first prehistoric human found with his clothes on and his equipment surrounding him. The body was given to the Innsbruck Anatomy department for treatment, and after careful examination, it was frozen at a temperature of -6oc. A lot of work was carried out on the materials which were found near the body of Otzi, including x-rays, scans and radiocarbon dating. It was thought that Otzi had died due to exhaustion on the mountain, probably caught in a snowstorm. The body was protected from the movement of the glacier until a storm from the Sahara laid a layer of dust on the ice which absorbed sunlight and finally thawed it out. Tests determined the physical appearance of Otzi; he was a dark-skinned male aged about 40 at the time of death and approximately 5ft 2in tall. When found, he was bald and it is possible that he had a beard. A full body scan showed evidence that he was very healthy apart from his lungs which were blackened (probably due to the smoke from open fires.) Some tattoos were found all over his body. His nails had come off but one was recovered in the excavation. It has been suggested that Otzi had died a violent death, due to the fact that he had been found with an arrowhead lodged in his left shoulder. There were also cuts on his hands, wrists and ribcage. To conclude this essay, I will talk about how the study of burials and funerary practises have in my opinion, helped to build a social structure. <quote>"Burials are difficult to analyse and have their own problems, but they can be used to augment texts and pictures to give us a fuller understanding of one type of ritual. From this, we can develop models of ancient social structures that make far greater allowance than previous interpretations for changes through time and space, for differing perceptions of structure by different groups, and for conflicts over meaning." (Morris I. "Death-Ritual and Social Structure in Classical Antiquity" - 1992)</quote>We can't treat each aspect of burial practises individually, instead, we must look at the context as a whole. By trying to see the rituals from different social perspectives, we are able to figure out the ways and traditions of our ancestors. <quote>"It might seem that archaeology is a straightforward process of discovery followed by description, yet it is accompanied by interpretation at every step. Interpretation draws on theory- our rationalisations of our experiences in the world- in order to make sense of how and why people of the past treated their dead, disposed of their remains, and provided ways for the dead to co-exist with the living." (Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999)</quote>