The objective is to go through the procedures to produce UHT milk by direct processing and to evaluate the quality of a range of heat treated milk products. <heading>Results </heading><table/><heading>Observations/ Discussions :</heading>Raw milk was yellow in colour and when it has undergone the UHT process the colour of the milk was more whiter. When we compare the Freezing point depression values of Raw milk and UHT. UHT milk has a higher value since , the milk has taken more water by the steam. Commercial samples of Milk <table/><heading>Processing Aspects </heading>Processing temperatures <table/>And the following pressures; (insert units) <table/>Flow rate: 129-130l/h Determine the average residence time (holding tube = 260cm long and 0.96 cm diameter: assume turbulent flow: Estimate the Fo (based on tmin).  FORMULA  <heading>Estimation of the F0 value</heading>The UHT temperature was 145.2°C, thus the lethality the UHT sterilisation process, for T ref=121°C and z =10°C, of was:  FORMULA  Assuming that the flow is turbulent, the minimum residence time in the holding tube was:  FORMULA  Thus, the F 0 value of the process, based on the minimum residence time can be determined as follows:  FORMULA  <heading>Observations of the turbidity and microbiological testing</heading>The samples of the milk tested have been ranged for their intensity of turbidity and microbial growth on the agar slope. The results are given in the table below with 1 indicating the lowest intensity of turbidity and 6 the highest. <table/><heading>Turbidity test: </heading>The turbidity test is a measure of serum protein denaturation, which depends on the precipitation of denaturated serum proteins with casein in 20% ammonium sulphate solution. The denaturated protein can be removed by filtration. The filtrate, after reheated, if there is left no non-denaturated protein, will be clear and the turbidity test will be positive. On the contrary, if non-denaturated protein is present, the filtrate will be turbid and the test will be positive. (Burton, 1988) The degree of denaturation of the proteins is indicative of the severity of the heat treatment, combination of temperature and time, which the milk sample has undergone. The ranking of the milk samples, regarding the intensity of turbidity, is in accordance with the above statement. The heat treatment during pasteurisation is not severe, thus the pasteurised milk sample had the same turbidity as the raw milk. The UHT direct milk sample was more turbid than the UHT indirect one, as the small time of heat treatment in the first case causes less denaturation than the indirect heating, although performed in much higher temperatures. Finally, the sterilised and UHT shop milk samples were the most severely heat treated. <heading> Microbiological test: </heading>As it was expected, the sample of raw milk resulted to high microbial growth, as it has gone under no treatment so as the microbes present in the milk when it is collected from the cow to be eliminated. Moreover, the samples of the commercial, packaged milk (pasteurised, sterilised and UHT shop sample) has shown no microbial growth, thus the process they have gone through had achieved the desirable sterility. On the other hand , the two milk samples of direct and indirect UHT, which had been processed in the laboratory, has shown significant sings of microbial growth. This could be mainly caused by post pasteurisation contamination, as there was not available aseptic packaging for the processed milk to be placed. Other factors that are possible to have contributed to the low microbial quality of the two samples are poor sanitation of the equipment used (for the UHT direct sample the sterilisation of the plant was performed for only 20min) or insufficient heat treatment; as if the UHT processes have been performed correctly the commercial sterility of the milk would have been achieved. <heading>Alcohol stability test </heading>The alcohol test is used by the milk industry as reception test for milk in the plant, to measure the heat stability of milk. The alcohol test, together with the acidity test, is used on fresh milk to indicate whether it will coagulate on processing. Milk that contains more than 0.21 % acid, or calcium and magnesium compounds in greater than normal amounts, will coagulate when alcohol is added. The alcohol test was carried out at three ethanol concentrations. <table/>We noticed that the UHT milk is slightly stronger than raw milk. It also depends ont the pH of milk. <heading>Sensory evaluation </heading>Our group of students did tasting of the commercial samples and our UHT milk sample. The majority of members preferred, our direct UHT sample was much better than the three commercial samples. The Waitrose organic milk had an oxidised off flavour. There preference ranking for the samples were as follows: <table/><heading>Has the UHT milk been diluted? </heading>By comparing the values of the freezing point depression, we could say that the UHT (direct) milk was slightly lower than the one of the raw milk. Consequently, the water content was lower for the UHT direct milk, it has been concentrated and not diluted, comparing to the raw milk. This was due to the fact that the control of the temperature of the before steam heating begins and the temperature of cooling in the flash cooler. To avoid dilution or concentration of the milk these two temperatures should ideally the same, so as to allow the evaporation of the exact quantity of water that has been diluted during steam heating. The lower the temperature of cooling, the more water evaporates from the milk, thus in the case of the UHT sample tested, the pressure of cooling was lower than the appropriate one. The fact of the concentration of the milk can also be determined through the comparison of the concentration of protein, lactose and milk solids non fat between the UHT direct and raw milk sample, which are higher for the former. <heading>Discuss the differences between direct and indirect processes</heading>With direct heating systems, the product is heated to sterilisation temperature by mixing it with steam. Some of the steam condenses giving up latent heat of vaporization to the product and giving much more rapid rate of heating than is available with any indirect system. The steam may be injected into the product know as steam injection or steam infusion or product-into-steam. These two methods give different characteristics and are considered separately. This method of heating can cause considerable dilution of the product. For example, a 60˚C temperature rise will involve about 11% addition of water as condensed steam. The design of the holding section for a desired residence time must therefore take into account that the flow rate within it will be greater than the inlet product flow rate. Cooling of the product may be by any indirect heat exchanger that is suitable to the product characteristics. Therefore, the added water will remain in the product and allowance for the dilution must be made in the product formulation. The steam quality is important, and contamination of the food product by steam pipe corrosion or boiler feed water additives must be eliminated. Those food products where the added water is not acceptable, or where very rapid cooling is required, "flash cooling" may be used. The thermal efficiency of a direct heating system may be increased by indirect regenerative heating before the product is mixed with steam; this may be achieved by heat transfer from the outgoing product is mixed with steam; this may be achieved by heat transfer from the outgoing product after the expansion cooling stage, by recovery of heat from the water vapour liberated in the expansion, or by using the condenser cooling water on the exit from the condenser, when it has been heated. High rates of heating and cooling are obtainable in direct plants. This means that the ideal of high temperatures held for short times, which is the basis of the continuous-flow thermal process, is more easily obtainable with direct than with indirect systems. Practical advantage of the direct heating systems are its ability to process more viscous products, particularly those that cannot be satisfactorily handled in plate-type indirect plant, and comparative freedom from fouling. For example, a direct plant may be able to operate producing UHT milk without cleaning for twice the length of time of a plate-type indirect plant. A direct heating plant is relatively complex. Much of it is non-standard and specially fabricated, unlike heat exchanger plates and tubes. It requires additional equipment such as expansion vessels and condensers. Water consumption for cooling in a high-regeneration indirect plant during operation is negligible, because the cooling requirements are met by the incoming cold product. Even an indirect plant with lower regeneration levels, the cooling water requirements are relatively modest. Direct plants require large amounts of water, particularly for the operation of the condenser. Direct heating systems need more pumps than indirect systems. It needs three product pumps of different types, as well as a homogeniser if the product requires it, and a vacuum pump for the removal of the non condensable gases from the condenser. Only a single pump may be needed with an indirect system, together with a homogeniser. At the stage of flash cooling, the temperature and the pressure of the process should adequately controlled to avoid dilution or concentration of the product due to removal of quantity of water less or more, respectively, than the one of the steam which has been condensed at the previous stage. As mentioned above UHT direct systems can achieve the heating of the product at very high temperatures for short periods of times. This combination is beneficial for the quality of the product, as although the desired microbial quality is attained the nutritional quality of the product is also preserved. Finally, as far as the processing of milk is concerned, when milk is heated above 85°C there is production of low molecular weight compounds like H 2S, CH 3, SH which can give unacceptable taste. The flash cooling process involved in the direct systems results in the loss of some components which are more volatile than water, like oxygen, the components mentioned above and, and other desirable or undesirable flavour components, which may lead to a further change of product quality. This fact is the reason for which direct UHT milk is regarded to have less cooked flavour than the indirect. 