<heading>Introduction</heading>The England and Wales precipitation record contains data going back to 1766, and is compiled from approximately 60 rain gauges. In this report the seasonal totals of precipitation will be analysed from 1767 to 2001. Seasonal differences will be compared, probabilities calculated for some extreme rainfall events, and any evidence of long term trends will be analysed. <heading>Section 1</heading>Table 1 shows a summary of the data set of total annual precipitation. <table/>Figure 1 shows a histogram of annual precipitation. It can be seen that the distribution is slightly positively skewed, with more outliers at high values than at low values. None of the outliers seem so extreme as to raise concerns about their accuracy. There is not a sharp peak in the distribution, with all bins between 800mm and 1000mm having a similar frequency. <figure/>Figure 2 shows a normal Q-Q plot for the annual precipitation. The fit is fairly good, but it can be seen that the tails of the observed distribution are too short, particularly at the lower end. <figure/>Figure 3 shows boxplots for each of the seasonal totals. On average, the precipitation is highest in autumn and lowest in spring, with the summer and winter totals being similar. Each season also shows some positive skew, with more outliers at high values. The seasonal nature of the rainfall explains the slightly broader peak of the annual distribution seen in Figure 1. Each individual season has a sharper peak in its distribution, but the different means lead to the combined distribution having the shape as seen above. <figure/><heading>Section 2</heading>There are 8 recorded years where the total rainfall was less than 700 mm. The probability that a drought year (Pr(DY)) will occur can therefore be estimated as 8/235 = 0.034. From Bayes theorem, the probability that a drought year will occur, given that a drought winter and spring has occurred (probability Pr(DW)) can be estimated.  FORMULA  This is equal to 0.5 for this example. The probability Pr(DW|DY) can be estimated as 0.5 from the data, however as there are only 8 drought years in the record, this probability is very uncertain. Rearranging the equation now gives  FORMULA  This probability equates to a winter and spring with total precipitation of approximately 281 mm. Figure 4 shows the total annual rainfall plotted against total winter and spring rainfall. <figure/>It can be seen that a December to May total of 281 mm or less will result in an annual total of less that 700mm approximately half the time, according to the data. However, it is possible to have a December to May total of up to 350 mm that still result in a drought year. <heading>Section 3</heading>Total autumn rainfall can be modelled using a Normal distribution.  FORMULA  The total rainfall recorded in autumn 2000 was 502.7 mm. This is the highest seasonal total on record. Using the Normal distribution as a probability model, the probability of exceeding this amount is 0.00025. The Normal distribution is perhaps not the best model to use in this case. It can be seen from Figure 5 that the fit in the tails of the distribution is quite poor. <figure/>A better fit to the data can be obtained by using a gamma distribution.  FORMULA  Using the Gamma distribution as a probability model, the probability of exceeding 502.7 mm is 0.0020. <heading>Section 4</heading>It can be seen from Figure 3 that the distributions for summer and winter rainfall are quite similar. From this a hypothesis can be formed that the summer rainfall has an equal population mean to the winter rainfall. This hypothesis can be investigated by estimating the population mean of each set of data and comparing them. A simple point estimate of the population mean is the sample mean, i.e.  FORMULA  For the summer,  FORMULA  and for winter  FORMULA . These values differ by 5.2 mm, but a point estimate gives no information about the significance of this difference. The difference in the means could be due to the sampling uncertainty. To examine how significant this difference in the means is, it is necessary to investigate a null hypothesis, for example that that both means are the same;  FORMULA  This will be tested to a significance level of 10%. The alternative hypothesis is that the two means are different;  FORMULA  The hypotheses can be tested by an unpaired two sample t-test. This yields a t-statistic of 0.88 and a p-value of 0.3765. Therefore the null hypothesis cannot be rejected at the 10% confidence level. The 90% confidence interval for the difference in the means is -4.47 to 14.83. The likely difference in sample medians, rather than means, can be considered simply by the notches on each boxplot in Figure 3. The notch gives a guide to the likely range of the median. Each notch extends to 1.58 IQR/n. This gives roughly a 95% confidence interval for the difference in the medians. <heading>Section 5</heading>Figure 6 shows the data for each season plotted as time series. Fitting a simple linear regression shows evidence of a marked increase in winter precipitation and decrease in summer precipitation, and to a lesser extent an increase in spring precipitation and decrease in autumn precipitation. A lowess filter has also been applied to each data set to give an indication of the time variance of the trend. The trends in different seasons do not appear to be changing at the same time. For example, any trend due to climate change would be expected to be visible only from about 1900 onwards. The lowess filter does not clearly pick up an effect like this, with the possible exception of in the winter data. It is probable that the random variations in the data are too great to allow the precise trends to be detected in this way. <figure/>Figure 7 shows the autocorrelation function for the winter precipitation time series, calculated up to a lag of 10 years. It can be seen that there is no significant evidence of correlation between different years. This result is the same for each season. <figure/>A simple way to estimate the significance of the trends in each season is to compare a smaller sample from the start of the period to a sample from the end of the period. The distributions of these two data sets should have significantly different means if there has been and average change in precipitation over the period. Figure 8 shows boxplots comparing the first 30 years (1767-1796) for each season to the last 30 years (1972-2001). <figure/>The significance of any difference between each pair of samples can be investigated using a similar process to that in Section 4. Using the null hypothesis that the means are the same for each pair, a t-test can then be performed. Again the significance level will be chosen as 10%. The results are shown in Table 2. <table/>This means that the null hypothesis is rejected for the winter, spring and summer data. There is strong evidence of a change in mean precipitation between these time periods for these three seasons. 