In 2006 Nutrition students at  undertook a food frequency questionnaire, designed to summarise their average weekly diet. The food composition of these results was analysed and a summary of the student's diet compiled, to assess their nutritional status. These results were then compared to the reference nutrient intake (RNI) based on recommendations by the Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy (COMA) and the National diet and Nutrition Surveys 2003. The RNI is the quantity of essential nutrients and energy required by 98% of the population of the UK, to prevent deficiencies and reduce the risk of chronic disease. According to the questionnaire female students lack the essential nutrient Iron, which is vital for energy production and the transfer of oxygen in the blood. A deficiency can cause anaemia, the symptoms of which are tiredness, dizziness and possibly heart palpitations. The RNI for women is 14.8 mg, the female student's average just 10.2 mg. About 31% less than the RNI. The RNI is only a guide as some women may actually need more depending on their menstrual losses. The students have good amounts of calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus in their diets. These minerals are found in bone and are vital to maintain good bone health and reduce the risk of osteoporosis. The government recommends that we should aim for less than 2.5g of sodium in our diets (sodium is found in table salt). The male students average 2.9g so they should aim to reduce this. The female student's average consumption was a healthy 2g. Potassium is essential for healthy nerves and muscles and fluid balance. Female students fell short of the RNI. The students also lacked fibre in their diets. So an increase in fruit and vegetables would increase their fibre intake as well as the potassium in their diets. Both the sexes had enough zinc, iodine and copper in their diets. However they have less than the RNI for selenium. Selenium intakes are difficult to assess, and levels are falling in the UK. It is an essential nutrient and higher intakes may promote health, but in excess it is very toxic. They also obtain good levels of the antioxidants vitamin C and E. However according to the questionnaire they have less than the RNI for Vitamin A. Female students have about 6% less and males 12% than the RNI. The RNI is only a guide line. Some of the students will have enough in their diets even below the RNI. Deficiency in this vitamin is unusual in the UK. Around the world it is the main cause of non-accidental blindness. The student's eyesight maybe at risk. The students receive plenty of water-soluble B vitamins and Biotin, which help the body to convert the fuel it needs for energy. Dietary energy comes from fat, carbohydrates, protein and alcohol. <figure/>The RNI for fat states that it shouldn't exceed more that 35% of the total energy intake, these students's have 31% in their diet. Different fats release the same amount of energy but the effects that they have on our health vary. The students obtain 14% of their total energy from saturated fats. It is recommended that saturated fats should not exceed more than 10% of total energy. The student's should aim to replace some of the saturated fat with polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat. The students gain too much energy from protein, and not enough from carbohydrates (sugars and starches). They should increase the amount of carbohydrates in their diet from healthy sources. The students surprisingly consume no more alcohol than the national average for adults. Assuming all the student's are average in size and moderately active they are consuming just below the average energy requirements. (However people often underestimate their calorie intake by up to 25%.!) The questionnaire results are as good as the information that was put in, and can only cover some foods. There are more accurate methods of collecting data such as using diet diaries and photographic records. Using the questionnaire results the students have a fairly typical UK diet. Their diet is mostly balanced, but it is lacking in a few nutrients. 