<heading>Introduction:</heading>The analyzed remains of this individual were recovered on a medieval monastic cemetery of Hulton Abbey in Staffordshire. Burials took place for about 300 years from the foundation of the monastery in 1219 (officially in 1223) till its Dissolution in 1538. This inevitably caused overlying of later burials on the earlier ones; some damage was also made after the Dissolution. The abbey was of a Cistercian order, which indicates certain life style of the monks. <heading>Palaeodemography:</heading>Sue Browne's (2000) report states, that there were 91 skeletons excavated during the periods of 1972 to 1983 and 1987 to 1994. The earlier excavations provided 22 individuals and 6 disarticulated crania excavated by Pape in 1930 and described in Staffordshire Archaeological Studies, 2. Further 69 individuals were recovered in the second period of excavations. 50 of these (72%) were fairly complete, 12 of them (19%) were well-preserved, 8 (12%) represented a quarter of less of the skeleton. In the whole sample of 92 skeletons, 78% are adult and 22% are immature, 20 years old or less at death. 60% of individuals of the adult and non-adult sample (n=76) are male and 22% female. In the sexed sample (n=63) 73% is male and 27% female. The greatest number of deaths occurred at the age of 25-35, although a wide range of age is represented. More males than females died at older age, 20 males (57% of the aged sample) and 2 females of 35 years or older (18% of the aged sample). The organisation of the cemetery does not show any sex or age divisions, apart from the south transept, where only males were found (and two skeletons of indeterinate sex). <heading>Preservation of the material: </heading>The preservation of skeleton 50012 can be classified as partial (25% - 75%). Most of the bones are present, but they are fragmentary with bad surface preservation. Root activity had major impact of the surface. Water in the soil resulted in partial dissolving of the remains. Substantial damage has been done post-mortem, as a result of post-depositional conditions, which was the continuous use of the remains as laboratory aids for university students. The amount of data that can be collected from the skeleton depends on its preservation. In this case the crucial diagnostic features necessary for determining the sex, age, stature and pathologies of the individual are absent, therefore affecting the accuracy of the results or even enabling necessary measurements for estimation of sex, age, stature and identification of pathologies. There are 8 labial teeth of maxilla (incisors, canines and first premolars) and 13 of mandible preserved intact. Other 4 are disarticulated, two of which are maxillar first molars and 2 maxillar second molars, lost postmortem. There is also one disarticulated root, probably of maxillar second right pre-molar. Four teeth were lost antemortem, the first and the second right mandibular molars, second left maxillar premolar and third left molar lost just before death, as there are little signs of socket reformation. <heading>Methods:</heading>The diagnostic features of skull (Krogman and Iscan 1986), pelvis (Krogman and Iscan 1986 and Phenice 1969) and the glenoid cavity length were used to assign sex, because of the high accuracy of the methods and presence of necessary bones. Long bones and sternum could not be used due to their poor preservation or absence of both proximal and distal ends. The estimation of age was based on cranial suture closure (Meindl and Lovejoy 1985), pubic symphysis (Brooke and Suchey 1990), dental wear (Brothwell 1981) and ossification of cartilage. Each of these methods on its own does not provide accurate estimation, so they were combined to give better results. Trotter's method using the length of the right ulna was applied for the gestimation of stature (Trotter 1970). This bone had to be reconstructed therefore it is a gestimation. The possible error in measurements ranges from one to four millimetres, which does not affect the results in any major way. Poor preservation of other bones did not allow using them in the process. <heading>Results:</heading><heading>Sex:</heading>This individual has been recognized as a male. The traits used and their description has been presented in Tables 1. and 2. <table/><table/>Measurement of the length of the right glenoid cavity also indicated male features. The length is 44.1 mm, which falls into the male interval of above 37 mm. There is a slight surface abrasion, which might have affected the length by maximum of two millimetres, which cannot affect the estimation. <heading>Age:</heading>The age of the individual has been assigned as 35 to 45. The comparison of the results has been demonstrated in Table 3. According to the method of Meindl and Lovejoy (1985) for lateral-anterior suture closure the mean age is 56.2, with standard deviation of 8.5, mean deviation of 6.3 and the age range of 34-68. This method is regarded as highly controversial, due to our poor knowledge of the relation between suture closures and age and various age of closure. Therefore, pubic symphysis surface was also used. Phase 4 of the development process was assigned to the one preserved pubic symphysis. According to the Brooks and Suchey (1985) diagram this indicates the mean age of 35.2 years, with standard deviation of 9.4 and the range of 23-57. Also in case of this method the results can be affected by the poor surface preservation. It is grained and traces of ridge can be noted, it is hard to say though if the oval outline is complete. Brothwell's (1981) method based on dental wear was applied, showing the age range from 25 to 35. This result lowered the average age and the range. The progress of dental attrition is relatively slight. Although there is light attrition on each present tooth and some more developed on one disarticulated one, the general condition od the teeth in terms of wear is good. This could be due to a good diet of the individual, who could be a monk or a lay brother at Hulton Abbey. <table/><heading>Stature:</heading>The stature of individuals depends strongly on the environmental conditions, geographical location, socio-economic status and genetic features. Lack of sufficient nutrients in diet during the childhood determines the characteristics of the skeleton in adulthood. The studies of Korean War and World War II victims allowed Trotter and Glaser (1958) and later Trotter (1970) to develop formulae for estimating stature. We can compare these data with the statures of post-medieval samples from other British sites showed in Table 4 (Lewis 2001). <table/>Basing on the measurements of the right ulna (Trotter 1970) this individual's stature was estimated for the mean height of 171 cm (5'6") which falls within the range of 167 and 175 cm. <heading>Assessment of Pathology:</heading><heading>Dental pathology:</heading>Serious caries was noted, mainly on the left side. On the present teeth, caries was recorded on the first left maxillar premolar and third left mandibular molar. The second left upper premolar was lost antemortem possibly due to the caries infection. Also lower left first and second molars were lost antemortem, probably for the same reason. Three of the teeth disarticulated postmortem have caries; the two first molars and one second molar. Because caries was strong on the left side, this migh help side the teeth, but there are no clear evidence that the ones with caries were on the left. Medium dental hypoplasias in a form of pits was recorded on the left mandibular premolars and the first and second molars. Also some slight traces on second left maxillar premolar. Heavy to slight calculus present on all teeth. Strongest towards the lingual side of the insisors; also strong on the disarticulated teeth. Mainly supragingival type of calculus is present, although subgingival type also noted on the labial upper incisors. There is little dental attrition developed, which has been mentioned above. The labial teeth (especially evident on the right canine, which is rotated) of mandible are slightly overcrovded, which could be a result of the presence of third molars. There was also medium alveolar destruction noted both on maxilla and mandible. <heading>Cranial and post-cranial pathologies:</heading>There were no cranial or post-cranial pathologies recorded. This is due to the poor preservation of the diagnistic areas and surface erosion. Especially the joints are damaged, the spine is very fragmentary which made the identification of potential pathologies not possible. <heading>Conclusions and Discussion:</heading>This skeleton is one of the most fragmentary of the whole collection from Hulton Abbey. The state of preservation makes it difficult to apply all the anthropological methods. The individual has been assigned as a male, as all the methods applied indicated. However, aging the skeleton showed two different ranges of age, varying from 25-35 to 34-68. This is due to the fact, that from th eosteological point of view this individual appears to be in his forties, however the dentition indicates lower age, due to the good condition is the teeth. The stature of average 171cm is comparable to the other mean statures of the individuals from medieval cemeteries. Lack of bones preserved well enough makes the stature estimation uncertain, as it was not possible to take more than one measurement. Poor and fragmentary preservation also affected the identification of pathologies. On the basis of present material no pathological changes could be observed in the post-cranial area. Due to a great number of teeth preserved, intact mandible, partial maxilla with disarticulated teeth the dental pathologies could be studied in more detail. Presence of caries, calculus, dental hypoplasias, alveolar destruction give us some information about the level of dental higiene in a monastery and medieval society as a whole. Cistersian diet based mainly on bread, vegetables, beans, herbs, on occasion fish or eggs ( URL ). The dentition of this individual reflects this diet, as his teeth were rarely exposed to hard surfaces. In cistercian monasteries main labor force were the lay brothers. If the joint surfaces were better preserved, it might have been possible to guess if the individual was a monk or a lay brother from th elevel of joint erosion. Lack of any signs of trauma suggests also a peaceful community. <heading>References: </heading>Brooks, S and Suchey, JM (1990) Skeletal age determination based on the os pubis: A comparison of the Acsádi-Nemeskéri and Suchey-Brooks methods. Human Evolution 5:227-238. Brothwell, D (1981) Digging up Bones. The excavation, treatment and study of human skeletal remains. Third Edition. Cornell University Press: Ithaca. Krogman, WM and Iscan, MY (1986) The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine. Second Edition. C.C. Thomas: Springfield, Illinois. Lewis, M (2001) St. Bartholomew's Church 2000. Great Barrow, Chester. Report on the Human Skeletal Remains. Department of Archaeology, University of Durham, Durham. Meindl, RS and Lovejoy, CO (1985) Ectocranial suture closure: A revised method for the determonation of skeletal age at death based on the lateral-anterior sutures. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 68:57-66. Phenice, TW (1969) A newly developed method of sexing in the Os pubis. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 30:297-301. Trotter, M (1970) Estimation of stature from intact long bones. In: T.D. Stewart (Ed.) Personal Identification in Mass Disasters. pp. 71-83. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C. Handlling human remains seems to be a great responsibility and moral duty of making sure they are used for a purpose and they actually do provide agreat deal of important information. If we do have to 'disturb the dead' we should do that for a reason. Personally I had doubts, whether I will be able to deal with this pressure. But I asked myself a question if I had anything against if someone did the same with my remains in the future. And the answer is 'no'. But another question is if we study human remains just to learn about the past or could our knowledge also influence the future? In which case these studies would be far more justified. Despite all the theoretical knowledge we were provided with, I think the most important thing is experience, as osteology is based hugely on personal judgements, which require experience. Especially identifying pathologies seems difficult, as when someone sees a skeleton for the first time, everything looks perfectly normal, if it is not an obvious pathological change. To improve my performance the best thing to do would be looking at some more samples, to gain a base for comparison. 