<heading>Introduction:</heading>In order to investigate the urban development of Late Bronze Age Levant it is necessary to explain its territorial and chronological frameworks. The argument starts already about what is actually the land of Levant. This is a geographical rather than political term, referring to the historical lands of the Middle East. Levant lies between hammer and anvil, being located in the proximity of such powers as Egypt, Mesopotamia or Syria. This strategic position has always been causing many conflicts. This work will concentrate mainly on the southern Levant, as this is the territory of Egyptian influence, which left the strongest mark on the Levantine urban landscape. The period of Late Bronze Age has been chosen for analysis in this work. There are several reasons for that. The tripartite division of urban development of the Near East, the Early, Middle and Late Bronze Age, is rooted in the history of Egypt (Falconer 1994). The conclusions are mainly based on pottery data and written sources. The Thirteenth Dynasty marks the end of Middle Bronze II A period, Middle Bronze II C occurred parallel to the Fifteenth Dynasty of 'Asiatic' or 'Hyksos' kings who ruled in Lower Egypt. The end of Middle Bronze Age is characterized by the military activity of the collapsing Hyksos kings. The Late Bronze Age begins, with many towns being destroyed by the conflicts. Again Late Bronze Age II A corresponds to the 'Amarna Age' and Late Bronze Age II B to the Nineteenth Dynasty and its military campaigns of Ramses I and Seti I. In the Late Bronze Age Levant adopted almost a role of an Egyptian colony (Falconer 1994). On the breakthrough of the Middle and Late Bronze Ages the major settlement shifts in the Levant took place. However, is that correct to call these shifts a 'decline'? And if so, a decline merely in terms of population, settlement or material culture? In this work I will try to prove that the processes that took place in the Late Bronze Age Levant cannot be simplistically called a decline, but rather a shift. The investigation is based on a number of excavated sites, the percentage of which is relatively low in comparison to the number of existing sites that have not yet been treated with a trowel. To begin with, some archaeological evidence needs to be presented in order to give a base for a worthy interpretation. <heading>Types of settlement:</heading>There were changes in types of settlement in the LB. They do not, however, give sufficient evidence for the decline scenario. Settlements differed in terms of their origin and it was the economic-political situation in a given region that determined their location and character. Hence, the fluctuating circumstances in the Late Bronze period decided about the change of existing settlements or complete decline of the 'outdated' ones. Thus we can distinguish also satellite settlements (Tel Ma'aravim), villages (Tel Kittan), and solitary temples (Tel Mevorakh). The expansionist activities of Egypt resulted in the creation of fortresses Har'uvit, Bir el-Abed or Deir el-Balah) on the routes linking Canaan with Syria and safeguarding Egyptian control of the region (Gonen 1984). Also the copper-mining settlements (Timna) were established in order to provide the supply of copper for trade (Baumgarten 1992). Garrisons placed in some unfortified tows played a rather symbolic or administrative role for the region during the 18 th Dynasty and with 19 th Dynasty their number increased with the intensification of imperial policy. Thus we can see that the types of settlement introduced by the Egyptians were new to the region and they served imperial purposes, mainly safeguarding the payment of tribute and overall Egyptian dominance. This justifies the wealth of Levant so emphasized in the written sources, but does not mean the prosperity of the region as a whole, but also does not prove a decline. Spatial distribution of towns shows that people not simply abandoned the old settlements, but rather turned to another type of subsistence, which cannot be treated as an indicator of decline but of various socio-economic processes. Number of settlements in the LB was greater in coastal zone than in mountain area. They were located mostly on the edges of cultivated areas, along the roads or at natural harbors (Baumgarten 1992). The areas in the inland, more densely inhabited in MB seemed to suffer a desertion during the later period. The LB period is the time of enormous development of trade with Cyprus, the Aegean as well as lands reaching far beyond the Near East such as India or China. Therefore, the new settlements that were established were in fact along the coast, especially northern, of the Mediterranean, indicating the importance of the trade with Cyprus. Therefore the spatial distribution of the towns indicates the movement of people towards the source of income, which is a sign of some sort of stagnation, but also indicates that some people could find their way in times of crisis, which led to the development of these towns. The trade routes were also safeguarded, the evidence for which we can find in the Amarna correspondence between the rulers about the safety along the trade routes. This implies a certain level of unrest in the region in which earlier the roads did not have to be protected, therefore could indicate decline in economic wealth of the population. <heading>Size, number and new settlements:</heading>These three characteristics of the LB Levantine towns overlap each other, hence it is crucial that we discuss them in relation to one another. From these aspects also the main evidence for decline has been derived, therefore it is crucial to analyze them in order to prove the more complex nature of the phenomenon. Even though the data from excavated sites is rather scarce, a classification of sites in terms of their size has been made. Thus we can distinguish between tiny or small, medium-sized, large and very large towns or metropolises. There was a substantial decrease in size of the existing settlements stressed by Gonen (1984) and Baumgarten (1992), in the transition from the Middle to Late Bronze Age. The authors combined the study of size with the changing numbers of settlements. The problem is more complex than that, because indeed there was a decline in number of large settlements, but in the course of Late Bronze Age the amount of the small and tiny settlements actually increased significantly (Gonen 1984). This could either imply that the size of the existing settlements actually decreased or there were new small settlements established. That results in the general increase in number of settlement towards the end of LB, after the decline of 16 th and 15 th centuries. We need to bear in mind the character of these new and reused settlements, most of which were comparatively small. That means that the urban life did not pick up on such a big scale as in the Middle Bronze Age. Falconer calls this phenomenon 'ruralisation'. This, however, again indicates a shift and decline in inhabited area, but not necessarily decline in general. After the MB II destructions some sites were reinhabited in LB and there is little evidence for existence of new towns. Baumgarten (1992: 144) claims that "in size (...) LB cities display the same tendency toward preserving the achievements of the preceding periods". The area of town was limited to the upper part of the tell and no attempt of expansion was noted as it took place in the previous period (Baumgarten 1992). Gonen, on the other hand, calculated that in the LB the occupied urban area was only 45 percent of the one in MB. If we do not regard the re-inhabited sites as new, their points of view seem to agree because there was a bigger number of small settlements, they were not regarded as new and due to their location they "display the same tendency toward preserving the achievements of the preceding periods". The opinions of scholars can be affected by the character of sites they excavate. After works have been undertaken in the bigger settlements, which show signs of abandonment, it is easy to slip into a conclusion that there was a decline in number of settlements. But we need to remember how much unexcavated areas it still is to examine. Gonen (1984) also claims that there were not many new towns established in LB, however along the northern coast some new ports were found around older MB harbors developed for trade with Cyprus and Mycenae. In the southern, Egypt-dominated part of Levant the already mentioned fortresses establishing took place, which served utterly the imperialistic purposes. The scarcity of information that we posses is caused by lack of attention to small sites. It seems, however, that the new settlements were either those small ones established by people moving from big towns or the new harbors serving the expanding trade. This does not necessarily indicate decline, but a search for alternative ways of subsistence. <heading>Plans and defenses:</heading>In order to announce the general decline in LB Levant we need to analyze the shifts in the towns themselves and see what they might have meant to the lifestyle and status of the inhabitants. The plans of towns were generally of the same type, but there were different variations depending mostly on size of town. Decrease in density of structures was recorded, accompanying the demographic decrease, which is another factor supporting the thesis of general decline of LB settlement. The facts, however, are not so obvious. In each bigger town or city there were both temples and palaces or governor's residencies. In Late Bronze Age palace and temple tend to be separated, with the palace being moved to the area near the city-gate. This may be an indication of the roles of these two authorities in the city and the changing relations between them through time. Social changes are also evident in the architecture of the buildings themselves. The LB period is the time of the development of the courtyard dwellings in the Near East. Most houses were now equipped with a second storey and the movement of the residential rooms from the ground floor can be seen, which is a proof for improvement of the standard of living and maybe raising the status of the household. Certainly we cannot talk about any decline in terms of housing then. Decreased density was a response to decreased population, but no decline in material culture can be seen and in fact quite opposite, the houses improved with time. Ben-Dov (1992) distinguishes two types of settlements, walled and unfortified, in the MB period. He claimed that latter almost entirely disappeared during the Late Bronze Age, whereas the fortified settlements tend to have survived through the course of the following, politically unstable period (Ben-Dov 1992). According to Gonen (1984) the majority of settlements, however, were unfortified at all, which in the times of frequent Egyptian invasions seems to be a great puzzle. This implies that these unfortified settlements must have been those new small villages, as Ben-Dov claims that the MB unfortified settlements disappeared after MB period. Many towns reused old defenses, as this was a common policy of Egypt, not to let the Levantine towns to build their walls in order to have a better control of them, weaken the power of the single city-states and to prevent revolts (Gonen 1984). The crisis in defense system does not have to mean decline, but rather change in political situation and imposing Egyptian policy. <heading>Prosperity or decline? </heading>The presented data lead us to the debate on weather prosperity or decline characterized the Late Bronze Age towns. The urban life during the period under investigation certainly undergoes a significant recession. Many towns, destroyed during the military campaigns are not inhabited for a long time, others do not recover at all. The fate of Levant in LB period is disputable. Albright and Ahituv prove that Canaan could not have any other significance for Egypt as only the passage to other regions beyond it, therefore due to many internal and external factors its economy, thus city-states, declined (Gonen 1984). On the contrary, Kenoyn claims that "by the last years of the Eighteenth Dynasty almost every town for which there is evidence in the Middle Bronze Age was once more flourishing and some had been newly established" (Kenyon 1971, quoted by Gonen 1984). Na'aman also stresses that Canaan paid Egypt large tribute, from which pharaohs would not resign, furthermore they intensified their activity in this region, which resulted in flourishing of Canaanite towns (Na'aman 1981, quoted by Gonen 1984). These opinions largely depend on what sort of material the scholar is drawing upon. Those analyzing the Amarna Letters, like Na'aman will surely note a significant increase in wealth, because the letters do not mention decline, as they were mainly records of Egyptian exploitation of the region. Archaeological data indicate decline, which was based on the evidence of destruction and movement of population that indicated decline. However, we need to remember about the non-sedentary population which is hard to quantify, but still a part of the ancient society. Therefore, although we inevitably deal with crisis after a major conflict, there is no evidence for decline in material culture. More recently Knapp (1987) restates the traditional view of Albright, that LB Canaan underwent a period of serious cultural crisis, but Liebowitz (1987) argues that the increase of ivories in Palestinian sites in LB II is a proof for a cultural zenith rather than decline. Bienkowski (1989), however, criticizes Knapp's opinion, using Jericho, Hazor, Tell Deir 'Alla as examples of degeneration in terms of architecture and pottery (towns outside Egyptian rules), but indicates also that in Beth-shan, Lachish and Tell el-'Ajjul there is evidence for more elaborate architecture and pottery. Moreover he accuses Liebowitz for taking into account only the evidence from elite palaces (ironically, doing the same thing in his studies) in the towns influenced by the Egyptians, such as Megiddo, South Tell el-Far'ah or Beth-shan and therefore argues that these ones indeed developed, but the ones outside of Egyptian control declined during LB period. This variation resulted from the position of a city-state being either strategic or marginal, therefore outside of Egyptian interest. Archaeological evidence from the major tells (or even more precise their elite areas) reveal a great wealth of palaces, temples and luxurious goods. Settlement and demographic studies, on the other hand, prove a serious decline in settlement and population. Bunimovitz (1994) claims the paradox of prosperity and decline is caused by the elites desperately fighting for power in politically and economically unstable city-states. The decline in human resources is the main root of the general stagnation, therefore looking at the settlement pattern we can examine the shifts of population causing socio-economic implications. However, we need to take into account the regional political and economic circumstances while making such generalization. To sum up it seems like there was a general increase in wealth in terms of architecture in the towns under Egyptian influence, but the ones outside of it gradually declined. Indeed the interest of Egyptians proved to be crucial for those towns under their rules, since they were their source of income. Like in case of all major demographic crisises, the population that is left mostly becomes wealthier because of reduced competition, more living space and resources. Although there is a wide scope of written evidence as well as archaeological data for the urban life in Levant in the Late Bronze Age, the character of this data is often misleading, unclear and incoherent (Gonen 1984). The written sources include the list of Thutmosis III (79 settlements in Canaan) and el-Amarna Letters (24 or 25 entries) from which we can conclude that there was a number of strong fortified urban settlements in Levant at that time. Archaeological sources, however, show abandonment, destruction and decline. These potentially contradictory views, however, have a reasonable explanation. It is evident, that there was some level of destruction and abandonment in the LB Levantine towns, whether caused by the Egyptians or any other power. If we assume this was the Egyptian influence, which is recorded in written sources, it becomes clear that by obtaining regular tribute from the region they create an illusion of a wealthy country. They obviously did not know or care much about what was happening there as long as they received the tribute. Therefore any destruction would not be noted in the Amarna letters as long as they were not significant for the amount of money Egypt acquired. <heading>Continuity of occupation: </heading>Gaps in continuity of occupation occur in the LB period in Canaan and the general view ascribes them to the activity of the Egyptian Empire in this territory. There are, however, different opinions regarding this event. One scenario suggests the "rapid destruction", others however claim, that the decline in settlement was a gradual process. Kenyon states that such sites like Tell ed-Duweir (Lachish), Tell el-Fār'ah and maybe Sharuhen captured by Amosis were abandoned, which could have taken a year or a century (Kenyon 1973). In addition, according to Gonen (1984) only 17 out of 77 analyzed settlements were continuously occupied since MB. In the coastal area some of the tiny ports were still occupied and in some other cases new ones were established in the same place. There is no evidence for occupation at Beth-shemesh and Gezer in the northern coastal plain and in the hill country Gibeon, Bethel and Shiloh were abandoned (Kenyon 1973). By abandonment, scholars mean the destruction resulting from Egyptian attack and the outward movement of people that followed it. Some of the abandoned sites, however, do not necessarily show evidence for destruction. In addition, some sites do not follow the pattern of a rapid destruction. Tell el-Far'ah (North and South) do not show evidence for destruction in the discussed period. Furthermore, Beth-shan seems to be continually occupied which is evident in tombs and pottery. The royal scarabs are as well a good indication of the potential continuity of occupation. 13 of the excavated sites show the evidence of royal-name scarabs. Their presence is supposed to prove the Egyptian activity in Levant, but only six of the sites where the scarabs were found show sign of abandonment and destruction. However, Weinstein argues that 81.5% of the scarabs come from these sites, which makes them even a better proof for the Hyksos-Egyptian conflict. Two main questions arise: were the destructions in Levant devastating enough to drive the Hyksos from the territory? And were the Egyptians responsible for them at all? It seems as if the patterns of continuity were more complex and more difficult to establish. Surely Egyptian invasion left a clear sign on the urban system of Levant, the changes being more evident in the southern and coastal parts of the territory. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>In the course of this investigation it has been proved that the urban landscape of Late Bronze Age Levant underwent some substantial changes from its Middle Bronze Age character. Egyptian and Asiatic attacks had tremendous impact on life in Levant during 18 th Dynasty and the region never recovered fully from this blow. General decline in both population and urban life can be noticed, where the latter resulted from the former. Egyptian control imposed on the region after the military campaigns enabled the Pharaohs to send people from Levant to Egypt in order to obtain a cheap labor force. Moreover, the invasions themselves undoubtedly motivated some of the inhabitants of towns to escape from the enemy. In addition, the tribute that the Egyptian imposed on the native people also makes some of them move to satellite towns or villages in order to flee from the taxes. Therefore the decline in number and size of the Levantine towns has been recorded in archaeological record, but it is difficult to trace the exact movement of people. The question that arises is that of the distinction between ruralisation and decline. Here again the answer is not straightforward and regionally unified. The political and economic situation in this area of the Mediterranean contributed to the development of trade, therefore some coastal sites and harbors were established or survived, if not flourished. On the other hand, more inland people seemed to turn to local production of goods mainly for subsistence (and to pay tribute in some places), therefore smaller settlement were favored to the big cities. Within the towns themselves some changes also inevitably occurred, as there were fewer people, hence not so many buildings were necessary and due to Egyptian control fortifications were often just slightly repaired or left to decay, in all probability because the Egyptians wanted to prevent the rebellions in the towns. For this reason also the established administration centers, garrisons within towns and separate fortresses. Paradoxically, some signs of prosperity have been recorded in archaeological evidence, however this comes from wealthier towns and in addition from elite residences and palaces, which are not representative of the population as a whole. Therefore, the argument is that the elites facing the Egyptian influence and unsteady political situation within their city-states had to struggle more to maintain their power, hence showing more material wealth as sign of prosperity. Therefore, it might be more appropriate to use the term "change in lifestyle and subsistence methods" than decline. Indeed we can speak about a decline in population and most definitely in the occupied area, however there is no clear evidence for the decline in material wealth. In fact, there is sign of prosperity in elite groups as well as some significant improvements in the quality of dwellings of regular inhabitants. However, in order to perform a valid investigation of the topic in the future, it is crucial that more sites are archaeologically examined and excavated, especially in the hill country, as there is little evidence from that region. 