<heading>Introduction to the project:</heading>Viking-age shipbuilding has always been an important part of Danish cultural heritage. The techniques of this craft as well as its cultural implication has long been known to the people, however only with the discovery of Skuldelev ships, such a thorough analysis became possible. In the second quarter of 11 th century AD the inhabitants of the Roskilde Fjord loaded five ships with stones and deliberately sunk them in a narrow channel in a place, where the sea bed was naturally raised. These ships then formed a barrier, part of a whole system of barriers protecting the southern part of Roskilde Fjord and the town of Roskilde. The Roskilde Fjord project is one of the most detailed and planned investigations of ships and shipbuilding techniques in the world. It is also outstanding in terms of its duration, from the early investigations in the late 1950s. up till now, when more works on the publications and further interpretation and exhibition are still being carried out. The Danes are a very marine nation, hence the salvage and conservation of the ships is hugely significant for them, as being a part of their national tradition and cultural heritage. The Skuldelev ships are interesting both because of the unconventional purpose they have been used for in the past and of the innovative techniques that have been used to excavate them. By far the most detailed and recent report from the excavations that has ever been published is the volume written by the two site directors, Ole Crumlin-Pedersen and Olaf Olsen, The Skuldelev ships I : topography, archaeology, history, conservation and display published in 2002 by the Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde in cooperation with Centre for Maritime Archaeology of the National Museum of Denmark. This is the main work that this evaluation will be based on, although it is important to remember about numerous smaller publications that appeared since the 1960s. <heading>Strengths:</heading><heading>The approaches and methodology:</heading>Undoubtedly, a strong point of this project is the approach with which the archaeologists started their works. The investigation has been carefully targeted since its very beginning. Firstly, its aim was to document and confirm the date of what has previously been regarded as a Queen's Margreth's Ship of 14 th - 15 th century forming a barrier defending Roskilde against the Swedes. In addition, the newly developing techniques of scuba diving for archaeological excavations could have been applied on this site, since it was only 0.5 - 3 meters under the water surface. There was a need to practice these new techniques and people preferred to practice them on the less significant sites. However, shortly after the first surveys and initial excavations, the site revealed unexpectedly a lot more evidence than it was ever hoped for. Bearing that in mind, the aims of the project altered to the salvation, conservation and exhibition of finds. Undoubtedly an important advantage was the extensive funding received from various organizations interested in promoting the Danish cultural heritage. In 1962, in order to raise the ships safely it was necessary to drain the whole area of the site (ca. 2,500m 2) by building a cofferdam. It could not be drained completely straight away, because the timbers needed to remain moist, otherwise they would corrode and become virtually impossible to lift. Additionally, the stones from ships' cargo had to be prevented from sinking into the soft wood of the construction elements, which would inevitably cause further damage. <heading>Publication:</heading>The volume published in 2002 is an excellent example of a detailed, in-depth and well structured publication of a project report. Crumlin-Pedersen and Olsen have skilfully gathered the results of over forty years of excavation and interpretation and presented it in a form of a modern, well-thought and illustrated publication. The work starts with presenting the environmental context of the find, namely the topography, hydrography and geology of the area, which of so important in underwater archaeology and understanding of the site. Next, they report the excavation process, documentation, analyses, dating, conservation and display methods. This is followed by the description and interpretation of each ship and historical background for the ships and the barrier. The summary is in English, Danish and German. <heading>Excellent exhibition and research:</heading>The finds from the site have been displayed in a purpose-built museum in the port of Roskilde. Since the first excavations, the museum has expanded both in physical and theoretical sense. It includes the exhibition hall itself, but also a boatyard, where many other activities are taking place. A lot of attention has been put into the conservation of the ships. The original planks and other construction elements were exposed as part of a metal skeleton, with those elements incorporated where they would have been originally. This visualization is surely very effective and helpful for visitors without archaeological background to interpret the elements, which otherwise would remain largely inexplicable. The museum became also a centre for maritime studies in Denmark and one of the most important in Europe. The extensive research conducted by its staff is a base for many other publications and projects. Experimental archaeology is also an important component of this research. Numerous journeys made on replicas of Skuldelev ships and other vessels contribute enormously to our understanding of both the technicalities of early medieval ships as well as the navigation methods. <heading>Historical and social context:</heading>The ships have been put into a much wider historical context. The authors did not concentrate only on the techniques of shipbuilding, but also attempted to place their finds in a more social context. Although it might be obvious to do so, shipwrecks have not been extensively used as evidence for social contacts between communities. The aspects of technological advances of a given society and its relation to other groups have often been two separate areas of study. In case of Skuldelev project, however, society plays an important role in the interpretation of finds. This is evident, for instance, in the reconstruction of the history of use of the ships, the functions they had and how does that fit into a larger picture of the region. Undoubtedly, the development of processual and post-processual archaeology in the 1970s and 1980s significantly influenced the methods of interpretation of the finds. <heading>Weaknesses:</heading>It is comparatively demanding to evaluate the weaknesses of the project, considering its scale and duration. Significant drawback of the project is a limited number of thorough, detailed and summarized publications of the results until recently, when the above mentioned volume was at last finalized. It is possible, that due to the lack of proper technology, mane data could not be analyzed in a sufficient way to present it in such a form. Additionally, it is fair to suspect, that Crumlin-Peredsen and Olsen were largely preoccupied with the conservation and presentation of the finds to the local people, as that was their initial priority. There have been, indeed, many technological developments since the ships have been raised. New techniques of archaeological investigation were invented, such as geophysics or chemical analysis. Most of the data from the Skuldelev ships, however, come from the time of excavations in 1960s. Therefore, these new techniques have not been applied to them to the full extent yet. Although new dating methods have been already used and the species of wood analyzed, not much else has been done in terms of other potential source of information, such as the more detailed analysis of organic remains or the chemical analysis of traces of food or plants. Although there have not been many other stray finds discovered with the ships, the ones that have been found have not received enough attention. They have been studied in their own context, but have neither been put into a wider context of the region nor of the relations with other regions. Many inferences could have been made about the social aspect of the finds, had they been analyzed from a slightly more anthropological point of view. <heading>Conclusions:</heading>Roskilde project is a unique example of marine archaeology research, both in terms of its significance for Danish people and of the understanding of the development of Viking-age shipping. The wrecks themselves and the barrier as a whole can tell us a lot about the technology and society of contemporary people. The scale of the project, its importance and the amount of funding it received, all contributed to the establishment of such a successful centre for marine archaeology, which is a leading institution in Europe. Also because of the innovative techniques of excavation, the project became known to the wider public already at an early stage, which is evident in the number of people that visited the site when the works were still in progress. 28,000 people came to Roskilde to marvel the cofferdam that has been erected around the site and the emerging Viking ships, such an important part of their cultural heritage. The project has numerous strong points, bearing in mind its extent, duration and scale it has almost reached perfection. Since the very beginning the methodology applied to the analysis of the site has been innovative and effective. During the first phase of excavations in the 1950s the techniques of scuba diving excavations have been put into practice and during the second phase in 1960s archaeologists showed even more technological creativeness and advancement by constructing a cofferdam to drain the site. In the course of research in the post-excavation phase, the interpretation of finds has been strongly influenced by the development of processual archaeology, which resulted in adoption of a more contextual approach. This allowed putting the site into the historical and social context of the Viking-age Europe. Ship wrecks can be a useful source of information about the different types of contacts that occurred between European societies. This, however, has not been much explored yet, but Roskilde project is surely a pioneer in this field. The results of the investigation have been very well published in the analyzed volume. The presentation of data is well-thought, clear, organized and clever. The authors began with the environmental background of the site, described the finds, their interpretation and the methods of conservation and dating. The volume is valuable both for professional archaeologists as well as simply people interested in the finds. Furthermore, the results have been excellently displayed in a purpose-built museum building. The wooden elements have not just been put on display as they were found, but there is indication which part of ship they came from. The museum also made a reconstruction of the whole way of living associated with marine activities. Many attractions for kids have been organized, which draws even more attention to this already popular tourist destination in Denmark. The drawback of the project is the enormous amount of time it took to produce a decent publication summarizing the obtained data. This, however, could be explained by the continuous technological developments that the museum team encountered in the way, which provided them with more and more new material, unavailable before. Bearing that in mind, the volume already seems slightly outdated, and many other things could have been analyzed, weather physically or chemically. Also the stray finds might have potentially been put into slightly wider context. Therefore, there are still a few points the authors can improve in their next publication, which in progress and will cover the experimental side of the project. Let us hope that the technology will not be too much ahead the authors at the time of this next publication. 