<heading>1.0 Introduction. </heading>This investigation into spoken discourse will focus on the interactional approach to sociolinguistics in relation to male and female speech. The aim of spoken discourse analysis is to verbalise, or make explicit, information that would otherwise be taken for granted (Gumpertz, 1982: 22) and 'to show what talking accomplishes in peoples lives and society at large' (Cameron 2001). Two transcriptions of speech will be analysed in order to take an in-depth look at how people speak, how language use differs in different social environments, and whether speech style alters with groups of males and females. One transcript to be used consists of four female students, whilst the other is a transcript taken from BBC2's Newsnight programme consisting of four male speakers. The report will start with a literature review of previous relevant interactional sociolinguistic studies in order to provide a basis for analysis. From the literature review a research question and hypotheses will be formed. Under the methodology the sociolinguistic approach will also be reviewed, with reasoning for its use within the context of this investigation and the particular features that will be analysed. Reasoning for not employing the other approaches will also be given. The methodology will also include the source of the data used, a brief discussion of the subjects involved and comments on the variables, such as those mentioned previously. The Interactional sociolinguistic approach will then be applied to the transcripts, results presented and consequently discussed. The conclusion will assess how far the results go to support the literature and the limitations will be discussed. <heading>2.0 Literature Review. </heading>Maltz and Borker (1982, Litosseliti, 2006: 37) suggested that linguistic differences between genders are similar to those that exist across cultures, with each gender being socialised differently. This seems to be supported through the evidence that between the ages of five and fifteen children mainly socialise in same sex groups (Crawford, 1995: 88) and therefore learn different rules of friendly interaction (Graddol and Swann, 1989: 90). These separate social spheres lead to different approaches to communication, due to the genders functioning in different ways dependant on situation with boys opting for a hierarchical structure within a large group, whilst girls prefer smaller groups or pairs with the focus being on closeness (Tannen, 1990: 43). Gender differences are clear from an early age, with Tannen noting them in children as young as 3;0 (Tannen, 1990: 44) and seem to explain miscommunication through socialisation differences. Socialisation is also responsible for the ways in which men and women are treated differently from an early age and the consequent affects of this in later life (Crawford, 1995: 14). Extra linguistic features such as tag questions, minimal responses, interruptions and hedgers demonstrate the differences between male and female speech and consequently seem to go some way to explain the different conversational styles adopted by men and women. Women are said to take a more collaborative approach to language (Edelsky 1981 as in Romaine 1999: 159) supporting each other by providing encouragement to their conversational partners (Holmes, 2001: 297) whereas men are more competitive (Aries 1976 as in Coates 2004: 126/7) for the floor often being found to disagree with and challenge the previous speaker (Holmes, 2001: 299). The content and purpose of male and female speech also differs with men using language to convey and obtain information, whilst women use language to establish, nurture and develop relationships (Holmes, 1995: 2)- these differing styles have been coined as report talk and rapport talk (Tannen, 1991 as in Talbot 1998: 98). Men's competitive style has been said to be responsible for males dominating public speech, however Holmes (1995: 2) reports that women often find it difficult to get men to talk in their own homes. In mixed gendered conversation men have been found to be responsible for 96% of the total interruptions (Zimmerman and West as in Crawford 1995: 41). However, interpretations of interruptions may differ between men and women due to women's collaborative style seeming to identify these violations as a form of solidarity instead of competition for the floor (Romaine 1999: 158). Tag questions have been said to be a female feature (Lakoff 1975 as in Holmes, 2001: 286) expressing uncertainty and mitigating threat, thus being tentative and weak (Coates and Cameron 1988: 76), however, not all tags have been found to have the same function. Tags have been divided into two categorise by Homles (as in Talbot 1998: 41): affective and referential, whilst referential tags indicate uncertainty, affective tags have been found to indicate solidarity (facilitating affective) and mitigate threat (softening affective). Although women have been found to use twice as many tags than men (Fishman 1978, Litosseliti, 2006: 33), the function of these tags has been suggested not to indicate uncertainty with Holmes (1984, 2001: 290) finding men use tag questions to express uncertainty 61% of the time, whilst women only do so 35% of the time. Similarly women have been assigned the stereotype of asking lots of questions (Brouwer et al 1979 as in Coates 2004: 93), however it has been suggested that these too are used to maintain conversation (Maltz and Borker :213 whilst men's use of questions supports Tannen's (1991,Talbot 1998: 98) report talk. It has been found by Dubois and Crouch (1975, as in Lakoff : 139) that men used more questions than women at a conference with Bashiruddinn et al (1990), Swaker (1979) and Holmes (1988, 1995) finding similar results in academic or presentation situations (Coates 2004: 94) seeming to support men competitive speech style and dominance in the public arena. Similarly, hedgers have been suggested to be unassertive with women being found to use twice as many as men (Fishman 1978 as in Maltz and Borker 1982: 33), yet Holmes found the use of hedgers with a falling tone to show certainty (1984 as in Coates 2004: 88). The addition of hedgers, such as like, act as a form of politeness that detaches the speaker from what they are saying, therefore avoiding negative evaluations of others or positive evaluations about themselves, although Deuchar (1988 as in Holmes, 1995: 2) suggests that those who are powerless must be polite hence women using more features of polite speech. Politeness is, however, divided into positive and negative forms, with positive politeness indicating solidarity and shared attitudes, whilst negative politeness avoids intrusion and demonstrates respect (Holmes, 2001: 268). Unsurprisingly, women have been found to use more features of positive politeness (Holmes, 1995: 6). Minimal responses have also been found to be used differently (Cameron, 2001: 117) with women using them to indicate attention whilst men se them as a sign of agreement (Mesthrie 1999: 233). Hence the tendencies for women to feel men are not paying attention and men's confusion when women use minimal responses without agreeing (Coates and Cameron 1988 70). <heading>Research question. </heading>After considering all the literature a research question can then be formed as follows: If the emergence of a dual culture between the genders, as suggested by Maltz and Borker (1982, as in Coates and Cameron 1988 124) can be founded and men have been found to favour public speech (Tannen, 1990: 76/7) does this suggest that men use more extra linguistic features in public speech, in the same way that women have been found to use more extra linguistic features in private or rapport talk? From this question the following hypotheses have been formed: Men use a greater or equal number of hedging devices in public conversation as women do in private conversations. Men use a greater or equal amount of tag questions in public conversations as women do in private conversations. Men use a greater or equal number of minimal responses in public as women do in private conversations. Men interrupt equally or less in public conversations as women do in private conversations. <heading>4.0 Methodology</heading><heading>4.1 Approaches. </heading>The four approaches studied have all been found to have their strengths and weaknesses, with certain approaches being favoured for different variants of speech. It was felt that, for the purposes of this investigation, the pragmatic approach, although effective to an extent due to its shared belief in miscommunication and emphasis on polite forms of speech, identified as female traits; would not be a successful approach to use due to its focus on implicit meaning being generated through what is said. The nature of the male transcript, it was felt, would be rife with "minimally explicit" (Holmes, 2001:263) which may be lost in translation due to the political content of the transcript and the analysis only being carried out on a selection of the interview. Similarly, conversational analysis was not favoured due to it not being compatible with simultaneous talk, a common feature of female speech. Conversational analysis assumes all overlaps and interruptions as a violation which seems to contradict suggestions of female's collaborative style and therefore it was felt that the female transcript may be compromised. Ethnography of speaking was also thought to be a limiting approach due to the fact that gender is not considered enough for it to be the most beneficial to this particular investigation, focusing on the reasons behind the differences. The interactional approach to sociolinguistics was favoured as it was felt it would give a comprehensive overview of the transcripts. <heading>4.2 Interactional Sociolinguistic Approach. </heading>Although speech seems to function as a means of exchanging referential information, there are more implicit functions that aid our understanding of others (Holmes, 2001: 259). When listening to someone speak we are establishing who they are, their purpose and possibly even identifying features that we misunderstand. Interactional Sociolinguistics is an approach that considers the different speech features that are used during naturally occurring conversations (Tannen 1984 as in Schiffrin 1994: 106), considering whether different subcultures, such as gender, class or ethnicity; use different speech styles and, if so, what effect do these speech style have on others (Gumpertz, 1982: 1)? Do these different styles cause miscommunication? The interactional approach to sociolinguistics highlights the significance of small differences in spoken discourse (Cameron, 2001: 106) with Maltz and Borker's (1984) suggesting that males and females belong to different subcultures leading to the decision to look at an all male and an all female transcript. The approach will allow me to investigate whether certain characteristics, noted in the previous literature review, explicitly characterise a speaker as one gender or another, or whether formality and public speech acts as a variable. Tannen (1990) felt men were more comfortable in public talk, and women more comfortable in private talk due to each genders dominance in each arena (Tannen, 1990: 76/7). The approach looks at, both, non-verbal and verbal features. Non-verbal features include prosody (stress, rhythm, intonation etc), paralanguage (voice quality, hesitation, speed etc), body language and vocalisations such as laughing, crying or coughing (Cameron, 2001: 109). Verbal features that are studied within this approach include hedges, minimal responses, tag questions, commands and directives, interruptions, overlaps and simultaneous speech, swearing or taboo language and so on. However, the data includes no visual aids and therefore aspects of non-verbal features will be impossible to investigate e.g. body language. For this reason verbal features will be the focus of the analysis. The key features that will be analysed will be interruptions and overlaps, minimal responses, hedgers, use of questions and tag questions, due to their significance in gender research; however other features may be commented on briefly. <heading>4.3 Data</heading>The first transcript is an all female sample of informal speech recorded and transcribed by the students who feature in the transcript. The participants are all university students in their early twenties and were all participating in the recording as part of an assignment. The second transcript is an all male sample from a political interview. The four participants adopt the roles of interviewer, interviewee and two members of the public who act as challengers to the interviewee's responses, via their recalling personal experiences. The transcript source is BBC 2's Newsnight programme. The reason for analysing a public male transcript and a private female transcript is to look at extra linguistic features in the settings which both genders are said to be most dominant in (Tannen, 1990: 76/7) . <heading>5.0 Results. </heading><heading>5.1: Interruptions in male conversation </heading><table/><heading>5.2: Interruptions in female conversation</heading><table/><heading>5.4: Questions (including tag questions)</heading><table/><heading>5.5: Tags</heading><table/><heading>5.6: Minimal responses: </heading><table/><heading>5.7: Hedging results: </heading>Results for hedgers considered the context as "like" is commonly used as he demonstration of speech <table/><heading>6.0: Findings</heading>Research question and hypotheses Men use a greater or equal number of hedging devices in public conversation as women do in private conversations. Men were found to use fewer hedging devices than women in these transcripts, with women using hedging devices 8 times and men using hedging devices 6 times. Men use a greater or equal amount of tag questions in public conversations as women do in private conversations. Men were found not to use tag questions in this transcript, whereas women were found to use them at 3 intervals. However, the tag questions used by women appear to be affective. Men use a greater or equal number of minimal responses in public as women do in private conversations. The men in this transcript were found to use no minimal responses, whilst women used them 9 times. Men interrupt equally or less in public conversations as women do in private conversations. The transcript does not show any evidence of men violating turn-taking conventions, whilst women are found to interrupt15 times, however 11/ 15 of these constitute as overlaps as the original speaker did not yield their turn the majority of the time. <heading>7.0 Summary. </heading>The aim to answer the research question using the interactional approach to discourse analysis has proven male speech to use fewer interruptions, minimal responses, hedgers, questions and tag questions than female speakers. The verbal features under analysis were noted and illustrated quantitatively, as shown previously, to show how often the features were present within each speech situation. <heading>8.0 Discussion. </heading>Analysis shows that women use all of the extra linguistic features identified as significant to this investigation more than men involved. Women were found to use more interruptions than men in their conversations, with men demonstrating no violations of turn-taking conventions. However, of the fifteen violations made by women 11/15 were classified as overlaps therefore supporting women's collaborative speech style (Edelsky 1981 as in Romaine 1999: 159) On one occasion in the male transcript and just let me try to explain was used before a statement, suggesting the speaker anticipated they would be challenged and possibly interrupted; this seems to support the notion that men try to hold the floor. The occurrence of more female violations contradicts the findings that men interrupt more than women, however many of these finding come from mixed gendered research- a sample that was not analysed for the purpose of this investigation. Women were found to use more questions and tag questions than men, which adheres to the stereotype (Brouwer et al 1979 as in Coates 2004: 93) despite the interview context of the male transcript. In an interview the interviewer controls the topics and evaluates the responses, whilst the interviewee offers information dependant on what they feel is expected of them (Coupland, 2000: 9). Men's use of fewer questions, despite this could be due to men's use of more directives and aggravated phrases (West1998, Coates 2004: 115) e.g.  FORMULA  Women have been found to fail in their attempts to interact by rephrasing what they would normally phrase as a question as a statement (Fishman 1978: 404) however this could be due to women being found to use less direct speech than men (Lakoff 1975,Tannen in Gumpertz 1982: 225). The interviewee demonstrates negative politeness in response to the interviewer's aggravated phrase in example 1: e.g.  FORMULA  Here the use of I'm sorry seems to be being used as a mark of respect and to mitigate any offence that may be caused by saying that the interviewer is speaking nonsense, supporting the idea that negative politeness avoids imposing on others (Holmes 1995: 5) Minimal responses were also shown to be used by women in these transcripts with the male transcript producing no evidence of this feature. The distinction made between men and women's perceptions of minimal responses may be the reason for this with men perceiving minimal responses to indicate agreement, and in this context of debating the effectiveness of the health service, both sides are arguing very different points and therefore may provide reason for their absence, whilst the female transcript has nine instances of minimal responses supporting the solidarity associated with female speech. Hedgers were used by both men and women in the transcripts analysed, however, once again women were found to use more than men, thus supporting the literature. The hedgers used in the male transcript were all used by the interviewee suggesting that he did not wish to commit himself to certain statements which could not necessarily be proven or followed through at a later date e.g.  FORMULA  The use of a hedger here avoids any future backlash as it avoids asserting that this is a fact known to the interviewee. Despite women being found to use more hedging devices, as the research suggested, the classification of hedgers did prove difficult in the female transcript due to the use of like acting as a demonstration of a speech or action e.g.  FORMULA  Characteristics such as these have been labelled "mall talk" with the suggestion that the speaker appears unassertive (Cameron, 2001: 112). Therefore, men have not been found to demonstrate female speech characteristics across the public domain in the transcript analysed as the research question suggested. <heading>9.0 Limitations. </heading>The male transcript used, although public, was also very formal and errors on the interviewee's part would have created negative publicity. This suggests that an element of planning was more than likely present, as opposed to the female transcript which demonstrated natural interaction. The male transcript did not follow the same written conventions as the female transcript. This meant that interruptions had to be assumed by the end of prose. Some features may have been demonstrated non-verbally e.g. nodding, therefore visual aids would have been beneficial Therefore, if the investigation were to be repeated the same transcript conventions would be used throughout to ensure accuracy. 