<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Many physical and chemical factors e.g. light, temperature and nutrient, can overcome seed dormancy. When a single factor is applied, the effect on germination can be small or none, but the combined effects of two or more factors could be considerate. In this experiment, seeds of an important annual weed, Chenopodium album L. in the goose foot family (Chenopodiaceae), which grows in waste and cultivated ground throughout the British Isles (Stace, 1991), were used. Murdoch et al. (1989) showed the effect of alternating temperatures on C. album seeds germination in the present of nitrate nutrient and light. In this experiment, tests were set up to measure the effects of these three factors, alternating temperatures, light and nitrate nutrient, which are the possible main factors in determining the germination of weed seeds in the soil environment. Appropriate controls, constant temperature, darkness and water, as well as all possible combination of treatments were used to measure the separate effect of one factor, and any possible interactions of two or more factors. The result is a 2 3 factorial experiment with eight different treatments. <heading>MATERIALS AND METHODS</heading>Table 1 summarises the set-up of the experiment. Each sample was a batch of 50 C. album seeds subjected to one of the eight treatments and each treatment had 3 replicated samples, which gave a grand total of 24 samples in the whole experiment. <table/>Each sample of 50 seeds was tested in Petri dish on top of 2 circles of Whatman Grade 181 Seed Testing Paper. The paper was moistened either by 4.5 ml of purified water or 4.5 ml of 0.01 M potassium nitrate solution. The Petri dishes with seeds were either kept in clear polythene bags and exposed to light during test, or wrapped in aluminium foil for dark treatment. Two incubators were used, one set at 20 ˚C constant and the other at alternating between 10 ˚C for 12 hours and 20 ˚C for 12 hours in a day. After 14 days, the number of germination for each treatment was counted. ANOVA (analysis of variance) statistical analysis was carried out on germination data by using a statistical program, MINITAB Release 14 and the model of analysis was set to General Linear Model. As ANOVA analysis is base on the following two assumptions: the observations of any treatments are normally distributed; the variance of this distribution is the same for all other different treatments (i.e. 1 = 2= 3 ... = n). However, percentage data may not satisfy these two assumptions if there is a wide range of values (lower that 20% or higher that 80%). To correct this problem, angular transformation (angular transform equation and raw experiment data are in Appendix 1) was carried out before ANOVA analysis. All the data present here after are angular data except otherwise stated differently. <heading>RESULTS</heading>Seeds under 20 ˚C constant temperature, in water and darkness had the lowest germination, whereas seeds under alternating 10 ˚C / 20 ˚C temperature, light and potassium nitrate solution had the highest germination with more than 5 times increases in term of mean percentage than the former treatment (Table 2). By simple comparisons of the mean germination angles between dark and light, between water and nitrate and between constant and alternating temperatures, they seem to suggest all these factors contribute to the increase in germination. However, the results from ANOVA analysis (Table 3) paint a different picture. The only two factors with significant effects on germination are medium and temperature (both have p-values < 5%), but not illumination or light (p-value = 26.7%), even thought there were some increases in the mean angles (Table 2 and Table 4(a)). The t-test results (Table 5) also support this assertion (detail of t-test calculation is in Appendix 3). <table/>p-values of interactions (Table 3) also indicate that there were no significant interactions between any factors. This is confirmed by the interaction plots in Figure 1 (the lines are almost parallel to each other in all the interaction plots) and the results of t-test on two factors interaction (Table 6). As there were no significant interactions, the increase in germination in combination of different treatments was due mainly to the additive effects of different factors. <table/><table/><table/><table/><figure/><heading>CONCLUSIONS</heading>A 2 3 factorial experiment on the effect of three different factors, alternating temperatures, light and nutrient on C. album seeds overcoming dormancy had been carried out. Results of ANOVA analysis on seeds germination data show that alternating of temperatures and nitrate availability are the significant factors. Although there were some increases in seeds germination under light, but these increases were not significant. Moreover, the results of the experiment also suggest that there were no significant interactions between light, alternating temperatures and nitrate. The increase in seeds germination when two or more treatments were combined was due to the additive effects. 