Sporting practices and their associated subcultures have to be conceptualised as possessing a unique nature that allows them to function independently of the societal context within which they exist, if it is to be argued that they bear no relation whatsoever to the social construction of masculine ideals. This is because masculine ideals are created and shaped by the society in which they are located, yet they also affect the natures of the institutions and cultural forces that influence them. This essay is concerned with tracing the historical construction of sport, and with assessing the relationship (if any) in contemporary society between sporting practices, masculine ideals, and the dominant cultural and institutional forces of modern society in order to evaluate whether or not sporting practices are related to the social construction of masculine ideals. This essay will argue that sporting practices are intimately bound up with the social construction of masculine ideals, and that the relationship between sport and society provides crucial insights into the other societal forces that contribute to the forms these ideals take. A central concept that will be employed throughout will be the concept of hegemonic masculinity. Masculine ideals as they exist in contemporary society will be conceptualised throughout the essay as forming the analytical tool that is hegemonic masculinity. Hegemonic masculinity can be described as occupying the dominant position in the gender order of society; this is very different to a conventional patriarchal view of society that argues all men are dominant over all women. Rather, the concept of hegemonic masculinity and the gender order proposes that the dominant force in gender relations is a particular kind of masculinity that has developed cultural primacy; consequently, all alternative masculinities and all femininities are subordinated and become involved in a dynamic relationship in which the power of the hegemonic masculinity has to adapt and evolve in order to retain its dominance. Therefore, this essay will attempt to deconstruct the concept of hegemonic masculinity into some of its constituent masculine ideals through discussing the role of sporting practices in ensuring the dominance of males over females; reinforcing the normality of heterosexuality; marginalising black males; and in emphasising the importance of physical prowess in order to show how sporting practices contribute to the stability of hegemonic masculinity itself. The essay begins, however, with an evaluation of perspectives that argue the development of institutionalised sporting practices was unaffected by issues of masculinity. The development of sporting practices in the 19 th Century has been conceptualised as reflecting the wider social transformations that have come to characterise modern society. It has been argued that modern sport shares the characteristics of modern society; in Weberian terms, sport is bureaucratised, secular, structured by rules and regulations, and can therefore be described as rational; in Marxists terms, sport is capitalist, specialised, quantified, defined by a distinction between work and leisure, and is consequently seen as bourgeois (Eitzen, cited in Crossett in Messner and Sabo, 1990; 47). Alternatively, the opposite has been argued. Although sport appears rationalised, it is essentially the institutionalisation of play, and is consequently irrational and purposeless, which means it has developed as an alternative to the forces of modernity (even if the institutional form that it takes is modern). Guttman has described sport as having its "roots in the dark soil of our instinctive lives" but that the form it takes is "dictated by modern society" (Guttman, cited in Crossett in Messner and Sabo, 1990; 47). Throughout these descriptions a connection between masculinity and the development of institutionalised sport has been ignored. The justification for the exclusion of issues of masculine ideals is derived from the belief that the 19 th Century concept of 'manliness' (which can be interpreted as embodying the masculine ideals of the period, and which was of central importance to the participants of sporting practices) was a 'confused moral concept' that embraced such contradictions as aggression and ruthlessness alongside compassion for the defeated; consequently manliness has been viewed as a front for nationalism and class cohesion (Mangan cited in Crossett in Messner and Dabo; 1990; 45). However, this perspective cannot explain how international competitions expanded upon already existing sporting institutions, and that class segregation was less prominent when sport was initially institutionalised (Crossett in Messner and Sabo, 1990; 47). Similarly, the perspective that sport is essentially irrational cannot explain how it has developed into a major social institution in an era that has witnessed increasing rationality (47). Therefore, although the Weberian and Marxists characterisations of sporting institutions aren't altogether inaccurate they need to be expanded to accommodate the influence of a gender ideology (of which 'manliness' formed a crucial part) upon the development of institutions in modern society (47). Todd Crossett endeavoured to show how the English public schools were a pivotal institution in disseminating the gender ideology, and his evidence for this shall now be discussed. Crossett convincingly described the mutually reinforcing relationship between sport in public schools and the emerging gender ideology of the 19 th Century. Crossett argues that the economic developments of the early 19 th Century resulted in a shift in power away from the aristocracy in favour of the bourgeoisie, and that the spread of liberal political theories which legitimised the ascendance of the bourgeoisie also increased the power of (bourgeois) women (Crossett in Messner and Sabo, 1990; 49). However, by the mid to late 19 th Century men began to displace women from the positions of power they had acquired (for example the male medical profession appropriated healthcare and midwifery and institutionally excluded women from positions of power), and they were able to do this because of the development of an ideology about the 'nature' and 'roles' of men and women (50). Pseudo-scientific justifications for the dominance of men over women became accepted as the truth, as "almost without fail, experts related a woman's fragility and inferiority to her genital organs" (50). Crossett argues that the development of sport in public schools socialised men into accepting this ideology and defining themselves as biologically superior to women (51). He describes how athleticism was placed in the foreground and deemed necessary for the development of manly, muscular students (52). The importance of athleticism was intimately connected with the popular view of the effect of sex upon the male body; sex and masturbation were perceived to make men suffer from exhaustion (as manly energy was believed to reside in sperm, and men were seen to possess a finite amount) and athletics helped to regenerate the body (52). Those men who were "not in control of their passions" (typically those who weren't involved in athletics) were labelled "hysterical, sensitive and nervous" which is significant as these were appellations commonly reserved exclusively for women (53). Therefore, without sport men were in danger of becoming womanlike, or "delicate and degenerate" (53). This shows that the development of institutionalised sport itself was predicated upon a societal ideology (that it served to reinforce) that sought to justify the masculine ideal of the dominance of men over women. Although sport as an institution has evolved beyond the 19 th Century public schools and women are not institutionally excluded from (most) sporting spheres, women are still marginal figures in contemporary sport, and this shall now be explored. The marginalisation of women in contemporary sporting spheres is made possible because of structural inequalities within sport itself, and because of the predominant societal perception that grants 'male sport' higher social esteem. The organisational bodies that govern most sports (even those where the majority of the athletes are female) are typically dominated by men (Bryson, 1994; 51). Similarly, institutions that are linked to sport such as sports journalism and corporations (involved in sponsorship) are conventionally male dominated spheres (52). Even when women do become professional athletes their achievements (and 'women's sport' in general) are largely ignored by the media and consequently receive very little attention or esteem (54). When women are given media coverage it is often in terms of their identity outside of their profession, typically with regards to their relational, marital, or familial situations (58). The justification for this marginalisation of women is the same stereotypes that originated in the public schools; namely that women are weaker and inferior to men and consequently their sport is less entertaining. Due to this contention there has been much discussion as to why women shouldn't compete with men in sports which rely on speed and strength (55). However, some sports rely on stamina and in other sports it is an advantage to be lighter, yet these sports in which women excel are excluded from the debate regarding sporting prowess, which shows this justification for marginalisation has an ideological nature (55). Therefore, contemporary sport influences the social construction of the masculine ideal of dominating women by ensuring that women are prevented from controlling how sporting institutions and organisational bodies are governed, which successfully negates any possibility that female athletes may use these institutions to re-shape the societal perception of 'female sport' as inferior. Whilst it has been established that women are subordinate to men in sport, the nature of men as the oppressing group needs to be discussed. The portrayal of sporting practices in the media reveals how specific types of masculinity that form the 'hegemonic masculinity' are glamorised and prioritised whilst other masculinities (and the men who enact them) are dismissed as deviant. The predominant image that emerges from the media representation of the male body is that a man should be muscular, athletic, powerful and healthy (Parker, 1996; 130). This perception emerges not only because of the extensive use of visual images of male athletes (who embody these physical ideals) but also because the male body exists at the intersection of sport, the media, and the consumer culture of society (130). Within contemporary society a culture has emerged that prioritises youth and beauty, and the portrayal of sportsmen in the media is part of the multiplicity of images and practices that individuals consume (such as yoga classes and healthy eating) in order to achieve these ideals (130). Therefore, the media representation of the male body shows how sport and the consumer culture are pivotal influences on the social construction of the hegemonic masculine ideal of physical prowess (as males who do not possess physical prowess are dismissed as inferior through the application of such labels as 'wimp') (132). Similarly, the masculine ideal of heterosexuality as the norm is reinforced by the media representation of sport. The depiction of homosexual male athletes is conspicuous largely because of its absence, and it can be argued that this is because there are comparatively few gay sportsmen (132). However, the relationship between the media and the dominant sporting culture of heterosexuality is more complex than this, as the media can be understood as actually creating this culture of heterosexuality through its obsession with "the macho exploits of Britain's male athletes" (132). Therefore, the media representation of the athletic male body and the normality of heterosexuality shows how sport is central to the social construction of these hegemonic masculine ideals as any alternative masculinities that do not feature in sport are labelled as inferior or ignored. The media representation of sport also contributes to the construction of the hegemonic masculine ideals of dominating women and the marginalisation of black men, and this relationship shall now be examined. The mediation of sporting practices (particularly violent sports) involves a complex and often contradictory relationship of identification and dissociation between male spectators from higher status backgrounds and the athletes themselves. The portrayal of sporting practices can be understood as naturalising the dominance of men over women, as media images of sport suppress the similarities between men and women and emphasise the differences, and then set about "weaving a structure of symbols and interpretations" around these differences to make them appear natural (Messner in Messner and Sabo, 1990; 101). Consequently, a sense of identification develops between male spectators and the images of sportsmen they consume which means that men identify themselves as physically superior to women; this sense of identification develops despite the fact that the majority of the male spectators are largely as physically dissimilar to professional male athletes as non-athlete females are (103). Conversely, the media representation of sporting practices also provides the male spectators with an image of a 'primitive other' embodied in the male athlete against whom he can define himself as modern and civilised (104). This sense of dissociation develops because the media representations portray images of sportsmen as predominantly black (and black men are historically associated with a notion of 'otherness'). It can be argued that the overrepresentation of ethnic minorities in sporting spheres is the result of a rational decision made by nascent black athletes to pursue a sports career, as it offered the best possibility of developing a career that would provide economic security because young black men are institutionally excluded from educational and occupational opportunities (104). Therefore, media images of sporting practices serve to reinforce the hegemonic masculine ideals of dominating women and marginalising black men through portraying 'natural' differences between men and women, and through depicting the black male body as an animalistic force. However, black men are not merely passive recipients of a racist social order, and their agency in relation to masculinity and sport shall now be elaborated. Through sporting practices black men have attempted to counteract the social invisibility imposed on them by an institutionally racist society, yet it is their acceptance of the ideals that compose hegemonic masculinity which ultimately ensures they do not affect the social order. Due to their exclusion from the educational and occupational institutions that confer social esteem on the individuals who have access to them, many black men channel their creative energies into constructing "unique, expressive and conspicuous styles of speech, demeanour and walk etc" (a phenomenon that Majors calls the 'cool pose') which offsets the invisibility they suffer due to their exclusion from the aforementioned institutions (Majors in Messner and Sabo, 1990; 111). Consequently, many black men pursue sporting careers because they can express themselves through the "virtuosity of a performance" and this offers the most realistic route to achieving the goals of hegemonic masculinity (such as being the breadwinner, having strength and dominating women) (110). Therefore, the response of black males through their concentration on sport represents an adaptation to, not a submission to, the hegemonic masculinity. However, in spite of their adaptation, their actions invariably do not allow them to transcend their subordination to the hegemonic masculinity. Through accepting the ideals of hegemonic masculinity black men pursue sporting careers in a context that is constructed by the racist wider society. In focusing predominantly on sport, black men accept the educational under-representation that is fostered by educational institutions; this is to their detriment as educational attainment is the principle route through which the ideals of hegemonic masculinity are realised and social power is attained (111). Even when black men do manage to become professional athletes, they are still confronted by institutionalised racism as there are remarkably few black managers or coaches in any sport, and the majority of sporting organisations are controlled by white males (113). Therefore, the participation of black males in sporting practices can be conceptualised as a response to the racism of the wider society, yet this response merely serves to reproduce the hegemonic masculine ideal of the marginalisation of black men, as it is predicated upon their acceptance of ideals that inevitably subordinate them. Although black athletes fulfil one element of the hegemonic masculinity (physical prowess), they are prevented from fulfilling other aspects (such as becoming professionals); this notion of contradiction is fundamental to the way hegemonic masculinity operates, and the role of sport in this process shall now be developed. The lives of professional sportsmen show how it is impossible to achieve all of the ideals that construct hegemonic masculinity, which therefore reveals how hegemonic masculinity operates in order to maintain its all encompassing dominance over the gender order. In his interview with Steve Donoghue (a champion in the iron man sporting practice) Connell asserts that Steve is an exemplar of hegemonic masculinity, as the life he leads makes him the embodiment of the masculine ideals of "competitiveness, toughness and physical capability" (Connell in Messner and Sabo, 1990; 94). However, Steve's testimony reveals that in order to maintain this status he has to sacrifice other masculine ideals that would jeopardise his physical performance, for example he can't "go wild" when he is socialising (92). Therefore, the representation of Steve and other sporting heroes like him can be understood as the symbolic embodiment of the epitome of an ideal. This means that sporting heroes are the tangible symbols for some aspects of hegemonic masculinity, namely the primacy of physical prowess, the domination of women, and the marginalisation of ethnic minorities and homosexuals. However, the sportsmen are unable to fulfil other aspects of hegemonic masculinity because they are antagonistic with the ideals they symbolise. Consequently, the other masculine ideals that contribute to hegemonic masculinity have different, often directly oppositional, symbols: for every sporting hero there is a 'bad boy', hedonistic Hollywood actor. Therefore, the existence of symbolic sporting heroes reveals that the hegemonic masculinity of which they form an integral part reproduces itself through the construction of a multiplicity of symbols that are often contradictory, yet always culturally exalted; and this shows how sporting practices contribute to the societal perceptions of masculinity and the roles of men and women that permeate all of society. In this essay it has been shown that the views stating the development of sport was unrelated to the social construction of masculine ideals are inadequate because of the primacy awarded to 'manliness' and athleticism in one of the major socialising institutions of the 19 th Century. It was also argued that the institutional subordination of women in sport contributes to the hegemonic masculine ideal of the subordination of women in society. The media representation of sporting practices was depicted as disseminating a consumerist, sexist, racist and homophobic ideology in order to maintain the dominance of hegemonic masculinity. It was then shown how black men pursue sporting careers to counteract the racism of wider society, but that ultimately the pursuance of a sporting career ensures the societal marginalisation of black men. Finally it was shown that hegemonic masculinity is a multi-dimensional phenomenon and sporting heroes constitute exemplars for specific ideals that construct hegemonic masculinity. It therefore follows from the evidence presented here that sporting practices are not a unique, socially isolated sphere and consequently do bear a relation to the social construction of masculine ideals. Sporting practices interact with other major societal forces in modern society, such as the perception that scientific knowledge equates to 'the truth' (as displayed in the relationship between the gender ideology and the public schools in the 19 th Century), or the prevalence of racism and consumerism, in order to socially construct hegemonic masculine ideals. Although sporting practices contribute to the social construction of the ideals that constitute hegemonic masculinity, it can be argued that the most important conclusion that can be drawn from an analysis of sporting practices and masculinity is that sporting heroes offer an insight into the way hegemonic masculinity structures the gender order of society in its entirety. Hegemonic masculinity is culturally exalted and stabilises a structure of dominance and subordination in the gender order as a whole, and in order to this it must have exemplars who are exalted as heroes. Sporting heroes as symbolic entities contribute to the vast network of images that cumulatively construct the societal perception of what a man should look like, or act like, or what the roles of men and women should be, which therefore means that sporting practices contribute to the social construction of characteristics that many individuals take for granted are part of our 'nature'. 