Sociologists have traditionally been divided into two groups depending upon their ontological position; Individualists emphasise the importance of an individual's action, whilst Collectivists give primacy to the role of social structure in the construction of social reality. Recently, however, these rigidly demarcated ontological positions have been challenged by the emergence of Realism and Structuration Theory. This essay is concerned with assessing the strengths and weaknesses of Individualism and Collectivism; the main issue under consideration is how far these opposing ontologies disprove each other. This essay will argue that neither of these ontologies sufficiently describes or explains the complexity of social reality, and it is because of their deficiencies that I have been persuaded to adopt a Realist perspective. This argument will be pursued by outlining the debate between Nicos Poulantzas and Ralph Miliband concerning who or what constitutes the 'Ruling Class', in order to show how I was first alerted to the stratified nature of social realty. It will then be discussed how Collectivism successfully discredits the methodological premises of Individualism, yet does not constitute a comprehensive ontological alternative. Following this will be a description of how Realism provides the ontological explanations that Collectivism cannot (due to Collectivism's grounding in Empiricism). Finally, the decision to adopt a Realist approach instead of supporting Structuration Theory will then be justified. The essay begins by proving that having an ontology is not an option. Having a view of social reality is a prerequisite for both constructing a methodology and conducting research. The role of the researcher's ontology is to regulate which explanations for social phenomena are acceptable; this therefore determines the researcher's area of focus and influences how they devise their practical social theories (Archer, 1995; 20-21). This means that the Individualist's premise that social reality is ultimately constituted by individuals determines that their explanations must consist of statements about a person's 'dispositions, beliefs, resources and interaction' (Watkins, 1971; 106). Similarly, the Collectivist's belief that society has structural features which cannot be reduced to the dispositions of individuals determines that their explanations of human action must refer to the influence of non-human features (such as the banking system) (Mendelbaum, 1973; 223-224). Therefore, practical social theories are only considered acceptable if they are predicated upon the explanations (or methodology) generated by the researcher's description of social reality (their ontology) (Archer, 1995; 21). Having a theoretical starting point when conducting research is vital because researchers who perform data collection and then generate their theories (through inductive reasoning or the grounded theory approach) inevitably reproduce the stereotypes and assumptions of everyday life (May, 2001; 31). Therefore theory is required to provide a level of abstraction which detaches the researcher from the subject (30). It must also be noted, however, that the results of research actually regulate the researcher's own ontological and methodological perspective, as data that challenges the original theory forces the researcher to re-consider their position. The necessity of a having a view of social reality because social reality itself is not united shall now be explored. The debate between Ralph Miliband and Nicos Poulantzas reveals that a clear distinction exists between social structure and individual action. By debating the importance of either structure or action, these two Marxist writers reveal that having an ontology is necessary as there can be no one unified theory of society, as social reality itself is not unified (Craib, 1997; 269). Ralph Miliband adopts an Individualist approach to answering the question 'who is the Ruling Class?' in his book The State in Capitalist Society (1969), (which generated the debate with Poulantzas). Due to his ontology Miliband investigates the specific members of the 'Ruling Class' and how they are connected to each other; he concludes that the 'Ruling Class' is constituted of individuals who share a common cultural background (such as attending the same schools) and the common interest of reproducing the capitalist system (as they benefit from it) (Miliband, 1973; 254-259). Alternatively, Poulantzas answers the question form a Collectivist perspective. He emphasises the importance of state institutions that persist regardless of the individual occupying them, and that individuals merely fulfil the 'role requirements' of their position within the capitalist system (Poulantzas, 1973; 242-245). Although these perspectives were presented as oppositional, I considered the merits of each to be complimentary. Neither satisfactorily dismissed the evidence of the other, and the possibility that both interpretations of the 'Ruling Class' could be correct (if reconciled) emerged. Therefore, I was encouraged to believe that there were two distinct strata of the 'Ruling Class', which could not be reduced to each other (and this is one of the central tenets of Realism). In light of this, the premises of Individualism and Collectivism needed to be evaluated. I was dissuaded from adopting the Individualist's perspective because of its inherent contradictions regarding reductionism and the role of the social context. Individualism's principle that social structures and phenomena must be reduced to statements about the interrelations of individuals (because the individual is the smallest constituent part of society) leaves it susceptible to criticism from psychologists who state that people themselves can be reduced further still into their underlying psychological features (Archer, 1995; 39). Due to their belief in reductionism it becomes difficult for Individualists to deny the psychologists' claim that society is the reflection of the combined psyches of the population (40). However, to defend their position from psychologists Individualists invoke the Collectivist notion of emergence. They claim that their concept of the individual is unique because it is defined by the individual's participation in relationships that pre-date them, for example 'English speakers do require other English speakers to become such themselves' (40). This recognition of an emergent structure (such as the English language) contradicts Individualism's premise that everything in society is reducible to an individual's dispositions. The Individualist's response to this criticism is to incorporate all non-individual and non-dispositional factors into their concept of the individual, such as a person's 'physical resources and environment' (Watkins, 1971; 110). This again reveals a contradiction, as these aspects of social reality are not about individuals or dispositions (the exclusive focus of the Individualist) yet are central to the Individualist's concept of the individual. Individualism's inability to discredit the Collectivist's concept of social structure provided further impetus not to adopt their view. Individualism cannot successfully prove that social structure is not autonomous from, pre-existent to, and does not exert a causal influence over individuals (Archer, 1995; 42). Individualists claim that social structure is not independent from individuals because the social structure is constituted of interpersonal relations (43). Collectivists oppose this idea because it does not take into consideration the importance of social roles in determining behaviour; they state that people behave appropriately to the role they are fulfilling (such as the interaction between a solicitor and a client) regardless of the individuals involved (43). Individual's rebut this criticism by denying the pre-existence of social structure; they claim that features such as 'roles' only exist because the individuals concerned lack the desire or the knowledge to change them (44). Collectivists disprove this claim by adducing the resistance shown by structures (such as the rate of recruitment into the police force) to the concerted efforts of individuals trying to change them; this proves that structures pre-exist and outlive specific individuals and their attempts to alter them by showing that they possess properties independent of the individual's influence (44). Additionally, it can be argued that the dispositions which are so important to Individualists are shaped and restricted by their historical context (Gellner, 1971; 100). Consequently, Individualist's cannot prove that structures do not have a causal influence (such as a low level of recruitment into the police force being causal of a high crime rate in urban areas). Although Collectivism highlights the inadequacy of Individualism's methodological approach, it does not offer a significant counter-ontology, and is therefore inferior to the Realist approach. Realists show that the flaws of Collectivism stem from its inability to transcend Empiricist concepts. Collectivists were never able to define the exact ontological status of 'societal properties' (as defined by Mendelbaum) (49). This is because a societal property cannot be empirically proven as it does not have a tangible existence which can be directly detected by an individual's senses (49). In addition to this, the Empiricist concept of causation (whereby a phenomenon only has causal power if it produces constant conjunctions at an empirical level) denied social structures causal power, because they are neither observable nor causal in their effect (based upon this definition) (52). Realism solves this problem as it recognises that society is an open system in which events are influenced by other contingencies, so the causal influence of emergent properties is not to consistently produce observable effects (53). Therefore, Collectivism could only challenge Individualism methodologically (by showing that some features of society cannot be reduced to statements about individuals) but could not advance a counter-ontology (because of the dominance of Empiricism) stating the existence of non-observable properties (54). Realism, however, does not recognise the validity of the Empiricist notion that all things which are held to exist must be detected through human sensory experience. The basic tenet of Realism is that society is stratified into individuals and the emergent, non-observable, social structure, and that these two non-reducible strata interact and influence each other (61).The differences in perspective between Structuration Theory and Realism clarifies the justification for my decision to adopt a Realist view of social reality. Both Structuration Theory and Realism re-conceptualized the relationship between structure and action. Structuration Theory endeavours to transcend the dualism of structure versus action by depicting them as inseparable, whereby structures are produced by social action, yet social action is only possible because of the existence of social structures (such as the use of language, which allows individuals to express themselves, but only exists because individuals use it correctly) (Taylor, 1995; 688). Regardless of their claim to have transcended the structure versus action dualism, it can be argued that Structuration theorists actually give primacy to the role of social action, and merely reduce structure to being a property of action (Craib, 1997; 268). Therefore, Structuration Theory does not offer an adequate alternative to Individualism and Collectivism as all three are ontologically preoccupied with either reducing structure to action or action to structure. Realism manages to overcome the structure versus action dualism by recognising that neither structure nor action is a completely dependent feature (Archer, 1995; 61). Realists maintain that social reality consists of both structures and actors; although the existence of structures is dependent upon the actions of individuals, once they have emerged they possess their own properties and powers which can then have an effect upon the actors, therefore the proper object of sociology should be investigating the interplay between these two strata (63). In this essay it has been described why a sociologist must have a view about the nature of social reality. It was also discussed how the different manifestations of the 'Ruling Class' are representative of the stratified nature of social reality. The different methodologies and ontologies of Individualism and Collectivism were compared to show how Collectivism exposes Individualism's methodological flaws. However, it was then shown that that the ontological premise of Collectivism is not far reaching enough to persuade me to adopt its view of social reality. Finally, Realism was depicted as providing the ontological depth that the Collectivist approach lacks, in addition to its superiority over any other theory that also rejects (or purports to reject) the structure versus action dualism. It therefore follows from the evidence presented here that I adopted a Realist view of social reality because of the insufficient level of importance and autonomy assigned to either action or structure by other perspectives. Individualism cannot successfully deny the importance of an autonomous, activity causal social structure, whilst Collectivism cannot disprove Individualism's ontological foundations because of its own Empiricist nature. Similarly, Structuration Theory does not transcend the structure versus action dualism, but merely reinvents the terms of the debate in another terminology. Consequently, Realism offers the most comprehensive perspective of social reality because it takes the existence of both individual action and an autonomous social structure as its central tenet, and avoids the ontological and methodological contradictions of the approaches that define these features as inseparable. 