<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>The aim of this experiment was to carry out an enzyme assay to study the effects of pH, temperature and product inhibition on an enzyme and calculate the Michaelis constant and order or reaction. This was carried out by assaying alkaline phosphotase under different conditions measuring the extent of reaction with a spectrophotometer. It was discovered that the optimum pH was 9.5 whilst the optimum temperature is 42 oC and activity decreases either side of these optimums due to disruption at the active site or denaturing of the enzyme. Phosphate was found to carry out product inhibition and the reaction was determined as first order. The Michaelis constant was calculated to be 0.0871. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Enzymes are biological catalysts (they accelerate the rate of a reaction without themselves undergoing any net change) and catalyse most of the chemical reactions taking place in the cell. They carry out this catalysis by providing an alternative reaction pathway with a lower energy transition state. Enzymes are highly specific binding a specific substrate in the active site. The amount of enzyme activity and elements of the kinetics of an enzyme-catalysed reaction can be measured by measuring the rate of appearance of one of the products of the reaction. The effect of a variety of factors on rate of enzyme activity such as pH, temperature, concentration of substrate and enzyme and presence of inhibitors can also be determined using this method. Inhibition of an enzyme involved in an initial step in a metabolic pathway is often carried out by the end product. This is known as feedback inhibition and is an important regulatory strategy. A similar effect, product inhibition occurs when the product of an enzyme catalysed reaction inhibits the enzyme carrying out that reaction. An enzyme catalysed reaction has a reaction rate order. If the rate of the reaction at any instant is proportional to the concentration of the substrate then this is known as first order kinetics. Enzyme kinetics can also be described using the Michaelis-Menten equation. This involves the use of two parameters to describe the kinetic properties of enzymes - V max, the maximum velocity, and K M, the Michaelis Menten constant. K M is related to the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate and is defined as being the concentration of substrate at which the velocity is at half its maximum value. These are linked in the following equation where V O is the rate of formation of product:  FORMULA  Here alkaline phosphotase was used to study principles of enzyme kinetics. Alkaline Phosphotase is a phosphotase (hydrolyses organic esters to inorganic phosphate and alcohol) which is optically active at alkaline pH. It is an excellent enzyme to use in the determination of enzyme kinetics as it is robust and easily assayed. The synthetic substrate p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) is a convenient choice of substrate to demonstrate the activity of the enzyme as is it colourless until hydrolysed by the enzyme to the products inorganic phosphate and p-nitrophenol (pNP). p-nitrophenol is yellow at alkaline pHs (although colourless below pH7) and so the hydrolysis of pNPP can be followed using a spectrophotometer if the solution is made more alkaline after completion of reaction (eg. By adding NaOH). This also stops the reaction as at a very high pH the enzyme is denatured. pNP is also very stable once the reaction is stopped. The aim of the experiment was to quantitatively assay the activity of alkaline phosphotase under different conditions in order to study the effects of temperature, pH and product inhibition on the enzyme. The kinetic properties of the enzyme were also determined with the aim of calculating the Michaelis constant and the order of reaction. <heading>Method</heading>The experiment was carried out as described in the lab manual with the following details: <heading>Effect of pH on enzyme activity</heading>The blank used for spectrophotometer was the second tube at each pH made up with no enzyme present. <heading>Effect of temperature on enzyme activity</heading>The blank used was a second tube at each temperature with no enzyme present. <heading>Product Inhibition of enzyme action</heading>The blank used was made up of 2ml glycine buffer, 1ml phosphate, 1ml enzyme and no substrate. A control was made up with 2ml pNPP, 1ml glycine butter, 1ml enzyme and no substrate. The concentrations of phosphate used were (in mM) 1, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100. Please see Appendix (Table 3) for volumes used in making up the concentrations. <heading>Determination of Michaelis-Menten constant</heading>The blank used contained no substrate ie. 3ml buffer, 1ml enzyme. The concentrations of substrate (PNP) used were (in mM) 0.5, 1.25, 2.5, 3.75, 5.0 (see Appendix table 4 for volumes used) <heading>Order of reaction determination</heading>Tubes were made up with 1ml enzyme, 1ml glycine buffer and 2ml pNPP and the time course of the reaction determined by stopping the reaction and measuring the absorbance at a different time for each tube. The times at which each tube was stopped are as follows (in minutes): 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 14, 18, 20. <heading>Results</heading>The graph below shows the varying concentrations of product, pNP, as the pH changes. This shows a clear increase in concentration as the pH increases to start with up until pH 9.5 where the graph peaks and then falls away again as the pH continues to increase. The graph is fairly symmetrical around the peak. <figure/>The graph showing the effect of temperature on the product concentration shows a gradual increase getting sharper towards the peak at about 42 oC. After this point the concentration drops sharply as the temperature is further increased. Boiled enzyme at 37 oC showed only trace absorbance. <figure/>Graph 3 shows the effect of increasing concentration of phosphate present in relation to the amount of pNP present. It is clear that as the concentration of phosphate is increased the concentration of pNP present falls rapidly. <figure/>Graph 4 is an Eadie-Hoftsee Plot to calculate the Michaelis constant. This was calculated from the slope of the graph to be 0.0871. (see Appendix Table 5 for calculation). <figure/>This graph (graph 5) to determine the order of reaction shows a straight line and gives a value of k of 0.013 (see appendix for calculation). <figure/><heading>Discussion</heading>The concentration of product can be used as a measure of enzyme activity as all the tubes started off with the same amount of substrate in each part of the experiment. Therefore the tubes with more product at the end must have had more enzyme activity take place in order to produce more product. <heading>The effect of pH on enzyme activity</heading>The graph clearly shows that the activity of the enzyme increases up until pH 9.5 before falling away again as the pH continues to increase. The optimum pH for alkaline phosphotase activity is therefore pH 9.5. The reason behind the change in activity with changing pH is to do with the structure of the enzyme and the mechanism with which is works. Firstly enzymes are proteins. Therefore at extremes of pH the enzyme will become denatured - its active site will bend out of shape and no longer function. Therefore enzymes only work over specific pH ranges. The presence of free hydrogen ions or hydroxyl ions can affect the charges on amino acid residues making up the polypeptide chain or chains in the enzyme distorting the three-dimensional shape and causing an irreversible change in the protein's tertiary structure. Secondly enzymes are sensitive to changes in pH due to the great sensitivity of their active site. Even a slight change in pH may upset the chemical arrangement at the active site upsetting substrate binding by disrupting the multiple weak interactions by which the substrate-enzyme complex is formed. The nature of the side chains present in the enzymes structure will therefore play a large part in determining the optimum pH of the enzyme. <heading>The effect of temperature on enzyme activity</heading>From the graph it is clear that the temperature at which alkaline phosphotase carries out the most activity (the optimum temperature) is 42 oC. Below this point the activity of the enzyme is gradually increasing and after the optimum the activity of the enzyme drops sharply. The gradual increase before the peak is as a result of the general effect of increasing temperature on the rate of any chemical reaction - more kinetic energy is present so the molecules can move around faster increasing the chance of a favourable collision. The descending portion of the graph is due to a decrease in catalytic ability as the enzyme molecules start to be denatured. The denaturation occurs because of decreased stability in the structure of the enzyme molecule at high temperatures resulting in changes to the shape of the active site reducing its affinity for substrate and thereby its activity. At very high temperatures all the enzyme molecules present will be denatured and no activity will take place. This is shown by the trace absorbance shown by the boiled enzyme. Virtually no activity has taken place. The small amount of absorbance present may be due to tiny amounts of product formed from the uncatalysed reaction or a few enzyme molecules still active or from contamination from another source. To have a high optimum pH an enzyme must therefore have a more stable structure than those functioning at lower temperatures, as it must be able to withstand these higher temperatures without losing stability. <heading>Product Inhibition of Enzyme Action</heading>It is clear from graph 3 above that increasing the concentration of phosphate (one of the products of the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl phosphate) causes a major decrease in the activity of the enzyme - the presence of phosphate is inhibiting the enzyme. As the rate of the reaction started to drop at 10mM phosphate it is clear that the lowest molarity of phosphate which will inhibit alkaline phosphotase lies somewhere between 1mM and 10mM. At 1mM the absorbance is almost the same as the control with no phosphate present and so only a very small amount of inhibition, if any, is occurring. Inhibition of the enzyme by the product of the reaction it catalyses in this way is known as product inhibition and has a regulatory role in many metabolic pathways. As the moles of phosphate being produced in the previous experiments were all a lot smaller than this (all were micromolar quantities) it seems that the phosphate released in these experiments would have been to small to have had an inhibitory effect on the enzyme. <heading>Determination of Michaelis constant</heading>The figure arrived at for this constant was 0.0871. However a lot of error could have been introduced into the calculation throughout the experiment. Firstly in making up the test solutions at the start imprecision could have introduced errors. Translating the absorbances into concentrations involved the use of a calibration curve which means the concentrations are really estimates and the use of a trend line also introduces new error all of which could have resulted in an inaccurate result. The introduction of these errors could have occurred in any of the experiments carried out here. <heading>Order of reaction</heading>The graph clearly shows a straight line indicating a first order reaction whilst the value of k is less than 1.4 also indicating a first order reaction. This means that the rate of the reaction at any moment is proportional to the concentration of the substrate. Although there are two reactants in the reaction (p-nitrophenyl phosphate and water) the fact that it is still a first order reaction must be due to the mechanism of the reaction. This may be because water is present in such a large excess as pure water is highly concentrated that it is not having an effect on the rate, that is the rate is still only dependent on one concentration - that of p-nitrophenylphosphate and so still only shows first-order kinetics. <heading>Conclusions</heading>In conclusion therefore it was determined that the optimum pH of alkaline phosphatase is 9.5 whilst the optimum temperature is about 42 oC. Activity of the enzyme decreases either side of these optimums. The presence of phosphate, one of the products, inhibits the reaction when in concentration of higher than 1mM with the inhibition being greater as the concentration of phosphate increases. This is known as product inhibition. The Michaelis constant for this reaction has a value of 0.0871 and the reaction is first order. 