To answer a question on Russia, I think it is first necessary to give some general details about this extraordinary and difficult to classify country. Russia stands eight thousand miles long, for much of the year it is landlocked, surrounded by foreign powers with whom it shares seas and rivers with. Russia has specific producer regions upon which some areas are dependent; Russia's variable climate makes growing hard in many areas. Russia's population in 1905 was very large and very mixed, only about fifty percent of this population was infact Russian. Nationalities including Ukrainians, Polish and Armenians made this a multi-cultural, multi-religious country which was very hard to generalise about demographically. In terms of classes, Russia had some more traditional groups such as peasants, landowners, autocracy and merchants. Whilst also having some modernising classes such as industrialists, foreigners and intelligentsia. Politically, Russia was run by a single autocratic monarch, seen as ordained by God. Democracy was seen as an evil the Russian people ought to be saved from, political parties as well as free speech were not allowed under the Tsar. <fnote>Christopher Read, Lecture, University of Warwick, October 2003. </fnote>Having looked briefly at some of the important features of Russia in 1905 to place it in to some kind of context, I wish firstly to outline what exactly the 1905 revolution was; looking very briefly at its causes and the events that took place. Secondly, I plan to look in some depth at the main reasons given by historians on why this revolution 'failed'. Finally I will conclude by suggesting that although the 1905 revolution did not result in a full revolution, this was not its aims, therefore simply classifying it as a failure may not be appropriate. 'Until 1905 the struggle against the autocracy was predominantly an affair of individuals and small groups...it was only in that year that the Russian masses...were stirred in to action on a larger scale." The 1905 revolution was the response of the people (or at least some of them) to years of hardship and harsh autocratic rule. It was perhaps the taste for change they felt under Tsar Alexander II (such as peasant emancipation) that led them to question Tsar Nicholas II when he took measures to strengthen autocratic rule. The expansion of Russian industry during the 1890's '...was succeeded by a period of depression and industrial conflicts became sharper and more numerous." Strikes, though illegal were becoming more common at this time. Propaganda spread by revolutionaries and the intelligentsia was beginning to reach and interest workers disillusioned by working conditions and unfair treatment by superiors. The peasantry still carried their resentment at the government and landowners over their emancipation which left them tied to the land by the increased power of the village commune, and forced to make redemption payments to the state. The peasants saw themselves as rightful owners of the land because they were they ones who tended it. They seem to have borne this bitterness quietly until they sensed their old enemies growing weak in 1905; and turned on the landed and wealthy. Also at this time, poverty and even starvation were not uncommon and were arguably enhanced by government policies which built up huge foreign debts. <fnote>Chamberlin, The Russian Revolution, (London, 1935), p.46. </fnote><fnote>Edward Acton, Russia, The Tsarist and Soviet Legacy, (Essex, 1995), p. 69. </fnote><fnote>Chamberlin, The Russian Revolution, (London, 1935), p.48. </fnote><fnote>E. R. Wolfe, Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century, (London, 1971), p. 63. </fnote><fnote>Wolfe, Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century, (London, 1971), p.58. </fnote>'Student disorders, assassinations of government officials...growing demand for liberal reforms all added to the worries of the government and created a tense atmosphere." In part to divert attention from this state of affairs, the government launched a 'little victorious war' on the Japanese. That this war proved a disaster for Russia leaving her shamefully beaten by 'the little yellow monkeys' and diverting precious resources for a lost cause did not help the political situation. Further causes of the 1905 incidence included the modernisation and democratisation of other European powers, in sharp contrast to Russia's 'backward' autocracy and economy, as well as the hesitant, weak leadership qualities of the Tsar himself. The catalyst for all these problems in Russia in 1905 proved to be what was intended as a peaceful, even slavish event. Bloody Sunday was a non-violent protest to the Tsar, by workers and their families, about poor working conditions, and poor relations with managers. The demonstration was organised by the priest, Father Gapon, a police agent put in place to help control labour organisation in the face of the increased striking. The march was preceded by a general strike, which stirred the authorities in to action, and ended up with them using the military to fire upon marchers even as they carried pictures of the Tsar and sang patriotic songs. The day of bloodshed obliterated the Tsars' image of the 'little father' of the people; many ordinary workers and their families were left shocked and horrified at the Tsars' action. Sympathy strikes and further chaos followed before the autocracy gradually regained its shaky control of Russia. I now wish to look at the reasons why this chaotic period did not result in the full revolution that occurred under similar conditions in 1917 which deposed the Tsarist regime. <fnote>Chamberlin, The Russian Revolution, (London, 1935), p.47. </fnote><fnote>'The Russian Revolution of 1905',  URL , (09/11/2003). </fnote><fnote>(As the Tsar 'habitually' referred to them). Chamberlin, The Russian Revolution, (London, 1935), p.47. </fnote><fnote>A, Verner, The Crisis of the Russian Autocracy, (Oxford, 1990), p. 2. </fnote><fnote>Acton, Russia, The Tsarist and Soviet Legacy, (Essex, 1995), p. 115. </fnote><fnote>Harcave, First Blood, (London, 1965), p.89. </fnote>The opposition to the government in 1905, though it did exist, was unorganised with no formal aims to work towards. The main left wing parties were still finding their feet; Lenin was still deciding which brand of socialism to support, and theorising about the application of socialism in relation to Russia's distinct features. Revolutionaries and the intelligentsia worked towards spreading anti-Tsar feeling among the urban workers and the peasantry. However their work was patchy and disorderly and the reception their work received was mixed. Students dressed up as peasants to try to spread revolutionary beliefs; however they were distrusted and consequently were relatively unsuccessful. Similarly, radicals would address gatherings of peasants, attempting to spread and develop anti-establishment ideology, and stir the peasantry in to action. In the towns, revolutionaries spread leaflets presenting their ideas to the already disgruntled work force. Though some of the ideas of revolutionaries in the towns were accepted and recognised by many, loyalty to the Tsar at this point was not faltering. Though people were unhappy with the government, they blamed ministers, believing that the Tsar was ignorant of his people's fate. Father Gapon's brand of action was much more appealing; it was more organised, with one main leader, and remained loyal to the Tsar. <fnote>P. Waldron, The end of Imperial Russia, (Hampshire, 1997), p. 36. </fnote><fnote>Acton, Russia, The Tsarist and Soviet Legacy, (Essex, 1995), p. 87. </fnote><fnote>'Why did the Tsar Fall?',  URL , (09/11/2003). </fnote>As I have mentioned above, the Tsar himself still had quite a lot of personal support, even if his government did not. The peasantry, even when roused in to action, attacked not the Tsar, but the landowners whom they felt were taking advantage of them, and treating them poorly. The urban factory workers were angry that they had to work such long hours in such poor conditions, the main reason that they took to striking was due to managers ignoring their wishes and maltreating them. The slowly emerging middle and upper classes remained largely loyal to the Tsar until the bloody Sunday disaster, which created more uncontrollable disorder. Landowners, capitalists and the urban rich supported the autocracy whilst it was able to control the masses and protect property. With bloody Sunday and the subsequent rural attacks on property, strikes and general disarray, the Tsars ability to maintain order was brought in to question. However, in 1905 it seems that the concessions the Tsar was forced to make such as the October Manifesto reassured the upper and middle classes and restored their loyalty to at least a 'safe' level. Finally, the loyalty of the armed forces was still in place in 1905, though strained, the forces did not disobey the government at this time, as they were later to do in 1917. The fact that before bloody Sunday the Tsar still remained the champion of the urban and rural people, and still had loyalty from the middle/upper classes, Capitalists, the Church, and the army; perhaps saved him from possible downfall after bloody Sunday. He was able to use the army to stifle protest, and no organised activity against him had been fore-planned because previously he had maintained support. Therefore he could still make concessions to the country satisfying the upper, middle and lower classes before action against the dynasty could be taken. <fnote>Ascher, The Revolution of 1905 (2 vols), (Stanford, California, 1988). p, 16. </fnote><fnote>Waldron, The end of Imperial Russia, (Hampshire, 1997), p.1. </fnote>The government reaction to the 1905 uprising was an important factor in why the Tsar was not overthrown. As Christopher Read points out, it was not necessarily the 'implications and nuances of the changes taking place' in 1905 which led to the unrest, it was more the fact that these changes '...were being contained within a stubbornly unchanging framework..." By easing this unchanging framework with the concessions made in reaction to the demonstrations, the government was able to maintain their position of power. Faced with sympathy strikes, general discontent from people of all classes, the dismay of other European countries, as well as a fear that the army's loyalty was lessening, the government was forced in to conceding to certain public demands. The October Manifesto was able to quell discontent to a large extent; the upper classes felt that they now had some control, whilst the lower classes felt that they had won a small victory on which they could build upon. The Manifesto, though using very vague terminology, and lacking the Tsars sincere approval, promised Russia a more democratic society; that this manifesto infact changed little, perhaps helped lead to a different outcome for the autocracy in 1917. However, the Manifesto's mixture of reassurance of the Tsars' care for his people, sorrow at their current situation, and assurance of future amendments proved enough to ease the political tension; at least for long enough to ensure the Tsar had ensured the safety of his position. 'The welfare of the Russian sovereign is inseparable from the welfare of the people. The turmoil and unrest...fill our heart with great and heavy sorrow... We grant the population unshakable foundations of civil liberties.' <fnote>Christopher Read, The Making and Breaking of the Soviet System, (Hampshire, 2001), p, 6. </fnote><fnote>Harcave, First Blood, (London, 1965), p.105. </fnote><fnote>Cited in Bernard Pares, The Manifesto of October 17, 1905, The Fall of the Russian Monarchy, (New York, 1939), p, 503 - 04. </fnote>Differences between the situation in 1905 and 1917 help highlight its 'failure'; for example, although it could be argued that almost all sections of the Russian population were against the Tsar in 1905, the situation in 1917 was more acute. The opposition was more ready for action, the concessions made in 1905 had been proved insincere, scapegoats for the people's continuing misery such as Russian minorities, had grown angry and organised, and the army defied orders. Moreover, central to the 'failure' of the 1905 revolt, was the reality that its aims were initially not political, but were in fact economical. The strikers wanted better working conditions, and the peasants' land reform, though some sections of the opposition such as the intelligentsia were looking towards a more democratic society, many wanted to accommodate these changes within the existing Tsarist framework. The aims of 1905 were not revolution for the majority of people. Instead their aims seem to have been in search of better life conditions and above all to be listened to by their managers, and the authorities; and at least to some extent these aims were realised in 1905. Through striking, managers were forced to pay attention to their subordinates, and some changes such as a shorter working day were implemented. Likewise, although the sincerity of the October Manifesto, as well as the Tsars' support of it can be questioned, it was still a concession the autocracy were forced to make. Though the Duma proved to have little autonomy or power, 1905 was a building block towards further changes. I would argue that the 1917 revolution would not have occurred without it; therefore to suggest it was simply a failure seems too deterministic an explanation. To conclude, I approached this question by setting the context by briefly mentioning some of the key characteristics of Russia. Secondly I looked at some of the reasons why the 1905 revolution transpired. These are important to understand why 1905, which could have ended in the overthrow of the Tsar, did not. For example, the fact that the peasants held grievances with the landed elite rather than the Tsar himself meant that when they got the chance to act on their anger the Tsar was safe. Similarly the fact that the workers wanted reform rather than revolution is also significant in understanding the nature of 1905. The causes of the 1905 revolution did not spontaneously appear in that year, however a mixture of factors meant that peoples long felt disillusionment with the government and their situation, could finally be expressed. The reason why the culmination of all these grievances as well as the poor initial reaction to protest of the government, did not end with full revolution can not be put down to one single cause. That the aims of the broad cross section of society involved in the uprising were not revolution, is I think, very important. That so many sections of the vast population were involved, from the rich, to the ethnic minorities, peasantry to the intelligentsia, white collar workers to foreigners, factory workers to capitalists makes it surprising perhaps that revolution did not occur. However, revolutionary activity was unorganised partly because previously there had been no perceived need for revolution. Other important factors include that this was the first time that confidence in and loyalty to the Tsar was severely challenged. Also, the fact that at this point the Tsar still had scapegoats available to him, in the form of his ministers as well as vulnerable groups in society meant he was still trusted when the October Manifesto was announced. By 1917 the Tsar himself had become the scapegoat, saving the ruling class from blame, he had allowed himself to be put in a position where he could not escape blame; conducting the war. Finally, I would argue that although the 1905 revolution did not bring about an overthrow of the existing order, to class it as a failure is too simplistic a categorisation. To a large extent the aims of many of those involved were achieved, at least in principle if not in reality. Furthermore 1905 was an essential factor in the eventual revolution of 1917, allowing people to see that they did have some power to change the system, alerting them to the shortcomings of the government. 