As an introduction to the essay question posed a very brief and simplified summary of Habermas's main ideas and theories seems appropriate. Habermas argued that from the late nineteenth century science, technology and industry became interdependent forming a new kind of capitalism. Habermas viewed this interdependence as meaning capitalist growth had no limits because science and technology were the new leading productive forces. This new form of capitalism used a different kind of production and allowed the '...biblical curse of necessary labour,' to be broken 'technologically'. (Habermas, 1970; 53). Originally capitalism had legitimated itself through economic notions of just exchange in the market, however due to the changes within capitalism, the exchange process itself now operated under political control. This new capitalism also required direct legitimation, this time using culture. Habermas argued that this led to a 'depoliticisation' of society, which was legitimated 'by having technology and science also take on the role of an ideology'. (Habermas, 1972; 104). A 'Technocratic consciousness' developed which affected everyone; not simply those repressed by the dominant. Habermas argued that there was no longer a lower class because everyone was now relatively rich. He argued there was no longer an exploited class, since technology was not dependent on labour; people were no longer forced to work, nor were they forcefully repressed in to their social positions. It is this universal, cultural phenomenon which Habermas's work focuses on and which replaces the Marxist questions of class conflict based on economic relations. In this essay I will argue that Habermas retains many aspects of Marxist theory in his work, in terms of some of the concepts he uses as well as the particular area of society he chooses to study. However, his work also includes many changes to orthodox Marxian work including his view on modern capitalist development and his placing of importance on the superstructure rather than the economic base. Perhaps the most apt descriptions of Habermas's work in relation Marxian thought are as a 'positive critique' (Heller in Thompson and Held, 1982; 23) or a 'positive revision' (Layder, 1994; 187). I will argue that Habermas's ideal speech situation as a means of emancipation, though not without some merit, seems deeply flawed as the general, universal, widely used and practical system it was intended. 'While severely critical of Marxism, Habermas does not reject it all. He uses aspects of it to construct his own synthetic model, drawing on many other sources in the process'. (Layder, 1994; 187). The type of theory which Habermas chooses to study is itself of Marxian trend, 'Habermas remains 'committed to traditional... Marxist ideas...he deals in systematic theory - the grand and 'totalising' theory that was rejected by Foucault.' (Layder, 1994; 188). Though both theorists have been criticised for their 'utopian' tendencies, Habermas seems to have believed that this type of theory was necessary to 'the immensely significant general understanding of social trends and developmental processes in critical theory.'(Layder, 1994; 187). Like Marx, Habermas was looking to identify the 'big problems' in society, suggesting that it was specific ways in which society functioned which was behind its troubles. In this way both Marx and Habermas belong to that school of sociologists who try to 'form epochal diagnosis', identifying causes and characteristics of the 'current crises': exploitation, bureaucratisation, secularisation, anomie, etc. (Chernilo, Lecture, 2004). Also like Marx, Habermas maintains the notion of praxis '...that is, a blending of theory and action, or the use of theory to stimulate action and vice versa'. (J. Turner, 1991; 255). Both theorists used simple presentation to explain society and what was wrong with it, but both also'...wanted theory to expose oppression and to propose less constrictive options.' (Turner, 1991; 255). Marx believed society would be 'cured' after the revolution of the working classes, Habermas too offered diagnosis for the crisis he saw in society; first identifying the problem as technocratic consciousness, before offering the solution of ideal speech situation. Habermas's work echoes the emancipatory theme within Marxist thought; in both there exists the respective victims who need to be freed. Throughout both their theories there is the idea of repression (though in different forms) of society, which must be lifted (though by different means) in order for society to operate in equality. In both theories the definite need to change society is an inherent part of the diagnosis made for improvement. Habermas's focus on the relation of economic workings to the population, and the way this economic system is legitimated, mirrors the area of sociology which Marx chose to study. In addition, two of Marx's main concepts are maintained in Habermas; that of class conflict, although the classes Habermas defines are very different to those Marx identified; and that of ideology, although Marx's idea of the ruling class using classical economics to oppress a working class is drastically altered under Habermas. As I mentioned in my introduction, one description of Habermas's work in relation to Marx's is as a positive critique, and indeed Habermas believed that '... Marx's analysis needed drastic revision'. (Turner, 1991; 255). Habermas argued that although Marx's analysis of economics and the class structure was perfectly applicable to the era he studied, it no longer held any accuracy for a modern society. Not only did Habermas reject the idea of a working class forced in to labour by a deceitful ruling class, but he rejected the idea that change could be brought about by economics. Habermas argued that the emergent properties of capitalism were cultural not material, and therefore argued that cultural change was necessary for more general change to occur. He also argued that Marx's predictions for the advance and eventual fall of capitalism were inaccurate; instead explaining that a new and constantly developing capitalism had emerged through the interdependence of technology and science. Thus the economic base was no longer more important than the superstructure (as had been the case with market capitalism). Habermas rejected many of the more 'romantic' features of Marx; his naïve optimism about the inevitability of class revolt, and of class consciousness. (Thompson and Held, 1982; 22). The ideal speech situation was Habermas's suggestion for emancipation from the technocratic consciousness repressing society, freezing relations of domination and perpetuating and legitimating them through positivism. Technocratic consciousness was a result of the technological / scientific capitalism of modern society. It was an ideology which mirrored the values of this capitalism; positivism, empiricism etc, it had one main interest; prediction. (Outhwaite, 1994; 13).This ideology, though repressive because it ought to only be applied to cells and microbes not subjective humans, was not delusional as was the ideology of Marx's time. It kept the masses under control, whilst only treating surface issues rather than the underlying problems; i.e. the depressed housewife feels lonely and unfulfilled with only a baby for company. However instead of identifying the problem as one of her limited and prescribed position in society falling short of her capabilities and desires, she identifies it as a medical / scientific problem, and treats it with Prozac. The problem which the ideal speech situation was set out to solve was this cycle of technocratic consciousness, never getting to the root of a problem, because you can not identify the problem other than in the medical terms such an ideology allows. (Habermas, 1971; 86). The ideal speech situation devised by Habermas was intended to make people realise firstly that they were infact following an ideology, then to help them think outside it in a less positivistic way. He suggested that this could only happen in a doctor / patient type of situation, where outside influences are shut out and the patient is the ultimate arbiter of how accurate the analyst is. This situation should be transferred over in to social situations, thus providing everyday chances for everyday people to look beyond technocratic consciousness. (Outhwaite, 1994; 54). This suggestion was met with heavy criticism; it was argued that not everyone (for example our housewife with the small child) could achieve such a situation. Likewise it was argued that even if this kind of situation were to be achieved, the patient may believe to know their underlying problems, but infact be deluded. Finally, it was put forward that this theory, even if it worked, was dubious as an emancipatory salvation. (Outhwaite, 1994; 55). In reaction to such criticism Habermas revised his suggestion; arguing that if there was a group of people present they could all arbitrate each other and the eventual result would be the lifting of technocratic consciousness and the fall of this technological capitalism. However, the circular potentials of this were not lost on Habermas's critics; not only was this a harder situation to achieve, but it could simply result in deluded people deluding each other further. Only in an already emancipated society could critical reflection produce truth. (Layder, 1994; 189). Yet Habermas still maintained that the ideal speech situation was necessary to arrive at the truth. Habermas explained that this ideal speech situation would begin with intellectuals, who were emancipated through education, providing the model towards which education might lead society as a whole. Whether this situation would lead to emancipation, whether intellectuals are infact emancipated (those controlling education usually control dominant ideologies), and whether this transformation of the micro to the macro, would in reality be achievable, has been the subject of much heated debate. There are three key arguments posed by sociologists about the ideal speech situation and how convincing it is as a means of emancipation, other criticism of Habermas's theory in general (such as his theory of modern capitalism) must be left for another essay. The first, accepts that if it were possible for large numbers of people to experience such a situation then it might well prove, at least in part, to play an important emancipatory role. However, it seems doubtful that such a situation would ever be within the grasp of most ordinary people. Both the actual practicality of discussing matters in a group, and discussing them in a situation free from the culture and ideology the group has been socialised in to, seems to be questioned. (A. Heller in Thompson and Held, 1982; 32). The second key criticism is posed by Ernst Tugendhat; 'to what extent can one sustain the claim that...truth and validity can be found in language and discourse.' (Tugendhat in Rasmussen, 1991; 74). Habermas's idea that emancipation from oppression can come from education and simple discussion in the presence of others seems a little optimistic. As Tugendhat points out, there is a certain tension between Habermas's 'theory of modernity and the philosophy of language' which throws doubt over the ability of his ideal speech situation to result in liberation. (Tugendhat cited in Rasmussen, 1991; 75). The final key criticism is that Habermas's theory is simply too Utopianist in style to legitimate it as a convincing means of emancipation. Both his method of reaching freedom, and his reason for wanting it are criticised as too idealistic and too big a narrative. Sociologists such as Paul Connerton argue that although as part of a suggestion for change the ideal speech situation has some merit; as the sole 'answer' to what Habermas identifies as the 'big problem' of society it is unrealistic. (Connerton, 1970; 353). Indeed this is a criticism levelled against, many of the social theorists, for though Habermas saw general theory of society as a necessity, others argue that it is unhelpful in terms of diagnosis for problems. To conclude, I initially looked at the similarities and dissimilarities between Marx and Habermas, and although many likenesses are apparent in Habermas's work, such as his use of key concepts and emancipatory theme, I would not go as far to label him a Marxist. Instead Habermas resides firmly in the Marxist revisionist camp, 'abandoning or relegating' certain Marxist principles. (Outhwaite, 1994; 4). As a means of emancipation the ideal speech situation does appear to have some merit such as the idea of using culture to force through change. And if considered as a (very) long term solution this suggestion does seem more practical than I originally thought. However, as a realistic emancipation from the kind of all encompassing, universal ideology legitimating not only the continuation of technological capitalism but also the depoliticisation of the population, I think it falls short. As Tugendhat points out; the idea that freedom is simply a matter of ideal speech in the right situation is problematic in itself, even despite the further problems such as its circular tendencies of reproducing delusions already held, and the impracticalities of all people having access to the right kind of situation. To finally answer the question, it seems that Habermas, although still within the broad Marxian trend is more a Marxist revisionist than a strict follower of Marx. Habermas's ideal speech situation does seem plausible in some cases; it seems as though it could work to emancipate some people. However when posed as a means of freedom from the kind of ideology Habermas identifies, it seems less convincing. 