The title of David Landes' seminal 1998 work 'The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why some are so rich and some so poor' encapsulates the prevalent question among modern society of why there is such a great disparity of wealth between countries. With the benefit of hindsight, events such as the Industrial Revolution have contributed to a Eurocentric opinion of western superiority, at least until the development of modern North America. However, in the year 1300 this was not the case as in actual fact East Asia possessed a more advanced society than anywhere in the West. During the early modern period, Asian technological and agricultural innovations were envied by Europe, for at this point Europe was no more likely than East Asia to experience an industrialisation process. The economic divergence between East and West has been greatly researched, with historians providing explanations ranging from inherent climatic differences and oppressive state politics to trade and the advantages of European territorial expansion in order to explain East Asia's lack of economic progress compared to Europe. However, many of these claims are rather over-enthusiastic in their emphasis. Whilst European climate was more suitable to agricultural productivity, Asia's technological advantage counteracted this through the creation of irrigation systems. In fact, the West adopted several of their inventions. The first two sections of this essay will focus upon demonstrating that these two factors can be encompassed- like many other explanations- within the greatest reason for slow Asian economic progress: attitude. The comparative superiority of East Asia in 1300 meant that competitive spirit was not fostered in the same manner as Europe, and that attempts to regulate their admirable systems enforced an introverted society based on centralised state control, Sino centric governmental policies and hierarchy. The final section portrays how the effects of this attitude accumulated across most facets of East Asian society creating a rather stagnant economy, not conducive to the burgeoning trade and emerging global networks that Europe was able to exploit. <fnote>For the purposes of this essay, at times East Asia shall be abbreviated to 'East', and Europe shall be substituted for 'West'. </fnote><heading>i- Environmental Differences</heading>David Landes claims that Europe's emerging economic superiority was due to its climate: the temperate weather, the even supply of rainfall all year round, and freedom from extreme natural phenomena such as flooding made the continent conducive to agricultural and commercial success. He notes that 'tropical areas generally average enough rainfall, but the timing is often irregular and unpredictable, the downpours anything but gentle' and therefore in terms of producing food for personal consumption and profit, Europe was in a greater position. Whilst this is a sensible observation, Landes extends his discourse to claim that the European climate was not merely the finest in practical terms, but that it was the most invigorating and therefore productive environment in the world, quoting the comments of a Bangladeshi diplomat: <fnote>David Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why some are so rich and some so poor, (London, 1998), p. 13 </fnote><quote>'In countries like India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Nigeria and Ghana I have always felt enervated by the slightest physical or mental exertion, whereas in the UK, France, Germany or the US I have felt reinforced and stimulated by the temperate climate'</quote><fnote>David Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, p. 15 </fnote>The moderate environment of Europe may have been beneficial in terms of agricultural production, but it is somewhat over-zealous to claim that the inherent climatic differences between the East and West were responsible for their divergence. Steady annual rainfall aided European agriculture, but the rice-oriented Asian societies developed canals and irrigation systems to counteract their natural disadvantage, creating a more technologically advanced society (which will be discussed in greater detail later). The Chinese invented the chain pump in the first century AD, which allowed water to be transferred from lower to higher ground, permitting the irrigation of crops, as picture one shows, and increasing their yield. <figure/>These devices meant that, as E.L Jones notes, 'by the thirteenth century China...(had) probably the most sophisticated agriculture in the world'. This superiority was necessary though as unlike Europe, which had a variety of staple dietary products (predominantly wheat, but maize and potatoes from the New World after 1492), Asia depended on rice as its major source of nutrients. Landes claims that this was another hindrance, as rice has a lower nutritional content than other staples. The main disadvantages concerning rice were, though, its land-intensive and labour-intensive cultivation requirements. As C.A. Bayly notes, China and South East Asia 'required large efforts by local communities to maintain the irrigation systems which watered the crops'. Irrigation problems were two-fold; firstly, the wet harvesting of rice subjected workers to parasites such as schitosomes, which cause snail fever. This problem was especially apparent in the stagnant water of canals, such as the Chinese Grand Canal built in 605 AD. Secondly, there were political ramifications. In South East Asia Muslim Emperors were responsible for the maintenance of canal systems, and in China the Emperors managed the irrigation system of the Yellow River and controlled the Grand Canal. State control of the water systems caused (as Karl Wittfogel terms it) a "hydraulic society". The necessary waterways were managed by the government, which led to a centralisation of power. Ruler control of canals in Asia granted the state ultimate authority regarding rice cultivation and distribution and therefore workers were restricted in the amount of enterprise they could exercise. By 1800 the Grand Canal and Yellow River dyke systems were all in a state of decay, and there was little that farmers could do to improve the situation; the state considered irrigation a necessity in terms of subsistence, not a vehicle for entrepreneurship and commercialisation. <fnote>E.L.Jones as cited in Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, p. 26 </fnote><fnote>C.A. Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World 1780-1914: Global Connections and Comparisons, (Oxford, 2004), p. 28 </fnote>State attitude towards irrigation was also due to ecological constraints in East Asia. Demographic changes were of much greater concern in the East than Europe, as it was experiencing a period of rapid population growth- in 1750 Japan had a population of approximately twenty eight million, and the Chinese population grew from approximately 100-150 million in 1650, to 200-250 million by 1750. This increase created a rapidly escalating need for food, therefore the states' primary concern was provision rather than profit. Demographic growth was also somewhat self-perpetuating; increased demand for food necessitated extra manpower for cultivation. This created a culture in which early marriage and many children were encouraged, which led to yet more food and therefore manpower being needed. As P.H.H. Vries notes 'China's internal transport with its densely knit system of waterways probably was the most efficient in the world', but this was because it had to be in order to provide subsistence for a large country. Efficiency was essential, and therefore demography hampered the East Asia's chances of large-scale commercialisation and industrialisation more than the environment itself. Landes emphasises climatic differences too fervently, for it was resulting ecological constraints the state's response and that hindered economic progress. As the next section explains, East Asia was able to overcome natural disadvantage through technology; however, their success was brief, for technical superiority highlighted problems similar to those posed by state control over water. <fnote>Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, p. 23 </fnote><fnote>P.H.H. Vries, 'Are Coal and Colonies Really Crucial? Kenneth Pomeranz and the Great Divergence', Journal of World History, 12 (2001), p. 415 </fnote><heading>ii- Technology</heading>Technology is a representative case of how the potential for development in East Asia was not wholly fulfilled, whereas Europe learned from Asian inventions and progressed ahead of them. The East experienced many technological developments, such as the aforementioned irrigation system, prior to Europe and by the early modern period they possessed a level of superiority. For instance, China explored rudimentary time measurement with water clocks during the Song period (960-1279). Also, agriculture was advanced not only through hydraulic engineering such as ditches and dykes, but through the development of an iron plough during the sixth century, which could adjust the depth of the furrow. Asia, in fact, was responsible for some of the most fundamental inventions in early history: the compass (960 AD), gunpowder (tenth century), paper (100 AD) and printing. As Joel Mokyr notes 'by the end of the middle ages, it appears that China was about ready to undergo a process eerily similar to the great British Industrial Revolution'. However, this prophetic stage of development was not fulfilled in the manner that European technological development succeeded. <fnote>Joel Mokyr, The Lever of Riches: Technological creativity and Economic Progress, (Oxford, 1990), pp. 212-213 </fnote>The main problems with Eastern technological development were that either significant inventions were forgotten, or other advancements were not enhanced to their full potential. In the first instance, time measurement is an excellent example. Achievements such as Su Sung's forty-foot high clock, produced in 1086, had faded by the sixteenth century. Nothing like the European weight-driven clocks were developed, and in the seventeenth century the Jesuits were able to use the novelty of western timepieces as an attraction towards their appeal in the East. Also, in agriculture, many of the superior Asian techniques were forgotten even though they had been recorded. For instance, Wang Chen's work 'Treatise on Agriculture', published in 1331, had only one copy left by 1530. As Mokyr concludes 'a gradual deceleration took place that by the nineteenth century resulted in unmistakable backwardness compared to Europe', as Asia failed to exploit some of its early seeds of innovation to their full potential. The second factor is more important in explaining divergence as many of East Asia's inventions were adapted by the west, which they developed further in order to enhance industrial progress. For example, although the Chinese invented printing, the process that they created was xylography- a wooden block with the text carved on it on reverse, which was then imprinted onto paper. Europeans adopted this technique throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, however they progressed to using moveable letters when printing documents, which allowed for articles to be printed and subsequently circulated with higher frequency. Although Korea used metal moveable type from 1240 onwards, Asia as a whole failed to develop a similar system in parallel to the West. Another example of Eastern loss of technological superiority is warfare. The Chinese invented gunpowder, but it was used predominantly in rockets and bombs. Overall their weaponry consisted of more antiquated equipment such as bows and arrows. Europe, however, brought gunpowder back to the west and developed cannons. The East then had to learn how to use them from their European counterparts. Even then there were differences in reception throughout East Asia; Japan embraced western inventions, whereas throughout the sixteenth century Chinese officials had to repeatedly ask for the Chinese army to adopt the cannon before it was introduced. <fnote>Mokyr, The Lever of Riches, p. 219 </fnote>Overall, in explaining East Asia's dwindling economic progress E.L. Jones' claim that 'the technological category of explanation is probably a diversion' is true in that inventions themselves did not cause a divergence, but the East's decline in technological innovation reveals a far more important cause of economic developmental discrepancy: attitude. Europe's success lay in its interest in Eastern inventions and their subsequent desire to improve upon them. East Asia's attitude, on the other hand, seemed to be the antithesis of Europe, for they had little interest in what the West had to offer unless it became a vital acquisition (such as the cannon). Creativity was not encouraged within the East, for in China even the most prosperous emperors such as K'ang Chi (1622-1722) and Ch'ien Lung (1736-1795), as Mokyr notes, 'discouraged the kind of dynamism that was throbbing throughout Europe at that time'. As the next section of this essay will demonstrate, technology is an illustrative example of an Eastern ethos that restricted growth in many aspects of economy and society, an ethos which can be labelled as the most prominent cause for the slowing of East Asian economic progress. <fnote>E.L. Jones, The Record of Global Economic Development, (Cheltenham, 2002),p 26 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 237 </fnote><heading>iii- Attitudes</heading>One of the greatest areas where attitude constricted eastern development was trade. Interest in long-distance trade had prevailed during the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, but this was not a lasting feature of Asian history- after 1431-33 there were no more economic or diplomatic voyages made by China during the early modern period. The East's loss of interest in the West was the opposite of European attitude; in 1498 Vasco de Gama discovered a sea trade route between Portugal and India, the first Portuguese ships reached China by 1514, and the Spanish had occupied the Philippines by 1565. Whilst the East had retreated, the West had attempted to encroach upon their land and exploit newfound areas for luxury goods. Asia's loss of interest in foreign voyages was symptomatic of their attitude towards burgeoning foreign trade, for they lacked demand for foreign goods. Europe, on the other hand, sought many products, importing tea, porcelain, lacquerware, spices and sugar from the East. Between the beginning of the eighteenth century and 1800 Britain's import of tea increased from 400,000 lb per annum to 23,000,000 lb per annum, and import duties on Chinese tea provided the British government with a tenth of their total revenue. As Western products did not hold the same appeal in Asia, the main attraction for international trade was the acquisition of silver, particularly in China. China, though, did not necessarily have to engage in European trade as there was a great demand for silks in Japan, which had a large supply of precious metals. It is worth noting, however, that in some instances European merchants acted as a middleman between China and Japan. Also, the Chinese accumulation of silver could have been utilised more effectively, for it was traded as bullion rather than being minted, which meant that the unit of account varied between trades and regions. The great interest in Chinese products led to the commodity economy became monetised, but the government failed to fully exploit the potential for economic growth. Whilst competition between Spain, Portugal, England and the Netherlands drove economic and territorial expansion in the West, East Asian policies began to restrict the dividends of European interest. In China, as Fairbank continues, 'mercantile interests were felt to be inherently in conflict with those of society and the state and had to be curbed as far as possible'. Sea voyages were restricted to small vessels and the Ming dynasty (1368-1644) banned private trade abroad. Similarly, Japan only operated with go-shuinsen ships, official trading vessels, and merchants required the approval of the Shogun. After 1639 they extended this attitude to a Jakoku or 'closed country' policy; The Japanese could not leave the country, no catholic country could enter, and foreign trade had to be conducted via Nagasaki. However, C.A. Bayly notes that the early modern period 'saw the rise of the European chartered companies...in the Asian world', demonstrating how the west was gaining both territorial and economic power. China and Japan may have proved difficult to infiltrate, but the lack of competition that they provided allowed Europe to maintain acquisitions like the Spanish occupation of the Philippines, and capitalise upon available resources such as control of the Indian textiles market. The Western exploitative attitude towards trade allowed them to gain products that improved their wealth and economic progress, whereas East Asia had little to gain in return except silver, which it did not mint to create commercial unity or ease of transaction. <fnote>John King Fairbank, China: A New History, (1992, London), p. 135 </fnote><fnote>Christopher Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, 1780-1914: Global Connections and Comparisons, (Oxford, 2004), p. 44 </fnote>As well as expanding eastwards, Europe also gained an extremely valuable advantage above Asia through Columbus' discovery of the Americas in 1492. Acquisition of the New World supplied the West with new food products, a territorial outlet for an expanding population, and resources such as coal. In terms of food, the Americas provided protein-rich fish from the Caribbean and alternative staples to wheat such as maize and potatoes. The Spanish introduced cattle to Latin America, which meant that Europe was able to import beef as well. Asia did adopt maize, potatoes, sweet potatoes and peanuts from the New World into their diet, which increased the land under cultivation by thirty five percent between 1660 and 1760, as these new products could be grown in drier conditions than rice. However, these lands were a lower yield than the paddy fields, and deforestation to plant the new crops caused soil erosion and flooding into the low lying, fertile areas. As Bayly concludes, the New World was of most benefit to the west because it provided 'new, nutritious varieties of food...(which) spread across the Old World in the wake of the Spanish and Portuguese "discoveries", improving fertility and resistance to disease'. Better diet enabled a stronger workforce, conducive to increasing production. <fnote>Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 49 </fnote>The New World was also an important asset in terms of population; migration relieved the pressure of demographic growth, and colonisation allowed the exploitation of indigenous people and imported African slaves in order to provide cheap labour. This was particularly useful for the extraction of one of America's most useful resources to the west: coal. Kenneth Pomeranz, in particular, stresses the importance of coal to Europe, as the transition from a timber to coal fuelled society 'relaxed the land constraint in a more fundamental way than any other innovation before turn-of-the-century chemicals and electricity'. Although Pomeranz disputes that divergence occurred before 1800, Europe definitely exploited American resources from the moment of discovery. East Asia had coalmines but they were not as accessible as those in the New World; China's best coal deposits were in Shaanxi, 700 miles from the country's main area of production the Yangzi Delta. Parthasarathi concludes that 'the massive use of coal certainly made possible an energy economy that far surpassed one based on timber and made possible huge iron output, the steam engine and eventually railways', thus providing Europe with the physical resources it needed to power the inventions of the Industrial Revolution. The Americas gave the West nutrients, fuel and territory that it could exploit and command, altogether creating the potential for an energised society capable of increased economic production and therefore greater prosperity. Whilst Pomeranz's conclusion stressing the cruciality of coal and colonies is both overzealous and too late in history to explain economic divergence by 1800, the New World provides a good example of how Western attitude to trade and exploitation helped them to progress ahead of the East. <fnote>Kenneth Pomeranz, 'Political Economy and Ecology on the Eve of Industrialization: Europe, China and the Global Conjuncture', American Historical Review, 107 (2002), p. 441 </fnote><fnote>Prasannan Parthasarathi, 'Review Article: The Great Divergence', Past and Present, 176 (2002), p. 282 </fnote>The backward attitude of the East extended further than their approach to trade; Asian government and state policies were centred on hierarchy and repressive central control. In China, as Fairbank notes, the government: 'operated vertically, from the state upon the individual, more than it did horizontally, to resolve conflicts between one individual and another'. This made deviation very difficult, especially since the law was viewed as ultimate in sanctioning behaviour, with legislation predominantly concerning public activities. As Stephen Haw notes, 'the courts were intended to be terrifying places, which good citizens would avoid at almost all costs' and therefore society felt compelled to side with the interests of the state. The later Ming dynasty advocated repressive rule as they sought a controllable environment, and the successive Qing rule extended Ming foundations by ceasing all public services. Without a formal police force, commercial law or road maintenance, China was denied some essential elements for economic development. This was further exacerbated by the fact that the local governments under central Qing rule were somewhat ineffective, for the population of around two hundred million was divided into only eighteen provinces. An imperial bureaucracy based upon centralised control left little capacity for the accumulation of private profit. Similarly, Japanese politics was based on a philosophy of absolute government. Mason and Caiger observe that the Shogun held 'a right to command which could extend, if need be, to each man, woman or child in the country', and the Tokugawa administration (1600-1868) was underpinned with regulations and restrictions for important social groups; for instance, after 1615 nobles were not allowed to leave their ancestral cities. This detailed level of control fostered an environment in which obedience was key. Across East Asia the state 'oversaw, regulated and repressed' and whilst this did not necessarily mean the absence of autonomy, it did entail the desires of the state being valued above personal ambition. <fnote>Fairbank, China, p. 184 </fnote><fnote>Stephen Haw, China: A Cultural History, (London, 1990), p. 123 </fnote><fnote>R.H.P. Mason and J.G. Caiger, A History of Japan, (Tokyo, 1973), p. 158 </fnote><fnote>Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, p. 35 </fnote>Europe, on the other hand, possessed an advantage in its state control: it was politically fragmented. Differences in governments created competition between countries, which led to the desire for economic superiority and the emergence of city-states. As Van Zanden observes, only in Europe did city-states 'manage to dominate the socio-political and economic life of large regions', and this meant that mercantile interests were of greater concern to European governments than they were in Asia. Many merchants believed in the phrase stadtloft macht frei (city air makes one free), and governments benefited as urban migration created a new workforce to fuel the growing manufacturing industries. England and the Netherlands- perhaps the most advanced European states during this period- established an equilibrium between central authority and commercial interest groups, providing them with the ability 'to mobilise resources on an unprecedented scale'. The mutual benefits of compromise between government and mercantile interests influenced European legislation, for both English common law and European Roman law protected property rights. This removed some of the vulnerability of entrepreneurial nous and thus encouraged economic development. Such an attitude was enhanced by financial changes; In East Asian government monetary matters were controlled by individual rulers, whereas European financial institutions were independent both of government whims and the fortunes of individual merchants. The Bank of England provided independent checks on the state of the economy and concept of partnership came into fruition with the Dutch pioneering of a joint-stock company. As Van Zanden concludes 'social and political relationships in Western Europe appear to have been less hierarchical than in large parts of Asia' and this enabled mercantile interests to prosper. Repressive government in an increasingly global economy was not conducive to economic progress. <fnote>Jan Luiten Van Zanden, 'The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective, Some Thoughts and Hypotheses', Itinerario, xxiv (2000), p. 15 </fnote><fnote> Ibid, p. 18 </fnote><fnote>Van Zanden, 'The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective', Itinerario, xxiv, p. 21 </fnote>Attitude affected the economic progress of East and West on more levels than political policies, for Europe and the Orient possessed very different mentalities on the whole. Whilst the West was dominated by Christianity, which provided moral reason and fuelled war, competition and change, the East was more secular, being dictated by Confucianism and natural philosophy. These differing mentalities contributed to their economic divergence. Religious prevalence, in particular, demonstrates the importance of attitude; in Europe, the philosophical separation of Church and State gave scope for free economic thought. Although faith played a great part in the monarchy, it supported rather than oppressed mercantilism. Max Weber claimed that Protestant ethic encouraged men to apply themselves rationally to their work, thus promoting economic progress. Also, Europe experienced religious wars during the early modern period, such as disputes between Catholics and Protestants in France from 1562-98. Conflicts of faith and the emergence of groups such as Lutheranism encouraged individual thought within religion, an ideology that could be extended to all aspects of life. In Asia, however, there was no established faith. As Bayly notes 'in Muslim and Asian societies a broad recognition of the supremacy of the emperor's cult, not uniformity of belief, was what was required' and therefore there was no separation of the Church; the state was all-powerful. Both the Chinese and Japanese states were highly influenced by the ideology of Confucianism, though this was never established as a religion. Mason and Caiger agree that Tokugawa policies were also Confucian in nature. Confucianism stressed love within the family (Hsiao) and loyalty to the state (Chung), which meant that businesses were kept within the family unit rather than sharing mercantile interests like Europe, and government attitude to politics and trade was respected rather than disputed. As Landes claims, the hierarchy that such an ideology impressed upon East Asia meant that Confucianism produced 'a culturally and intellectually homeostatic society'. This stagnation produced a desire for the east to maintain the status quo they had achieved, so major changes such as foreign inventions and trade were viewed with fear rather than interest. As Fairbank notes, China tried to extend economic possibilities with expansion of old systems rather than creating new ones: 'the tradition in China had been not to build a better mousetrap but to get the official mouse monopoly'. <fnote>Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 32 </fnote><fnote>Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, p. 38 </fnote><fnote>Fairbank, China, p. 181 </fnote>The East was hindered further by other cultural influences such as the role of women in society. Early modern Europe experienced the growth of cottage industry through utilising the skills of women. They were able to spin and weave from their homes and the sale of their products supplemented family income, allowing an improved living standard. Asia, as aforementioned, encouraged early marriage followed by many children; Confucianism not only restricted growth in terms of foreign interaction, it restricted their use of human resources where Europe employed initiative to further their progress. Also, China never developed a system of formal logic. This has obvious organisational repercussions, but it is also symptomatic of East Asian culture as a whole. The West was cultivating an atmosphere of change, innovation and progress, whilst the East strived to reinforce structure, control, and remain somewhat introverted. As Landes concludes, 'if we learn anything from the history of economic development, it is that culture makes all the difference' and the contradictory mentalities of the two continents goes a long way in explaining the divergence that occurred between them during the early modern period. <fnote>Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, p. 516 </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>With the benefit of hindsight it could be easy to view the slow progress of the East Asian economy as inevitable; the early modern period was an era in which trade networks were cemented across the world, where new continents were discovered and where new resources and techniques created the potential for both industrialisation and the expansion of consumerism. European religious and political beliefs formed an ethos of utilisation, competition and conscientiousness, all favourable for embracing these changes and thus encouraging economic growth. The West changed its diet to incorporate food from the New World, modified decorum to embrace Chinese porcelain, and sought fresh energy resources such as coal in order to increase their prosperity. On the other hand, East Asia had the advantage at the beginning of the period: It had overcome environmental problems such as water distribution with irrigation systems, and experimented with technological developments to create an accomplished agricultural system and efficient methods of chinaware production. However, this supremacy led to an environment in which foreign interaction was viewed with hostility. Instead of exploiting the full potential of European trade, they resisted it; instead of adopting western technology, they ignored it; instead of allowing the flourish of mercantile interests, they repressed them. In the move towards modernisation, the West cultivated the seeds of capitalism whereas the East retained Confucianism, and in an increasingly material society, Europe fared better. It would be erroneous to suggest that the East Asian economy remained stagnant by 1800, for it did change and develop, but the inherent mentality of state control imposed limitations upon the extent to which new thought and direction could emerge. As Bayly concludes 'Europe's..."exceptionalism" was to be found not in one fact, but in an...accumulation of many characteristics seen separately in other parts of the world', characteristics that the West learned from their encounters and promoted within Europe. Equally, East Asia's slow progress can be seen as an accumulation of characteristics- although these were predominantly from within their society- that led to a situation in which the East became economically inferior to Europe. <fnote>Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 71 </fnote>