The luxury debates have been closely entwined with the rise of modernity, and while 'luxury' has ceased to be a central issue, in the supposed 'post-modern' world, I would argue that the issues that were pertinent to the writers of the eighteenth and late-nineteenth century are still with us today; and our knowledge of this past debate can only serve to sharpen our acumen, and make us more aware of the role of 'conspicuous consumption' in our society in shaping the discourse about women; the self; taste and civility; and progress (economic and social) which was closely related to the notion of the well-being of the nation. It is my intention to examine the implications of the eighteenth and late nineteenth century luxury debates by employing these categories as a means of injecting a bit of order (albeit artificial) into the vast amount of literature written on this subject. Despite the tendencies of our relativist age to avoid crouching the debate in the language of morality, it is important to note that morality remains very much an integral part of the luxury debates, despite the shift from the vice/virtue dichotomy to one of dependence/freedom. Whatever their stands on luxury, the writers who participated in the luxury debates were keenly aware that 'luxury' was not a self-contained concept, but was rather a useful tool in understanding and critiquing the wider notion of the nature and progress of society. <fnote>Coined by Thorstein Veblen in The Theory of the Leisure Class, (New York, 2001) </fnote>However we may choose to judge women's association with luxury, the two remain closely yoked, and it seems almost impossible to tear them asunder. It is significant that the participants of the luxury debates have chosen to work with, instead of challenge, the assumption of a 'Female Luxury'. Even Mandeville, who disputed the accepted universality of Christian morality, and who was perhaps most favourable to the position of women (as major contributors to the economy due to their demand for luxury) chose to relate an anecdote featuring a male Mercer and a young lady customer, undoubtedly as an excerpt to illustrate the general; also, in his argument that luxury (or fashion) had done more to promote the development of nations than the Reformation, he picked "the silly and capricious invention of hoop'd and quilted petticoats" as a means of making a stark contrast. That "luxury was identified with effeminacy and weakness" is perhaps best seen in Rousseau's first discourse where he argues that the result of the pursuit of the arts and "...the study of the sciences is much more apt to soften and effeminate men's courage than to strengthen and animate it" Elsewhere in Emile, Emile's education teaches him to be an honest man whereas Sophie is taught deception and arts of manipulation and coquetry by her mother. <fnote>F.B.Kaye (ed.), Mandeville: The Fable of the Bees Vol I, (Indianapolis, 1988), p. 356 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 330 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 349-353 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 356. </fnote><fnote>Maxine Berg and Elizabeth Eger, "The Rise and Fall of the Luxury Debates", in Maxine Berg and Elizabeth Eger (ed.), Luxury in the eighteenth century: debates, desires and delectable goods, (Hampshire, 2003), p. 18 </fnote><fnote>Victor Gourevitch (ed.), Rousseau: The Discourses and other early political writings, (Cambridge, 2003), p. 21 </fnote>This link between women, artifice, enticement and luxury might account in part for the 'Female Luxury', which Sombart, at the turn of the twentieth century harps on. Sombart attributed an important role to women of leisure in the development of luxury, and commented: "luxury was fostered by illustrious mistresses and promoted for their sake". In his central theory, which states that: "all personal luxury springs from purely sensuous pleasure", the identification of female as mistresses (and therefore sex objects) establishes the link between the rapacious sexual appetite of these women and their equally insatiable demand for luxuries, which, interestingly enough seems to conjure up the image of a particular 'Lady Allurea Luxury' (which as an 18 th century creation was the product of and engendered prevailing prejudices). The notion of women as 'objects' or adjuncts is also suggested in Veblen's illustration of the corset. While it "lowers the subjects' vitality, rendering her permanently unfit for work...the loss suffered on that score is offset by the gain in reputability which comes of her visibly increased expensiveness and infirmity." Though these women may gain some 'reputability' for being women of leisure, it is apparent that the men on whom these women are dependent reap the bulk of this 'reputability'. Hence, while women seem to consume more than men, it is the case because women have a duty, as adjuncts, not only to consume on behalf of the household, but also to display 'conspicuous consumption' in a way that would serve to elevate the status of their husbands/master. <fnote>Werner Sombart, Luxury and Capitalism, (Michigan, 1967), p. 78 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 60 </fnote><fnote>Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class, p. 126. </fnote>It is perhaps appropriate to involve 'the Self' in the implications of the luxury debates of the eighteenth and nineteenth century, as the debates of the eighteenth century inaugurated the growth of the 'cult of the individual' that is still apparent in the present Western society. Luxury became a means by which an image of the 'Self' could be cultivated, which on one hand would allow others to view the 'Self' in a certain way; and on the other hand, permitted the 'Self' to nurse fantasies, which were stimulated by the acquisition of luxury objects. Hundert, through his study of Mandeville, highlighted the importance of "the difference between being and appearing...for commercial moderns", and how city people "wear clothes above (their) rank...and consequently have the pleasure of being esteemed by a vast majority, not as what they are, but what they appear to be". Veblen picks up on this point, and comments on the role that conspicuous consumption has in forging an image for the 'Self', especially in the midst of strangers. In succumbing to an appearance of public 'decency', we demonstrate how much we value others' good opinions of ourselves, and ironically, how this opinion shapes our understanding of the private 'Self'. The dictum "a cheap coat makes a cheap man" clearly illustrates the importance of conspicuous consumption in validating one's self worth. No doubt the freedom-loving Rousseau lamented this dependence not only on foreign luxuries, but more significantly, the dependence of oneself on the opinions of others. It is thought provoking, even for the modern readers that he concludes with: "what good is it to seek our happiness in someone else's opinion if we can find it within ourselves." <fnote>Edward Hundert, "Mandeville, Rousseau and the Political Economy of Fantasy", in Maxine Berg and Elizabeth Eger (ed.), Luxury in the eighteenth century: debates, desires and delectable goods, (Hampshire, 2003) p. 29 </fnote><fnote>Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class, p. 65 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 114 </fnote><fnote>Gourevitch (ed.), Rousseau, p.27 </fnote>The shifting perception of the 'Self' was part of a change in wider society that the changing definitions of luxury reflected. The Industrial Revolution, the increased exploration and exploitation of the colonies through trade led to the creation of an industrial, commercial and professional middle class, which sought to elevate its social standing as its pecuniary resources were increased. The old dichotomy between 'luxury' and 'necessity' became antiquated and was replaced by categories that were more indicative of the social climate-new luxuries (associated with commerce, utility, taste and comfort) were adopted in place of the excesses of old aristocratic luxury. As Dena Goodman points out "by associating it (luxury) with commerce, the superfluous could now be embraced as a civilizing force in modern society without carrying the taint of barbarous luxury." It was in this climate of changing values and meanings that 'taste' became the chief indicator of value, and a mechanism by which the surplus could be employed for the benefit of refinement and civility. The inclusiveness of taste as opposed to the exclusiveness of luxury driven by ostentation allowed for a realm of self-expression through fashion, which "became a function of knowledge rather than wealth, and gave power to those who carried the authority of taste." However, Veblen would have us believe that taste is still a function of wealth and that "by habitually identifying beauty with reputability, it comes about that a beautiful article which is not expensive is accounted not beautiful." And if it is as Veblen claims, that "the canons of taste have been coloured by the canons of pecuniary reputability", we once again sink back into conspicuous waste and excesses of 'old luxury', and taste becomes once again the prerogative of the rich. <fnote>Berg and Eger, "The Rise and Fall of he Luxury Debates", p. 9 </fnote><fnote>Dena Goodman, "Furnishing Discourses: Readings of a Writing Desk in Eighteenth-Century France", in Maxine Berg and Elizabeth Eger (ed.), Luxury in the eighteenth century: debates, desires and delectable goods, (Hampshire, 2003) p. 76 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 77 </fnote><fnote>Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class, p. 97 </fnote>The implications of luxury did not merely pertain to the self and society, but were of national importance, as it affected the material and nonmaterial well being of the nation. The suspicions generated about 'luxury' are perhaps in part the product of its association with 'foreignness', and the mercantilist fear that the demand for luxury imports will drain the metropolis of its gold and silver, leading to its economic downfall. The advocates of the Scottish Enlightenment, David Hume and Adam Smith were keen to challenge this antediluvian attitude and promote luxury as a "progressive social force" through which free trade in goods would also allow for a transfer of technologies from other advanced civilization to Britain, through the process of emulation and 'imitative industries'. As Hume argues persuasively "...in most nations foreign trade has preceded a refinement in home manufactures, and given birth to domestic luxury...and their delicacy and industry being once awakened, carry them on to further improvements in every branch of domestic as well as foreign trade." A classic example would be the stimulus that the Wedgwood pottery industry received from the East-West trade in porcelain, which created the market for fine dinner services that Wedgwood was able to capitalize on in the mid eighteenth century. It is often the argument employed by the advocates of luxury (notably Mandeville) that the demand for luxury would "lead to the expansion of commerce and the wider employment of the poor" As Sombart elaborates in his theory that luxury gave birth to Capitalism, luxury was an indirect tool for social redistribution, through the rich spending themselves into debt in pursuit of frivolities and the subsequent employment of the poor to produce luxury items for consumption.  <fnote>Berg and Eger, "The Rise and Fall of he Luxury Debates", p. 9 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 11 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 12 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 10 </fnote><fnote>Sombart, Luxury and Capitalism, p. 171 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 114 </fnote>This economic argument by no means displaced the element of morality in the luxury debates. Though Mandeville accepted traditional associations of luxury with vice, his central thesis "that Private Vices by the dextrous management of a skilful Politician may be turned into Publick Benefits" is indeed refreshing, and justified the state's act of harnessing the demand for luxury as an engine for economic growth. Diametrically opposed to this line of argument, Rousseau instead espouses the view that civilization corrupts because civic virtue is compromised as a result of the development of the arts and sciences. Rousseau sarcastically commented: "the ancient politicians forever spoke of morals and virtue; ours speak only of commerce and money." Morality was an intrinsic part of national well being, and the attack on luxury and its association with moral corruption was often raised in the light of national wars. In particular, "French critics associated luxury with France's humiliation by England during the Seven Years' War"; in England, the war "also provided a platform for a denunciation of French luxury..." and "journalism during the war years rehabilitated classical condemnations of luxury in defence of Britishness."  <fnote>Gourevitch (ed.), Rousseau, p.18 </fnote><fnote>Berg and Eger, "The Rise and Fall of he Luxury Debates", p. 14 </fnote>It should be obvious from the above that "luxury was not so much a key term in a debate as it was the marker for certain anxiety-'a convenient code for all of society's perceived problems.'" Through participation in this debate, one was commenting not merely on luxury, but more importantly, was discussing the implications of luxury for a host of issues, revolving around Women, the Self, sociability and taste, and most importantly national well being. The luxury debates reinforced notions of 'Female luxury' and the close associations of women with consumption, without a deeper understanding of how men have helped shaped the ways in which women consume. It also served to highlight the modern tendency to use goods as the "primary vehicle for the construction of the self that has the opinion of others as an indelible part of its contents." The changing definitions of luxury and its subsequent link with taste also illustrate the changing expressions of sociability, which reflected the change in the pecuniary structure of society. Despite this and the argument that luxury facilitates social progress, there is a realization that while the luxury debates are becoming more inclusive, the gap between the haves and the have-nots has not narrowed, but have instead widened during Veblen's and Sombart's time. This has obvious bearing on the well being of a nation, and the social distribution of income is still very much on the present agenda. Lastly, despite the modern preference for economic arguments, the link between morality and luxury has been paradoxically strengthened, and remains as a bastion from which the critics of luxury draw their ammunition. The luxury debates therefore became an avenue where the problems of society were raised, and correspondingly, where the shape of an ideal modern society could be discussed. <fnote>Goodman, "Furnishing Discourses: Readings of a Writing Desk in Eighteenth-Century France", p. 73 </fnote><fnote>Hundert, "Mandeville, Rousseau and the Political Economy of Fantasy", p. 35 </fnote>