Hitler's popularity amongst the majority of the German people have been variously analysed by historians, and though the percentages are debatable, it is generally recognized that his popularity was of fundamental importance to the functioning of the third Reich. As Ian Kershaw suggested 'The adulation of Hitler by millions of Germans who might otherwise have been only marginally committed to Nazism meant that the person of the Führer, as the focal point of basic consensus, formed a crucial integratory force in the Nazi system of rule." Despite the concession that Hitler, or rather the 'Hitler myth' played an important role in the third Reich, it does not follow that the influence was necessarily advantageous for Nazi Germany as a dictatorship. The nature of this question is quite deceptive, and the search for a direct answer can be elusive, due to the fact that the line between strength and weakness may be obscured. Hence, what may initially appear to have strengthened the Third Reich may in the long term prove to be the ultimate de-stabilising factor, threatening the very foundations that the Reich was built upon. To reach a conclusion regarding this question, it is imperative to examine the effects of Hitler's 'charismatic rule' on the following: the German people, the issue of legitimacy, the state bureaucracy, the party, and the resistance movement. <fnote>Ian Kershaw, The 'Hitler Myth', (Oxford, 1989), p.1. </fnote>From the start, the German people were never adverse towards the concept of dictatorship. Their distrust and contempt for the system of liberal democracy that Weimar represented was pervasive throughout society. There was a 'national' yearning for a Caesar figure to pull Germany out of the economic doldrums, and to lead Germany to reclaiming her former glory. Hence, Hitler's 'charismatic rule' was seen as a welcome and much needed respite to the inefficient Weimar Republic, and did in fact appeal to the romantic within each person- the harking back to the Second Reich of Bismarck. This acceptance of the rule of a 'strong man' made possible the tolerance of Party dictatorship of the Nazis, and the subsequent new state bureaucracy. Also, Hitler's style of leadership, the propaganda machinery of floodlights and military processions created the façade of participation, that made the regime seem like an 'enlightened dictatorship', thus reconciling the people with the loss of their political vote. Judging from the plebiscites held in 1933, 34, 36 and 38, '...though no doubt the product of intense propaganda and coercion, nevertheless reflected genuine widespread approval and admiration for Hitler's accomplishments, and persuaded the masses to fall in line." The extension of the personal loyalty of the population from Hitler to the state would strengthen the regime, and lessen the impact of the transition from a liberal democracy to a dictatorship. <fnote>ibid. p. 258. </fnote>It is imperative to examine Hitler's 'charismatic rule' as a claim to the legitimacy of the Third Reich. Max Weber in 'Economy and Society' expounds on the ideal type of 'charismatic authority' by which the leader is seen as an exemplary character of superhuman powers, and derives his backing from the personal loyalty of his subjects. This description would seem to fit Hitler's style of leadership in the Third Reich. To a large extent, it gave legitimacy, which was lacking during the Weimar republic, to the Third Reich, and allowed it to function with the support of the people. This would appear to have strengthened the Third Reich as a dictatorship because it portrayed Hitler not as a usurper of power, but merely fulfilling the will of the people (reliance on personal loyalty). However, 'if those to whom he feels sent do not recognize him, his claim collapses; if they recognize it, he is their master as long as he proves himself." The conditional status of his power can be de-stabilising in that Hitler is under constant pressure to bring in success. Failure, or a series of failure (Operation 'Barbarossa' against Russia) would mean that the mandate was passing out of the hands of Hitler. Routinisation (the lapse back into normality) was also a threat to a regime that innately relied on dynamism to rule. Hence, the 'charismatic' form of leadership was 'an extraordinary, unstable and therefore transient form of rule, tending to arise in unusual or crisis conditions, and directed not at the solutions of everyday problems of government, but at the over-coming of supra-dimensional crises and emergencies." With the above question in mind, the inherent instability of the regime is definitely a point to consider, when evaluating the impact of 'charismatic authority' on the dictatorship. With the prospect of normalcy approaching as Germany emerged from the Great Depression, the Fuhrer had to act in his own interest: the entry into a long-drawn war would cement Hitler's status as the 'messiah' of the German population, and allow for the reign over the 'thousand-year Reich'. This apparent inevitability of war if the Nazi's were to stay in power was risk-taking (and in some aspects, miscalculation) on the part of Hitler and his cronies, because the fate of the party was now tied up with the outcome of the war. <fnote>Max Weber, Economy and Society, ed. G Roth and C. Wittich, (Berkeley, 1978), p. 241. </fnote><fnote>Kershaw, The 'Hitler Myth'. p.8. </fnote>The emphasis on personal loyalty to Hitler in the system meant that there was in reality no bureaucracy to speak of, but rather, 'the administrative structure of Nazi Germany formed a complex mosaic of party and state agencies with ill-defined and over-lapping jurisdictions, sometimes complementing each other, more often mutually antagonistic, all striving to obtain a monopoly of power in their own domain." This polycractic and inefficient structure, whereby the duplication of jobs, confusion amongst the various ministries, and internal rivalry to gain the backing of the Fuhrer, can be said to have undermined the political system in Germany. As Carr pointed out 'Confusion about the direction of policy was not restricted to the immediate circle around the Fuhrer. The whole structure of government has been aptly dubbed "authoritarian anarchy"." Also, as Ian Kershaw observed 'the demise of collective centralised government (the Cabinet never met again after 1938) promoted the disintegration of government into a proliferation of departments with ministries working largely independently of each other." Should the confusion be seen as the necessary and inevitable outcome of Hitler's 'charismatic rule' hence weakening the system from within; or can it be, that this was a deliberate policy of Hitler to encourage '...confusion and uncertainty as a means of consolidating his power', thus the implication that a strong and omnipotent dictator would unite the will of Germany within himself, making the Third Reich stronger as a personal (rather than party) dictatorship, because the power struggle at the bottom would not be able to penetrate the office held by the Fuhrer. <fnote>William Carr, Hitler: A study in personality and politics, (Bath, 1978), p. 41. </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Ian Kershaw, The Nazi Dictatorship, (Cornwall, 2000), p. 75. </fnote><fnote>Carr, Hitler, p. 43. </fnote>Where did Hitler feature in this chaotic system of rule? It has been said that '...the symbolic Fuhrer authority was more important than the direct governing will of the person Hitler', and to a large extent it is true, because the presence of the Fuhrer was largely absent in the day-to-day running of the government. For his part, Hitler encouraged Social Darwinism within the party and state, allowing competing interests to fight it out amongst themselves, through which, a victor emerges, or a consensus is reached, which would then have the backing of the Fuhrer. This laissez-faire attitude seemed to have compromised the standing of the Fuhrer on the affairs of the state, which is reinforced by records telling of Hitler's laid-back attitude to work. However, to conclude that Hitler was a weak dictator and that this in turn affected the standing of the Third Reich as a dictatorship would be unjustified. Though Hitler took a very long time to act, 'but when he did, his personal orders, or Fuhrererlasse, cut quickly through the red-tape and ensured compliance with his decisions at least on major matters of policy and within the limits of available resources." Despite the apparent success of this policy of Social Darwinism, it must be noted that this system 'led inexorably to an accelerating decline into aggression, lawlessness and criminal brutality' that could have undermined the stability of the regime. The system was essentially a very cracked pot, held together only by the 'glue', which was Hitler's authority. <fnote>Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Carr, Hitler, p. 45. </fnote><fnote>Kershaw, The Nazi Dictatorship, p. 75. </fnote>The over-reliance on a figure is perhaps one of the inherent weaknesses, as well as strengths of a dictatorship. The centrality of the figure of Hitler in rallying the party together cannot be over-emphasised. Hitler's personal magnetism provided the foundations of charismatic authority within his own entourage and bonded the party leadership to him. It was as Kershaw described "personal conflicts within the Nazi elite which otherwise would have torn the system apart, were resolved only in Hitler's charismatic authority-in his indisputable position as the base of Nazism's popular legitimacy and the embodiment of Nazism's 'idea'." It is interesting to note that even though vicious rivalry and power struggles were prevalent within the Nazi party, none of it was aimed at toppling Hitler. And contrary to Stalin's fear of being overthrown, which manifested itself in the purges (Gulags), there was only one purge that Hitler agreed to, and even so, reluctantly-the purging of Ernst Rohm. It must be emphasised that Nazi dictatorship of the Third Reich would not have been possible without Hitler, because the mandate of the people resided in him, and not in the party. The man remained ever popular, despite the party's decline in popularity, owing to some unfavourable economic policies. This would however be interpreted as a strength to some extent, because the party could borrow Hitler's name to gain the much needed power for rule, but yet at the same time, the over-reliance on one man makes it virtually impossible to appoint an heir to replace Hitler as Fuhrer. Hence, when Hitler shot himself in the bunker, the Third Reich died with him. <fnote>Kershaw, The 'Hitler Myth'. p. 262. </fnote>Finally, the impact of Hitler's 'charismatic rule' on resistance (or potential resistance) must be considered. Perhaps it would be logical to suggest that because of his immense popularity, those who resisted him were few. Few it seem, could contend with Hitler's deification and cult-like status, to the point that Hitler seemed to a large portion of the population as Germany's 'messiah'. However, this 'Hitler-worship' could have created a backlash against Hitler amongst the devout Christian/Catholic groups. More importantly, the lack of resistance from the traditional elites was in part, the result of Hitler's charismatic rule, which reduced the Army officers from 'power' elites to merely 'functional' elites, thus ensuring that countering and overthrowing Nazi rule would be extremely difficult to do accomplish, even if the Army had the will to do so. Therefore, it was due to the charisma and will of Hitler, that the traditional elites were unable to use him as a puppet for their own purposes. However, charisma alone was inadequate to secure the support of the German population for the Third Reich. Like all other dictatorships, the element of terror was crucial in taming the obstinate 'enemies of the state.' The 'Hitler myth' and terror were therefore two sides of the same coin, 'ensuring political control and mobilisation behind the regime. It is no coincidence that terroristic repression escalated visibly in the final phrase of the waning regime as the binding force of Hitler's popularity weakened and collapsed.' <fnote>Kershaw, The 'Hitler myth', p. 258. </fnote>Hitler's 'charismatic rule' worked to the benefit of the regime initially, when the conditions were favourable, and the success that was much desired was obtained. Entry into World War II was inevitable for the survival of the system that inherently thrived on dynamism and periods of emergency, but it was a double-edged sword, in that failure of the war effort would surely bring the Nazi dictatorship to its knees, and it did. As the war started going badly, 'the tide of Hitler's popularity first waned rather slowly, then ebbed sharply-a decline accelerating after Stalingrad, when Hitler's personal responsibility for the catastrophe was widely recognised." Even the tool of propaganda could not erase the fallibility of the Fuhrer in the eyes of the people, instead, it made the population even more distrustful of the system that they had come to doubt. Therefore, the writer would conclude that ultimately, Hitler's 'charismatic rule' weakened the Third Reich as a dictatorship, due to the innately destructive elements in this concept of legitimacy. <fnote>Ibid, p.200. </fnote> 