It was in the historical context of the religious and political upheaval of the 1640s, and the subsequent breakdown of censorship (which made fertile ground for the ferment of radical ideas), that Winstanley first made his appearance as a pamphleteer. Considering that Winstanley was only prominent as a writer between 1648-1652, and thereafter faded into oblivion, there seems to be a disproportionate amount of literature written about him, with little consensus over how we should understand such a complex figure. The most prominent debate revolves around Winstanley's evolution as a thinker- while most agree that he started off as a religious thinker, few concur on his predilections (secular or religious or both) in the Law of Freedom in a Platform (1652). While the question above seems to be fairly straightforward, it is in this writer's opinion that the position one takes in the fore-mentioned debate has bearings on how one would view the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook in The New Law of Righteousness (1649). Therefore, while an examination of the primary sources is necessary, it is equally important to consider the interpretations of some historians on Winstanley, and, as far as possible, how their biases feature in the following themes: the nature of Winstanley's millenarianism; his conception of God; his understanding of the Fall and Restoration; and finally his views on the institutionalized church. Before launching into the essay proper, it is perhaps necessary to consider the approach that one should take when reading the pamphlet. While Bernstein's view that Winstanley used "religious phraseology as a cloak" has been superceded by writers more sympathetic to Winstanley's religious propensities, there appears to be a dispute between the authors of "Winstanley: A Case for the Man as He Said He Was" (with their literal approach to Winstanley's works), and Christopher Hill, whom they accuse of "making allowances for Winstanley's language", in his bid "to establish Winstanley's uniquely secular revolutionary ideology". This larger dispute about Winstanley's religious phraseology is somewhat defined by their different interpretations of what Winstanley meant by being "in a trance", the former taking it literally (a vision/message from God) and the latter, as a seventeenth century manner of speech, to mean "a moment of clarification in a process of deep thinking". Their different approaches to Winstanley's religious phraseology are perhaps most amenable to their respective evaluations of Winstanley's development as a thinker. Taking the literal approach allowed Mulligan et al. to assert that Winstanley remained to the end a religious thinker, just as Hill's emphasis on Winstanley's rationality is linked to his interpretation that Winstanley ended up a secular thinker. An understanding of the seventeenth-century mentality is crucial if this is to be a productive study, and it should be noted that unlike the modern age, the belief in a Creator God and the belief in Reason were not antithetical, though Hill's caveat on 'trances' seem to suggest that he thought that the two were. <fnote>Lotte Mulligan, John K. Graham and Judith Richards, "Winstanley: A Case for the Man as He Said He Was", in Journal of Ecclesiastical History, Vol. 28, No. 1 January 1977, p. 58 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 65 "Rather than treat his Biblical language as a barrier to understanding of Winstanley's thought...the historian might treat that language as the articulation of thought, and through it come closer to understanding what Winstanley meant to himself and his contemporaries." </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 64 </fnote><fnote>George Sabine (ed.), The Works of Gerrard Winstanley, (New York, 1941), p. 190 </fnote><fnote>Christopher Hill, "The Religion of Gerrard Winstanley", in Past and Present Supplement 5, 1978, p. 21 </fnote><fnote>Mulligan et al, "Winstanley: A Case for the Man as He Said He Was", p. 60 </fnote><fnote>Christopher Hill, The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas during the English Revolution, (London, 1991), p. 150. "But if God is everywhere, if matter is God, then there can be no difference between the sacred and the secular: pantheism leads to secularism." </fnote>Perhaps one thing that can be agreed upon is that Winstanley held millenarian beliefs, though what type of millenarian he was-radical or traditional-is a matter of dispute. While Juretic saw Winstanley's emphasis in The New Law of Righteousness as primarily millenarian, and as consistent with his previous pamphlets (as opposed to it being a watershed as most scholars have suggested), he dismissed the pre-Digger Winstanley as "traditional millenarian" and his ideas as "common millenarian fare"; and failed to recognise that Winstanley's radicalism preceded his secularisation. Instead, he suggested that the Digger experiment was the key in the radicalisation and secularisation of Winstanley, and in striving to prove the break (as opposed to continuity) between the religious and secular Winstanley, neglected the uniqueness of Winstanley's brand of millenarianism. Also, in trying to set Winstanley firmly within the religiosity of his time by identifying him with his puritan contemporaries, Mulligan et al. compromised on Winstanley's unconventional millenarianism, by arguing that "he thought of the millennium in actual, not metaphorical terms." Perhaps Aylmer came closest to understanding Winstanley when he said that "the real interest of Winstanley lies in the totality of his challenge to established beliefs and systems of value...whatever his starting point as a religious thinker, he was not a normal kind of millenarian...". Due to Aylmer's stance that Winstanley's "communism and his theology are literally inseparable in his writings from 1649 on, even though the emphasis varies in different pamphlets", he was more likely to analyse Winstanley's radical theology rather than dismiss it in favour of rational materialism; and provided a more balanced view to that offered by Mulliganal. A more in-depth examination of Winstanley's religious beliefs is overdue, and it is to this that we now turn our attention. <fnote>Sabine, Winstanley, "...now comes the time that the elder sons, that are born after the flesh, shall serve the younger sons, in whom the blessing lies..." p. 150; "He is now coming to raign, and the Isles and the Nations of the earth shall all come in unto him..." p. 152; "But in the time of Israel's restoration, now beginning, when the King of Righteousness himself shall be Governor in every man..." p. 190 (emphasis added) </fnote><fnote>George Juretic, "Digger No Millenarian: The Revolutionising of Gerrard Winstanley", in Journal of the History of Ideas (36), 1975, p. 270 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 272 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 269 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 269 </fnote><fnote>Mulligan et al., "Winstanley: A Case for the Man as He Said He Was", p. 74 "The spirit of Winstanley's writings throughout had more in common with the apocalyptic visions of his puritan contemporaries than with modern socialist or communist ideologies." </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 65 </fnote><fnote>G. E. Aylmer, "The Religion of Gerrard Winstanley", in J. F. McGregor and B. Reay (ed.), Radical Religion in the English Revolution, (Oxford, 1984), p. 92 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. p. 92-93. </fnote>A crucial part of one's religious outlook is constituted by how one understands the nature of God, and as with most other things about Winstanley, this is controversial, and is centred on two main positions-God is immanent as opposed to God being immanent and transcendent. The adherents of the former include Zagorin and Hill, who were of the opinion that Winstanley's pantheism, which is manifested in the "...identification of God with the immanent principle of reason pervading this world", accounts for and precedes his transition to secularism. This view of Winstanley's "God", is most agreeable to their take on Winstanley as a whole, and disposes of the potential problem that the belief in a transcendental God might pose to their reading of Winstanley. Whereas those who take the line that Winstanley was influenced by theology throughout his writing career, assert his belief in an immanent and transcendental God. While both positions can be substantiated by a reading of The New Law of Righteousness, the bone of contention lies in the priority that one should accord to repetition or to a more subtle reading of the text. Although the idea that God is immanent is littered throughout the text, there are a few occasions when God as immanent and transcendent appear: "The great world...is no other but Christ spread forth in the Creation; and so upholding the Creation by his own wisdom, and power; for he is the maker, the preserver and the restoring Spirit." It seems to me that if Winstanley believes in a Creator God, it would necessarily imply that God as Creator of the world is able to transcend His creation; though this does not preclude His immanence, nor the equation of Reason with God, as Hill seems to suggest when he said "only if we forget that the Father is Reason and that Christ's second coming is in sons and daughters can we slip into thinking of an external God." It not only seems absurd to think that God must be bound by an either/or straitjacket, but it is also simplistic to think in such strict dichotomy. <fnote>Zagorin's understanding of Winstanley's path follows the progression "mystic, pantheist, material rationalist". Seen in Perez Zagorin, A History of Political thought in the English Revolution, (Bristol, 1997), p. 57 </fnote><fnote>"Winstanley knew no transcendent God, only immanent reason", in Hill, "The Religion of Winstanley", p. 30. See footnote 7 for Hill's position. </fnote><fnote>Zagorin, A History of Political thought in the English Revolution, p. 47 </fnote><fnote>"Therefore Christ hath the honour above his brethren, to be called the spreading power, because he fills all with himself..." p. 151/ "...for he is in all and acts through all" p. 160/ "So that, this one Almighty power be spread in the whole creation..." p. 166 in Sabine, Winstanley. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 164-165 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 204 "If any man be offended here, let him know, I have obeyed my Maker herein, and I have peace in him." </fnote><fnote>Hill, "The Religion of Winstanley", p. 30 </fnote>However, Winstanley's belief in a transcendent and immanent God does not make him less of a religious radical, despite what Mulligan et al. seem to imply, and his views on the Fall and the Restoration are testament to that. Mulligan et al. appear keen to make Winstanley out to be a traditional millenarian, and this is reinforced by their interpretation of Winstanley's understanding of the Fall and Restoration, which is fairly similar to the traditional Christian understanding of it. Unlike Hill's radical Winstanley who believed that the introduction of private property constituted the Original Sin, their Winstanley saw property as a symptom, rather than the cause of the Fall. Also, Hill's astute observation that Winstanley was unorthodox in equating the Resurrection and the Second Coming stands in contrast with Mulligan et al.'s conventional reading that Christ's "appearance would be a literal Second Coming." The scales seem to be tipped against Mulligan et al. as Zagorin's Winstanley saw Man's redemption "not in a heaven to come, and not through Christ's vicarious sacrifice, but by the restoration of the absolute law of reason." Aylmer too, acknowledged Winstanley's unorthodoxy in asserting that the Original Sin was not a historical event, nor was it inherited from Adam, but rather, it was "the defeat of good by evil, which is repeated in all of us..." The notion of an internal as opposed to historic and external Fall, Resurrection and Restoration is certainly radical, not to mention also that the Restoration would be complete only when Second Adam (within) kills the First Adam in us, and this inward restoration will be manifested outwardly in the abolishing of Private Property, and the re-establishment of the earth as a common treasury. In using biblical concepts as metaphors to criticise the inequality prevalent in his society, Winstanley ended up creating his own brand of Christian heresy. While the need to substantiate his social critiques and ideas with biblical references is perhaps traditional, in the sense that he acknowledged the authority of the Bible and used it as a legitimising force for his ideas; his use of it is far from conventional, as seen from Winstanley's unorthodox understanding of the Fall and Restoration. <fnote>"Winstanley believed in a transcendent God, working through inner transformation" p. 68 in Mulliganal. "Winstanley: A Case for the Man as He Said He was". This makes Winstanley sound almost like an orthodox Christian! </fnote><fnote>Christopher Hill, "The Religion of Gerrard Winstanley: A Rejoinder", Past and Present, No. 89, (Nov, 1980), p. 151. </fnote><fnote>Mulligan et al., "Winstanley: A Case for the Man as He Said He Was", p. 74 </fnote><fnote>Hill, A Rejoinder, p. 148. This is substantiated with the quote from Sabine, Winstanley, p. 162 "So that upon the rising up of Christ in sons and daughters, which is his second coming..." </fnote><fnote>Mulligan et al., "Winstanley: A Case for the Man as He Said He Was", p.68 substantiated by quotes from Sabine, Winstanley, Fire in the Bush 1650, p. 466 and 471. The fact that these quotes are not from The New Law of Righteousness does not really matter, since they held that the theological beliefs set out in Truth Lifting Up Its Head are central to Winstanley's thought throughout his writing career. See p. 65 of the same article. </fnote><fnote>Zagorin, A History of Political thought in the English Revolution, p. 47 </fnote><fnote>Aylmer, "The Religion of Gerrard Winstanley", p. 95 Can be substantiated by p. 173, 176, 211, 215, 217. in Sabine, Winstanley. </fnote><fnote>Sabine, Winstanley, p. 159 </fnote>Up till now, the writer has focused on the debates surrounding the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook as a means of conveying the difficulty in assuming a singular stance, and the avoidance of a direct answer to the question so far is an admittance of Winstanley's complexity as a religious thinker. Not forgetting what has been mentioned earlier, there is however, more to be said about Winstanley's views on the institutionalised church, that do not take the form of the above. The lack of attention and controversy concerning Winstanley's anticlericalism (arising from his perceived hypocrisy of the clergy and their monopoly over the interpretation of Scripture, both of which result in the oppression of the people), his suspicion towards institutionalised Christianity, and preference for the personal religious experience, is probably due to the fact that these do not define Winstanley's uniqueness as a religious thinker, but were prevalent in other radical sects. His ambivalence towards an afterlife, belief in the perfectability of man on earth, notion of true worship manifesting itself in love, and the avowed tactic of non-violence echoes that of the Ranters, though the form that it took was different. It is interesting to note that Hill draws out quite a few similarities between Winstanley and the Ranters, and by doing so, sets the religious radicalism of Winstanley within the framework of his time. What remains most distinctive about Winstanley's religious outlook in The New Law of Righteousness is his concept of Restoration being tied up with that of the re-establishment of the earth as a common treasury. Hence it is the communism that is embedded in Winstanley's religious outlook that stimulates the reading of The New Law of Righteousness, since as Zagorin puts in "it is in his religious evolution ...that we must seek the source of his political theory." Thus, The New Law of Righteousness has often been read less for itself, and more for its part in the grand scheme of Winstanley's development as a political thinker. Therefore, as mentioned earlier, the different interpretations of the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook reflects the agenda of each historian in trying to conceive of a holistic entity that is Winstanley. <fnote>Hill, The World Turned Upside Down, p. 206-7 </fnote><fnote>Zagorin, A History of Political thought in the English Revolution, p. 43 </fnote>In conclusion, it is not possible to take The New Law of Righteousness in isolation, and any interpretations made about the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook necessarily has repercussions on how one understands his evolution as a thinker. Such interactions make it exceedingly difficult to give a straightforward answer to the question. Also, disagreements over how the text should be read has not made it easier to decipher the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook, as the study of the text seem to support more than one interpretation. The debates surrounding Winstanley's millenarianism, his understanding of God, his views on the Fall and Restoration; and the lack of attention given to his stance on the institutionalised Church all illustrate the importance of the agenda of the historian in his treatment of primary sources. 