The Enlightenment, an important feature in most written works on the origins of the French Revolution, has often been credited with the ideology that inspired the French masses to rise up against the monarchy. Though the association has been made, there is nevertheless no direct causal link between the "siecle des lumieres" (the century of light) and the revolution. Other factors were present, along with the influence of the Enlightenment, which created the context in which the revolution occurred. To provide a satisfactory answer to the above question, the writer will attempt firstly to examine the ideas of the Enlightenment, and how it contributed to the Revolution; secondly the other factors that culminated in the Storming of the Bastille on the 14 th of July 1789 will be placed under scrutiny; and finally, an alternative interpretation of the relationship between the Enlightenment and the Revolution will be considered. According to the Oxford Dictionary, the Enlightenment was 'a European Intellectual movement of the late 17 th and 18 th centuries emphasising reason and individualism.' 'Man is the single term from which all must be brought back' or as Professor Colin Jones puts it 'human value was the critical yardstick of knowledge employed." Eric Hobsbawm saw the Enlightenment as being dominated by 'a secular, rationalist and progressive individualism' in which its main objective was to free the individual from the bonds of traditionalism, superstition and an irrational hierarchical class order. The cult of the individual may have led to the estrangement of the self from the Church, (seen as an oppressive and stifling body with traditional rituals and rigid beliefs) hence the dominance of secularism in the ideas of the Enlightenment. Proceeding from there, the criticisms aimed at the Church would have led some to question the basis of its power, and the resultant decrease in its prestige and inviolability. Since the monarch was seen as God's ordained agent on earth, any challenge to the supremacy of the Church would only serve to de-stabilise the King's position as an absolute monarch, which was precisely what happened in 1789 (King Louis XVI by the grace of God, King of France now became Louis, by the Grace of God and the constitutional law of the state, the King of the French). <fnote>Compact Oxford Dictionary Thesaurus and Word Power Guide (2001) p.292. </fnote><fnote>Dennis Diderot, Encyclopedie, vol. V, p. 641 (article, 'Encyclopedie'). </fnote><fnote>Colin Jones, The Great Nation, France from Louis XV to Napoleon (London, 2002), p.174. </fnote><fnote>Eric Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution 1789-1848 (United States of America, 1996), p.21. </fnote><fnote>Hobsbawm, Age of Revolution, p. 59. </fnote>'Liberty, equality and fraternity of all men' was the slogan of both the Enlightenment and the revolution. It is plausible to suggest that the enlightenment did lead, in reality, to greater equality between certain groups of people. In the salons, academies, Masonic lodges and coffee houses, people debated on equal footing, regardless of their status in society. Madam Geoffrin even went as far as to bar the powerful duc de Richelieu from her salon, 'arguing that wit rather than social rank was the passport for admission into her circles." But this could have resulted in the resentment amongst the lower classes that thought of themselves as the intellectual, but not social, equals to the aristocrats- resentment for the fact that nepotism and the lack of meritocracy were going to cost them that promotion in the Army or civil service hierarchy. The revolution thus could be borne out of the conflict of interests between the old order, and the new forces that were trying to assert themselves. <fnote>Colin Jones, The Great Nation, p. 183. </fnote>Perhaps, the most significant way in which the Enlightenment contributed to the Revolution was that it created a climate of change that was conducive for the revolution to occur. The overall rise in literacy, from 29 to 47 per cent for Men between 1686-90 and 1786-90, and 14 to 27 per cent for women during the same period, led to the rapid and widespread dissemination of the ideas of the Enlightenment. Large-scale diffusion of critical and denunciatory literature (not least in pornographic books targeting the royal family) transformed the representation of the monarchy in the minds of the French, and made them think of themselves as victims of a despotic monarch. Thus, in Roger Chartier's words, regardless of the intent of the 'philosophical books', it succeeded in producing an 'ideological erosion' that may have made the revolution inevitable. According to Darnton, even though the people did not call for a Revolution or foresee 1789, unconsciously however, they prepared for that event by 'desanctifying the symbols and deflating the myths that made the monarchy legitimate in the eyes of its subject." The increased criticisms of the established order (the Church and the Monarchy) may have therefore poisoned the mentality of the Public Opinion in France that eventually led to revolution. The Encyclopedie also aspired to embody 'the power to change men's common ways of thinking' so as to make a 'revolution...in the minds of men and the national character." Hence the fostering of the 'critical spirit' amongst the French was also an important consequence of the Enlightenment <fnote>Roger Chartier, 'Do books make revolutions?' The French Revolution in Social and Political Perspective, ed. Peter Jones, (New York, 1996), p. 168. </fnote><fnote>Robert Darnton, 'A Clandestine Bookseller in the Provinces,' in his The Literary Underground of the Old Regime (Cambridge, Mass., 1982), p. 147. </fnote><fnote>Encyclopedie, vol. v, p.637 (article, Encyclopedie) </fnote>Roger Chartier however, cautions against this link between philosophical works and revolutionary thought. Using the example of Rousseau, Chartier illustrates the popularity of the philosophes amongst the sans culottes, middle classes and the aristocracy. Moreover, one of the Enlightenment's crowning glories, the Encyclopedie was too expensive to be purchased by anyone other than the notables, and though some were dedicated to the revolutionary cause, the majority was apathetic or hostile to it. Due to the fact that there can be many interpretations to a book, hence, it is impossible to credit too direct a role to books in creating the revolutionary ardour of the French masses. Furthermore, the philosophes were from quite a diverse social background. Rousseau's father was a watchmaker, Voltaire was the son of a notary, and Montesquieu was 'a magistrate in the parlement of Bordeaux, a feudal lord living in a moated castle and an apologist for noble power." Most of them (excluding Rousseau) believed in the idea of the monarchy as the generator of utilitarian reform, and despite the criticisms of the monarchy and traditional institutions, the philosophes believed that 'the modern state could be improved as it stood." Perhaps, it was the failure of 'Enlightened Despotism', which resulted in the bourgeoisie transfer of faith from the monarchy to the masses, which led indirectly to the French revolution. <fnote>William Doyle, The Oxford History of the French Revolution, (Oxford, 2002), p.50. </fnote><fnote>Colin Jones, The Great Nation, p.221. </fnote>Amongst the other factors that contributed to the outbreak of the revolution, Hobsbawm suggests that it was war and debt that broke the back of the monarchy. He explains that the bankruptcy of the government and the resultant need for tax reforms gave the aristocracy and the parlements a chance to barter with the government. In exchange for the tax reforms, the aristocracy wanted an extension of their privileges, and this led to the forming of the assembly of notables and the calling of the Estates-General (a feudal assembly which last met in 1614). Hobsbawm concluded that the revolution thus began as an aristocratic attempt to recapture the state, but it underestimated the sovereign ideas of the 'Third Estate', and the socio-economic consequences of its political demands. What made the 'Third Estate' a force to be reckoned with was the fact that they not only represented the interests of the middle classes, but also of the urban poor and eventually, the revolutionary peasantry. In my opinion, the socio-economic context of revolutionary France was just as, if not more important than the influence of the Enlightenment. The fact that the revolution broke out in 1789 and not any other year was partly because of the bad harvest in 1788/9, which was reinforced by a particularly harsh winter. The severe economic consequences and the resulting industrial depression drove the urban and rural poor to desperation. The impact was heightened by the fact that in the preceding years, conditions were improving and things were turning out for the better. The expectations of the people were raised, and it came crashing down in 1789. Hobsbawm also suggested that the campaign of propaganda lent an added political dimension to the grievances of the people, and united them behind the deputies of the 'Third Estate'. Once the bastion of monarchical suppression and power (the Bastille) had fallen, there was no turning back. <fnote>Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution, p.58. </fnote>In Roger Chartier's article he puts forward and alternative interpretation of the relationship between the Enlightenment and the revolution. He contemplates the possibility that it was not the Enlightenment that implied revolution, but rather, the converse, that it was the latter that constructed the former. He states that the retrospective construction were many-the 'canonisation' of Voltaire and Rousseau, by the revolutionary assemblies, as the intellectual fore fathers of the revolution, while others such as Buffon and Descartes were relegated; in the quest for legitimacy, political celebrations were held in Year II, honouring the philosophes and martyrs for liberty. The articles in the Declaration of the Rights of Man, which expounds on the freedom of Man, may have led to the belief that it was the Enlightenment that was the ideological inspiration behind the revolution. Perhaps it was a retrospective justification for the revolution and to put the revolutionaries on a moral high ground, since they were now seen not as mere rebels, but as agents of progress. Hence, 'it was the revolution that gave a premonitory and programmatic meaning to certain works, constituted, after the fact, as its origin.' <fnote>Roger Chartier, 'Do books make Revolutions', p.183. </fnote><fnote>Chartier, 'Do books make Revolutions', p.185. </fnote>The relationship between the Enlightenment and the revolution is a complex one that does not lend itself readily to simple cause and consequence explanation. There have been mutual exchanges between the two, in the sense that the Enlightenment provided the ideology and legitimacy of the revolution, and on the other hand, the revolution also gave the Enlightenment a prophetic element in that the latter 'predicted' the coming of the former and prepared the people for socio-political change. Much as the Enlightenment has contributed to the revolution, we should not discount the other forces and events that were in place for the revolution to occur, such as the economic depression that led to the politicising of the masses, the bankruptcy of the monarchy, and the personal temperament of King Louis XVI (in particular, how he was so easily manipulated by his Queen and reactionary advisors). Hobsbawm has an interesting perspective to offer, in that he thinks the revolution would have occurred without the philosophes, but they 'made the difference between a mere breakdown of the old regime and the effective and rapid substitution of a new one." Perhaps we can then say that the Enlightenment was important only after the revolution had become a fait accompli, and that it made its mark on post-revolution re-construction. <fnote>Hobsbawm, Age of Revolutions, p. 58. </fnote> 