<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>During the second half of the 20 th century hydro power in the form of increasingly large dams was seen as the clean energy solution. The trend declined however, as a result of saturation of available resources, and the growing opposition founded on the negative social, ecological and economic short-falls of many major projects. It has been shown that many large dams (of height greater than 15m) have failed to meet financial and physical performance targets. Many large projects have resulted in the displacement of communities from their homes and livelihoods, the benefits of the scheme going elsewhere. Ecological damage to rivers has resulted in a loss of species and damaged livelihoods of those who rely on the resources of the river. Financing of large dams has also become problematic as a result of deregulation of power industries, and weariness on the part of investors of the pitfalls of large hydro. The world's increasing problems of water supply and energy consumption may however re-open the case for hydro power and large dams as the only currently capable solution. This is particularly true for developing countries such as China, currently experiencing tremendous growth, and with a large hydro resource. Other opportunities do exist for hydro in the form of upgrading existing schemes, and new technology such as free-flow turbines. </abstract><heading>Introduction: The growth in Hydropower and Dam Building</heading>During the second half of the 20 th century, hydropower was adopted throughout the world as a clean energy solution; today 20% of the worlds energy needs are met by hydropower. The power from rivers was harnessed by the building of dams to control flow and direct it through turbines to generate electricity. The developments started in the 1930s in the US with the building of Hoover dam which has since has been dwarfed by many other projects providing electricity, irrigation, water supply and flood control on many of the world's major rivers (Figure 1). Ideologies and politics played a major part in the building of increasingly large dams, often without regard for the costs to a nation. In the later part of the 20 th century, many of the benefits of large dams began to be called into question by ever strengthening opposition, with a building case on the negative environmental, economic and social impacts of large dams. As a result of this, and the saturation of the hydro resource of many countries, there has been a great decline in the number of projects being commissioned. <enote>Pearce, F, The Dammed, The Bodley Head London, 1992, p137 </enote>A large dam is usually defined as one with a height greater than 15m, dams higher than 150m being classified as super dams. In terms of hydropower, large hydro is usually defined as a capacity greater than 10MW. Today there are around 40,000 large dams worldwide, with over 150 super dams. Table 1 shows a number of the worlds highest dams, nearly all of which were completed before 1980. Table 2 shows dams with the largest hydroelectric capacity. In this report, the future prospects of hydropower and large dams will be discussed in by considering the benefits and negative impacts of projects, and the future need of energy resources and water. <table/><table/><figure/><heading>The Case Against Large Dams</heading>The building of large dams has been a highly experimental, with lessons only learnt in hindsight. The negative impacts of large dams have only come to light in the last decade. Opponents have collected significant evidence of these impacts, and have had increasing success in halting further projects. <heading>Underperformance of Existing Projects</heading>One criticism levelled against large dams is that the vast majority of projects fail to achieve their predicted performance. The report of the world commission on dams (2000) claimed that a large proportion of the dams considered failed to meet physical and economic targets. Hydropower projects were seen to be the highest performers achieving close to, but still under predicted performance (Figure 2).2 Many dam projects overrun significantly as a result of poor time scheduling and unexpected eventualities in later stages of the project. Such criticisms hinder the progress of further dam building, especially when considering the nominal alternatives to hydropower- gas turbine plants for example have low and predictable costs and short lead times. <figure/><heading>Social Impacts</heading>The most significant social impact of dam-building is the flooding of inhabited landing, forcing whole communities to leave their homes and livelihoods. It is estimated that between forty and eighty million people have faced resettlement as a result of the world's dams. Many of those displaced receive little or no compensation, and do not see the benefits promised by a dam project. In the largest dam building program in the world, 16 million people have been displaced in India in the last 25 years.1 <enote>Dams and Development, a new framework for decision making, The Report of the World Commission on dams, 200, p16. </enote>Damming a river has significant effect on communities down stream as well. Lower river flows result in destruction of flood plains which provide fertile farming land. Fish stocks may also be affected- since the building of the Pak Mun dam in Thailand, communities reported more than a 50% decline in fish catch and the disappearance of many species. Nigeria's Kainji dam displaced some 40,000 people from rich flood plains and caused fishing and harvests to fall by more than 50% over 600km downstream.6 It is the poor who suffer most- those whose livelihoods depend on the resources of a river- and in most cases, the beneficiaries of a large dam are far removed from the locality of the project. <enote>Amornsakchai, S et al., Pak Mun Dam Mekong River Basin Thailand, final report, prepared for the World Commission on Dams, 2000 </enote>The failure of many projects to take into consideration these impacts has caused suffering of many people, giving rise to great opposition to future projects.2 <heading>Environmental Impacts</heading>Damming of rivers effects the environment upstream and downstream. The body of water created behind the dam may be replacing the natural habitat of many species. Downstream, a reduced flow rate may have a significant effect on the aquatic ecosystem- up to 35% of fresh water fish are thought to have become extinct or endangered as a result of dams.  <enote>Twelve Reasons to Exclude Large Hydro from renewables initiatives, International Rivers Network, 2003. </enote>The flooding of large areas of vegetation results in the emission of greenhouse gases as organic matter decomposed. If this can be shown to be significant it raises questions as to the environmental benefits of hydropower over fossil fuel plant. Some feel that environmental impacts such as these can be mitigated, for example by simulating river flow by releasing a proportion of the stored water. Some nations, such as Norway and Sweden have however gone to the lengths of imposing a complete ban on building dams on their rivers.  <enote>McCully, P, Silenced Rivers, Zed Books, 1996, p24, p231 </enote><heading>Sedimentation</heading>Many believe that hydropower dams should be excluded from being classified as renewable on the grounds that the build up of sedimentation behind a dam leads to short life spans. As sediment levels increase, the head of water available decreases, reducing the power available, and the volume of water that can be stored. It is thought that 1% of the world's hydropower is lost each year as a result of sedimentation. The problem is worse in tropical climates where rivers carry larger fractions of silt, and for larger dams, mitigation (e.g., silt removal) is more difficult and expensive because of the scale of the problem. <enote>6 Dammed rivers, damned lies, International Rivers Network, 2003 </enote><heading>The Water crisis</heading>The population in developing countries is growing very quickly, and with it the resource demands. It has been estimated that increasing food requirements will increase irrigation water needs by 20-25% by 2025. Many of these countries are already under significant water stress. Dams may be seen as a solution to this problem, particularly when considering the large hydro potential in the developing world. <heading>The Energy Crisis and Climate Change</heading>Concerns are escalating over the possibility of climate change as a result of global warming caused by man-made carbon dioxide emissions. There is also growing concern that fossil resources are running out. The problems are worsened by the increasing energy usage worldwide- there is expected to be a 60% increase in energy usage from 1997 to 2002. Renewable energy technology is getting increasing attention as a means of reducing the reliance on fossil fuel energy which contributes significantly to CO 2 emissions and consumes valuable resources. Hydropower was scene in the last century as the clean solution for power generation. Building of large dams converts the variable flow of rivers into a controllable, flexible power supply. Storage allows fast response to changes in electrical load. Hydroplants also promise longevity- over 30 years of operation. Being driven by the hydrological cycle, hydropower is, at least in theory a renewable resource. There are suggestions, however, that should significant climate changes take place, river flows could be affected, reducing the effectiveness of existing hydro and creating uncertainty for future projects. Wind power is the world's fastest growing energy source with a growth rate of 24% in the 1990s. In 2002 Europe's wind generator capacity increased by a third. The cost of energy from wind farms has fallen significantly in the last decade; in some areas it is lower than for fossil fuel alternatives. Wind power has its drawback, however, namely that it provides intermittent power which seriously inhibits the proportion of a grid system it can support. The size of the resource available varies across the world- Europe is blessed with an abundant resource but in many developing countries the resource is small. <enote>Beyond Dams Options and Alternatives, A report by the American Rivers and International Rivers Network, 2004, p72 </enote>Solar power also suffers from intermittency, reducing its potential contribution to a grid system. The cost of photovoltaic panels is falling significantly but is still too high to allow competition with fossil electricity prices. The potential for solar is large, particularly in developing countries which generally have higher levels of insolation. Biomass power generation may also become a strong energy resource for the future but is currently not significantly developed. Stress on fossil fuel reserves may drive a search for alternative fuels. Nuclear power remains for many nations a political no-go area with major concerns over safety, environment and costs- its plight seems similar to hydropower. It is however a strong contender to be capable of supplying energy needs. Hydropower may again find its place as a reliable energy resource as the looming crises of climate change and fuel reserves force a move towards renewable sources. It is a technology that is much more developed than other forms of renewable energy, and is more capable than the main contenders, wind and solar, of meeting the bulk of energy needs. The stigma that it shares with Nuclear may in time be forcibly overcome by a greater need to provide the worlds power and prevent climate change. <heading>Large versus Small Hydro</heading>Small hydro, normally defined as less than 10MW has a number of advantages over large hydro. It is cheaper (per project), with lower risks, shorter project times and is more manageable. Since the costs are so much lower, it presents opportunities for private enterprises and even local involvement. A single project will displace less people and have a smaller impact on the local area. Sedimentation may also be more easily removed, and even used for fertilization of farmland. This, however, does not give an argument for replacement of large projects with small ones. The cumulative effect of an equivalent number of small projects will have a much greater impact environmentally and socially than a single large one, and will provide less power.5 Small hydro may however provide a more appropriate solution for power provision to rural areas for which grid connection is expensive and problematic. This may come in the form of micro-hydro (less than 100kW), and may or may not necessitate the building of large dams. Recent advances in power electronics and inverter technology also make smaller scale power schemes more feasible. <heading>Financing of Hydro Projects</heading>In many countries in recent years the power industry has been largely deregulated, resulting in privatisation of electricity generation. The objective of independent power producers (IPPs), which have singularly lower financial resources is to invest in low risk, commercially viable technology with short term returns. Large scale hydro, which is capital intensive with long lead times and long-term returns, is therefore unattractive. Banks and governments have grown weary of the controversial issues surrounding dams. Private investment is seen as the way forward for large projects but investors are put off by the high risks and slow returns. Some suggest that for projects to proceed a partnership is required between public and private sectors. <enote>Head, C.R, Hydropower Dams, World Commission on Dams Thematic Report, 21/071999, p2 </enote><enote>Churchill, A.A, Meeting Hydro's Financing and Development Challenges, Large Dams: Learning from the past, looking at the future, World Bank, ICUN, 1994 </enote>The problem is accentuated in developing countries where funding is even less available, particularly in countries which are already under large debts. <heading>Hydro Potential</heading>The decline of dam building during the 1990s was in part the result of a decline in the number of suitable sites. This is particularly true for developed countries for whom it is estimated that 70% of the available hydro potential has been already tapped. The US, for example, now decommissions more dams than it builds.2 It is estimated that developing countries hold double the hydro potential of developed countries, with only 20% of this in use. While the suitability of many sites for hydropower might be laid under closer scrutiny in these times, there is clearly vast room for the development of hydro. The potential in developing countries also correlates with the high population growth currently being experienced (Figure 3), and the corresponding increase in energy demand. Industrialisation and urbanisation need energy and water that may be provided by large hydroelectric dams. Some would argue that the main issue is not whether large dams will be built in developing countries, but how their impact can be minimised. <enote>Biswas, A.K & Tortajada, C, Development and Large dams: a global perspective, DATE? </enote>China, a nation moving forward at a tremendous rate, continues to build many dams. As a country it is unique in the scale of its water resource and power requirements, which are growing at an increasing rate as the nation becomes more and more industrialised. At some 575 feet high and, spanning nearly one mile across, The Three Gorges Project in China is set to be the world's largest dam, with the primary purposes of flood control and power generation. It is expected to create a lake around 350 mile long, displacing around two million people. While much controversy exists over its construction, the project emphasises that large dams are still seen as a vital step forward for developing countries. <enote>Fuggle, R, Experience with Dams in Water and Energy Resource Development In The People's Republic Of China, Prepared for the World Commission on Dams (WCD), 2000 </enote><figure/><heading>Other Prospects for Hydropower</heading>Aside from dam building, other opportunities exist for development of hydro power. The world's many non-hydropower dams could be retrofitted with turbines to generate power. Similarly, upgrading existing hydropower dams with new equipment would increase generating capacity; this accounts for most small-hydro development in North America.5 Free flow turbines, which simply use the flow of an un-dammed river to generate power, are another prospect for hydropower which would negate the problems associated with large dams. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The stigma created by many examples of ecological and social disasters, and the strength of opposition, has left governments and developers weary of large dam projects. Deregulation of the power industry makes large hydro power an unlikely option as it is unattractive to smaller private companies seeking to compete in power generation markets. The prospects of a world energy crisis may re-open the case for large hydro as a means of providing high volume, low-carbon power. Developing countries offer large potential for hydro-power, and with quickly growing populations require large scale power generation and water supply that may be achievable with large hydroelectric dams. China continues to build large dams to support its high rate of growth. Other opportunities exist for hydro; upgrading and retrofitting existing dams, free-flow turbines. 