<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Previous research has been divided as to whether there are links between birth order and personality. Additionally, few studies have established causal connections. The correlation between birth order, personality and parental treatment was investigated in 34 eldest siblings, 30 youngest siblings and 19 middle/only children. Each participant was asked to fill in a structured questionnaire. Participants were required to rate how extroverted they perceived themselves to be and to indicate the level of parental overprotection and emotional warmth shown to them by their parents. Generally the findings were inconsistent with the experimental hypothesis. A significant relationship between birth order and personality was not found. Neither is it true that birth order is strongly correlated to parental treatment. The claim that differing parental styles explains personality differences was not supported. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Birth order refers to a person's rank by age amongst his/her siblings and is a topic that has generated substantial research for over a century. However, a definitive theory explaining its effects has yet to gain general acceptance. Regardless of this, many beliefs surrounding birth order have been produced. A popular assumption is that eldest siblings are typically responsible, conventional, authoritarian and achievement oriented while youngest siblings are thought of as more sociable, adventurous, dependent and peer-oriented (Steelman & Powell, 1985). Besides this, birth order has also been said to influence intellectual abilities, academic achievement (Mojoribanks, 1997), economic success (Travis & Kohli, 1995) and even romantic relationships (Schilling, 2001). It is a topic that is frequently mentioned in parenting guides, and has resulted in the coining of terms such as "middle child syndrome", which are commonly used in conversation. It therefore comes as no surprise that there have been many attempts to empirically verify the effects of birth order. Previous studies on the effects of birth order have produced conflicting conclusions. Some show that birth order is related to certain personality characteristics while others do not. An investigation by Singh (1985; cited by Guastello & Guastello, 2002) reported a higher level of extroversion amongst youngest siblings as compared to eldest siblings. Sociability - a major component of extroversion - was also found to be highest in last-born children (Segal, 1978; cited by Guastello & Guastello, 2002). According to Segal (1978), youngest children are unlikely to be successful in a competitive situation against their siblings because of their younger age and relative weakness. As a result, youngest siblings develop alternative methods of getting their way, such as adopting a more adaptive and agreeable attitude which enhances their social skills. The lack of a competitive spirit also allows youngest siblings to be less anxious and reserved, thus promoting an extroverted personality. Conversely, Snow, Jacklin and Maccoby (1981) reported sociability to be highest in only children and lower in last-born children than first-born children. Similarly, Sulloway (1996) showed extroversion to be more prevalent in eldest children than youngest children. Yet other researchers have found no significant effects for personality traits across birth order categories (Guastello and Guastello, 2002). The connection between birth order and familial relationships has also been explored with enthusiasm. This is because birth order may influence how parents treat their children, and this in turn tends to cause differences in personality and social behaviour (Buckley, 1998). After all, parental style has been strongly associated with a child's characteristics (Durkin, 1995). An example of this is provided by Carlson and Kangun (1988) who suggest that birth order affects socialization because eldest children are socialized by adults while youngest children receive less attention from their parents and are socialized by their older siblings instead. Thus, firstborns are more achievement oriented due to increased adult influences while lastborns are more independent of authority because they are peer-socialized. Another argument is that eldest children are more controlling in later life because parents tend to view them as stronger and more capable and therefore allow them more control in relation to their younger siblings (Buckley, 1998). Although many reports propose that development is affected by socialisation differences due to birth order, only a handful of studies have investigated parental behaviour towards children of different ordinal positions (Rothbart, 1972). Some researchers such as Putter (2003), who explored the relationship between birth order and depressive symptoms in early adolescence, have utilised parenting style as a mediating factor but most others like Nadler (2000) have only looked at birth order and either personality or parenting in isolation. This study seeks to distinguish between the conflicting conclusions that have been drawn from preceding research. In addition, it goes beyond merely establishing a correlation between birth order and personality by exploring parental treatment as a causal link between these two variables. The experimental hypothesis in this case is that birth order has an effect on personality because parents treat their children differently according to their ordinal position in the family. Unlike previous studies such as that of Sulloway (1996), which investigated a combination of personality characteristics, this research concentrates solely on extroversion/ introversion. The degree of extroversion people display is assumed to be influenced by their upbringing. It is also assumed that the effect of parenting style on personality is stronger than other environmental factors that may render the results insignificant. Based on research by Singh (1985) and Segal (1978), it is expected that youngest siblings will be more extroverted than eldest siblings. It is also predicted that eldest siblings will be more overprotected and perceive less emotional warmth from their parents. <heading>Method</heading><heading>Participants</heading>83 university students (40 men and 43 women) were recruited to participate in the study. The sampling method used was an opportunity sample of volunteers. 34 participants were eldest siblings, 30 were youngest siblings and 19 participants were neither eldest nor youngest siblings. All participants were unaware of the hypothesis of the experiment in order to preserve the validity of the results. <heading>Materials</heading>A structured questionnaire comprising three sections was used (see Appendix A). These sections were: the s-EMBU Parental Treatment test (Arrindell et al, 1999), the Big Five personality test (Goldberg, 1992), and birth order assessment questions. The s-EMBU Parental Treatment test consisted of 23 questions with three scales (Rejection, Emotional Warmth and Overprotection) to measure perceived parental rearing behaviour. Of the three scales, only Emotional Warmth and Overprotection were used. The questions were based on a rating scale of 1 to 4 and scores for mother and father were determined separately. The second section of the questionnaire (the Big Five personality test) contained a list of 100 human traits and required participants to indicate how accurately each trait described them, using a rating scale from 1 to 9. Participants were required to complete the entire Big Five personality test but only questions relating to Extroversion/ Introversion contributed to the data analysis. The final section of the questionnaire required participants to indicate the number of siblings they have, as well as their respective ages so that birth order could be determined. <heading>Design</heading>A within subjects design was used in which all participants were given the same set of questions. The independent variable in this experiment was the birth order of each participant whereas the dependent variables were the scores obtained by each participant for the Big Five personality test and the s-EMBU Parental Treatment test. The conditions in this study were the questions related to extroversion/ introversion and parental treatment. There was a control group consisting of participants who were neither first-born nor last-born in the family and therefore were expected to obtain non-extreme scores on both tests. <heading>Procedure</heading>Participants were administered the questionnaires individually under controlled conditions without the influence of other people. The researchers explained that the study was about personality traits and parent-child relationships (but with no mention of the hypotheses), and told the participants that they would be required to complete a questionnaire. Participants were then reminded that they had the right to withdraw from the study at any time. Confidentiality was also assured. The study only commenced once participants had given their written consent (see Appendix B). After the participants had completed the questionnaire, the purpose of the study was explained to them. Extroversion scores were then obtained by subtracting the ratings given by participants for introvert traits (see Appendix C) from their ratings given for extrovert traits (see Appendix C) on the Big Five personality test. This was done to establish how extroverted participants assessed themselves to be. The degree of Emotional Warmth and Overprotection perceived by participants in their parent-child relationships was determined by calculating the average rating given by each participant for the corresponding questions of the s-EMBU test (see Appendix D). Finally, the information that was gathered was used to form correlations between birth order, parental treatment and extroversion/ introversion. <heading>Results</heading>Descriptive statistics for personality are given in Table 1. <table/>Table 1 shows that the degree of extroversion according to birth order is not in the direction predicted. First-born children seem to be more extroverted than last-born children and children who are neither first nor last-born seem the least extroverted. This does not conform to the expected personality inclinations of all three birth order categories. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to investigate birth order differences in extroversion/introversion. Preliminary assumption testing was conducted to check for normality, missing values, outliers and omogeneity of variance. There were two outliers in the youngest child birth order group with extremely high and low z scores on extroversion (see Appendix E). However, these outliers did not significantly affect the results of the ANOVA and so were retained during data analysis. No other serious violations were noted. A one-way ANOVA indicated no significant difference in extroversion/introversion due to birth order, F(2,80)= .10; p>.05. In other words, there was no significant relationship between birth order and an extroverted/ introverted personality. Descriptive statistics for parental treatment are given in Table 2. <table/>Table 2 shows that perceived emotional warmth and overprotection is not entirely consistent with the hypothesis that parents are more overprotective of their first child, and show more emotional warmth to their last child. As previous studies suggest, mothers tend to be more overprotective of their eldest rather than youngest child and are also more emotionally warm towards their last-born child. However, fathers seem to display directly contradicting behaviour. They are more overprotective of their youngest child, and more emotionally warm towards their eldest child. Interestingly, both parents seem to be most overprotective of their children who are neither eldest nor youngest in the family (this includes 'only' children). Prior to analysis, the raw data was screened to ensure adherence to test assumptions. A positive relationship between the cell standard deviations and means of the raw data was found and thus a square-root transformation was applied. With the transformed variable in the variable set, there was found to be no relation between cell means and standard deviations (see Appendix F). All other assumptions were fulfilled. A one-way ANOVA revealed that mothers are not significantly more overprotective of any particular offspring, F(2,80)=1.38, p>.05. Neither do they show significantly more emotional warmth towards their youngest child, F(2,80)=0.74, p>.05. Likewise, fathers are not significantly more emotionally warm towards their eldest offspring, F(2,80)=.19, p>.05. However, birth order does appear to have a significant effect on how overprotective fathers are of their offspring, F(2,80)=3.85, p<.. 05. For this particular experimental design, a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) produced results that were identical to those obtained when a one-way ANOVA was carried out separately on each measure of parental treatment (overprotection-mother, overprotection-father, emotional warmth-mother, and emotional warmth-father). This is most likely to have occurred because only one independent variable - birth order - was involved. The relationship between personality and fatherly emotional warmth is illustrated in Figure 1. <figure/>A Pearson's correlation showed a weak positive but non-significant correlation between personality and motherly overprotection, r(81)=.02, p>.05; a weak negative but non-significant correlation between personality and fatherly overprotection, r(81)=-.12, p>.05; and a weak positive and non-significant correlation between personality and motherly emotional warmth, r(81)=.13, p>.05. The only significant correlation was between personality and fatherly emotional warmth, r(81)=.24, p<.05 (see Figure 1). In addition, the data were analysed by multiple regression, using as regressors, motherly overprotection, fatherly overprotection, motherly emotional warmth and fatherly emotional warmth. The regression was a very poor fit, R²adj=3.3%, and the overall relationship was not significant, F(4,78)=1.70, p>.05. With other variables held constant, personality scores were positively related to motherly overprotection scores, t(78)-.57, p>.05; negatively related to fatherly overprotection scores, t(78)=-1.09, p>.05; and negatively related to motherly emotional warmth scores, t(78)=-.85, p>.05. The effect of fatherly emotional warmth was the only one to approach significance at p=.05 with a positive relationship with personality, t(78)=1.98. p>.05. <heading>Discussion</heading>Generally, the findings were inconsistent with the experimental hypothesis that birth order is a predictor of personality due to differences in parental treatment. The results showed that birth order does not significantly predict extroversion/ introversion. With the exception of fatherly overprotection, neither does it affect how parents treat their children. In addition, the data did not support the claim that overprotection causes introversion. In line with previous research, emotional warmth shown by fathers was found to encourage extroversion. However, motherly emotional warmth had no effect on personality. It was expected that youngest siblings would be more extroverted than eldest siblings. Nevertheless, the statistical data did not show such a relationship between birth order and personality. Instead, the results of this study are more in correspondence with Bell et al's (1985) research which found that birth order has no effect on social competence. One reason that might account for this is that the measure of extroversion used in this study incorporates both sociability and assertiveness. The problem with this is that sociability is a trait usually associated with youngest siblings while eldest siblings are typically found to be assertive. Thus, both birth order categories would show a similar degree of overall extroversion and a null effect on personality (Sulloway, 1996). It might also be that just as the findings indicate, birth order has little to do with the extroversion/ introversion of an individual. Research suggests that at a young age, last-born children tend to be reserved because they are easily intimidated by their older siblings and are at a physical and intellectual disadvantage. However, it is possible for these birth order effects to diminish with age (Ernst & Angst, 1983). In time, the age-gap between siblings becomes less exaggerated, allowing youngest-siblings to gain self confidence and a sense of equality. Moreover, as individuals become more exposed to other environmental factors, the effect of birth order on personality is weakened. As all participants were university students, any birth order effects which might have been present in childhood may have been greatly minimised. In line with previous literature, mothers tend to be more overprotective of their first-born child than their last-born child. This is because parental inexperience causes parents to be more anxious about their children (Ounsted & Hendrick, 1977). Thus, new mothers are more fearful about their child's safety and tend to be more overprotective of first-borns. As more experience is gathered, mothers become more permissive. Also, by the time the youngest child is born, mothers have to divide their attention amongst more children and therefore are forced to be less anxious and overprotective in order to efficiently care for all their children. As expected, mothers are also more emotionally warm towards their youngest child. It is theorised that this is because parents are more strict and tough with the first child but easy-going with the later and younger children (Price, 1969). As parents adopt a more relaxed stance, children find it easier to identify and relate to their parents and so perceive their parents to be more emotionally warm. In contrast, fathers are more overprotective of their youngest child. It is possible that mothers are more involved in the caretaking aspect of their children and therefore while mothers are too busy to continue being overprotective by the time the last-born child comes along, fathers continue to display overprotection. It might even be that the overprotective attitude is transferred from the eldest child to the youngest child. As the eldest child becomes capable of looking out for him/herself, fathers become strict with the youngest child instead. According to the empirical data, both parents are most overprotective of children who fall neither in the eldest child nor youngest child categories. At first this seems puzzling as most people expect the middle child to be the least overprotected, but it is necessary to note that in this study, middle children and only children were put in the same category. Considering that there are more only children than middle children in the 'other' birth order category, it makes perfect sense that the 'other' children are the most overprotected. When there is only one child in the family, it is only natural that parents will invest more in him/her and also be more anxious about their child's wellbeing. Also, Adler (1956) claimed that the only child experiences all the effects of being a first-born but to a greater degree. If more only child participants had been obtained, it would have been beneficial to split the 'other' group into two categories: only children and middle children. The reason for this is that there are obvious differences between only children and middle children which may affect results significantly. This is most likely to be why the participants in the other birth order category did not obtain non-extreme scores as was initially expected. Hence the other birth order category is not very valid as a control group. A multiple regression revealed a very weak overall relationship between personality and parental treatments. This may be taken to reflect the true correlation between these two variables in the real world. Alternatively, the results of the multiple regression may be attributed to experimental noise. As mentioned above, there are several reasons this study may lack sensitivity and thus a stronger relationship may have been discovered if better experimental conditions were in place. A negative relationship between fatherly overprotection and extroversion was found. The more overprotective fathers are, the more introverted their children turn out to be. It is theorised that the parental inexperience and anxiety associated with overprotective parents instils greater anxiety in children (Ernst & Angst, 1983). Thus, children with overprotective fathers have a tendency towards being anxious, reserved and subsequently introverted. Children who are overprotected also lack the opportunities to learn social skills which may result in a more sociable and extroverted personality. Putallaz (1987; cited by Durkin, 1995) reveals that children with authoritarian parents have poorer peer relations. The reverse is true for motherly overprotection. In other words, the more overprotective mothers are, the more extroverted their children tend to be. It could be that children are able to rebel more successfully against their mothers and so the more authoritarian mothers are, the more inclined their children are to rebel. However, this relationship was found to be very weak and can probably be disregarded altogether. The potential weaknesses of this study are the small sample size as well as restricted sample population. The results obtained in this study may not have been a valid representation of the population as a whole. Generalisations based on overly small samples often lack strong validity. The simplistic design of this study may also have affected validity. Due to minimal resources and restricted availability of research methods, the only measure of personal characteristics and parental treatment used was a basic questionnaire. In addition, some shortcomings of the Big Five personality test were detected in the course of data collection. Many participants were unclear on the meanings of the words used in the personality test and had to ask the experimenters for definitions. This occurred fairly frequently and suggests that the questionnaire may have been an inaccurate measure of extroversion in this study. Participants may have become frustrated as they struggled to understand the words included and therefore may not have been very careful when giving responses. A superior design of this study may be drawn up using a more in-depth and suitable questionnaire consisting of more dimensions of assessing the investigated characteristics. Alternative methods of research that do not involve self evaluation could be used. A few examples are observational methods, interviews involving participants' family or friends and also task based experiments. Ultimately, it seems that generalisations about birth order effects cannot be made. Personal characteristics seem to be mainly determined by individual differences and other factors rather than birth order. There exists some relationship between birth order and parental treatment but is insufficient to explain birth order effects. Therefore, even if birth order was found to influence personality, it may be inferred that parenting style is not the only mediating factor affecting extroversion. Further, better designed research is needed to establish other causal factors. The weak relationship between personality and parental treatment also reveals that factors other than primary socialisation are involved in determining an individual's personality. In conclusion, birth order is not a predictor of personality and its effects cannot be explained solely by parental treatment. 