The 1990s witnessed a notable surge of interest and activity in both regions and regionalism and a sharpened awareness among states of the possibilities of regional cooperation. A study by the World Trade Organisation in 1995 highlighted some one hundred regional trade agreements in 1995 worldwide. The vast institutional development of the European Union has led to an even larger economic market whilst mechanisms of cooperation in economic and security fields have evolved elsewhere. The Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) (1967) and the subsequent Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) (1989) have flourished, whilst regionalism has also occurred within North and Latin America; the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) respectively. It is important to emphasise the focus within such regional projects, whether it be upon economic, political or security issues. Yet it is first necessary to define regionalism, for it is a term often confused with more vague forms of cooperation, and to establish a definition of sovereignty. A loss of sovereignty is commonly associated with regionalism - a claim frequently directed towards the EU. However, in contrast advocates of regionalism argue the process strengthens state independence and serves as a means of protection. The economic benefits of cooperation are frequently sited by regionalists who highlight the economic weight of the EU. The process may also benefit elites within states. The assumption that regionalism involves a loss of sovereignty however, can be challenged e.g. supporters of the EU emphasize the notion of 'pooled sovereignty'. It seems the traditional definition of sovereignty is perhaps less important in the modern global system given the rising significance of regionalism. <fnote>Statistics taken from White B, Little R, Smith M. 'Issues in World Politics' Basingstoke, Hampshire and London MacMillan Pres Ltd (1997) p.69 </fnote>It is first necessary to define the two terms central to this enquiry. Regionalism is said to refer to formal agreements made between states through intergovernmental negotiation. Conscious attempts are made to create formal mechanisms for dealing with common transnational issues. Stubbs and Underhill identify three central elements to regionalism; a common historical experience between the states concerned, close bonds between their societies and the emergence of organizations establishing the 'rules of the game'. The concept of regionalisation refers to the actual processes of integration which bond people or economies together regardless of national boundaries; it most commonly refers to economic integration which may need no formal regional institution to thrive. Despite this the terms should not be viewed as mutually exclusive. Regionalisation is a common predecessor of regionalism whilst the latter may decrease the significance on national borders encouraging regionalisation. The first wave of analysis of regionalism occurred in the 1950s following the emergence of the European Economic Community, forged with a heavy emphasis upon security. Considerations concerned the sustainability of the nation-state. Neofunctionalist approaches, such as that of Ernst Haas, were widespread; issues were said to 'spill over' into other areas widening the role of the institution in contrast to Mittrany's view that functionally discrete organizations are required to manage certain areas. Haas implicitly raised the issue of sovereignty given his belief that neofunctionalism would result in regional organizations transcending the state system. The end of the Cold War prompted a second wave of analysis of regionalism or 'new regionalism'. The development of the European Union encouraged economic regionalism with the emergence of the common market whilst notions of European citizenship and a common foreign and security policy were advocated within the Maastricht Treaty (1991). This was accompanied however, by recognition that the EU did not, as Scheingold, Lindberg and Nye had speculated within the first wave, represent a predictive model for regionalism elsewhere. The EU itself was evolving into a unique regional project. Within the field of international relations, sovereignty is referred to in an external sense; sovereignty relates to a state's place in the international order and its capacity to act as an independent entity. We shall now turn to discuss regionalism and its implications regarding this concept. <fnote>White B, Little R, Smith M. 'Issues in World Politics' Basingstoke, Hampshire and London MacMillan Pres Ltd (1997) p.71 </fnote><fnote>Breslin S, Higgott R. (2000) 'Studying Regions: Learning from the Old, Constructing the New' New Political Economy vol. 51, no. 3 p.334 </fnote><fnote>Breslin S, Higgott R. (2000) 'Studying Regions: Learning from the Old, Constructing the New' New Political Economy vol. 51, no. 3 p.335 </fnote>A loss of sovereignty is commonly associated with a state's membership of regional institutions. It is a charge frequently held against the EU - the most formal and wide-ranging expression of regional cooperation which does indeed have supranational institutions capable of overriding national governments. Critics argue the EU will ultimately entail the construction of a 'regional state' in which the traditional role of national governments will become redundant. In what he termed 'the myth of teleology', Kenichi Ohmae suggests states have become irrelevant within the global political economy. As the European Court of Justice noted 'by creating a Community of unlimited duration, having its own institutions, its own personality...and, more particularly real powers stemming from a limitation of sovereignty or a transfer of powers from the States to the Community, the member States have limited their sovereign rights'. Within the EU the Council of Ministers holds a position of particular significance for it is capable of formulating policy with a relatively minimal amount of accountability given the introduction of qualified majority voting. Decisions can be taken with approximately 70% agreement. European law now overrides that of nation states if the two conflict. This was illustrated perhaps most clearly within the UK in the landmark Factortame case (1988). The Spanish fishing company Factortame appealed against restrictions imposed on them by the UK government through the Merchant Shipping Act arguing they were permitted to fish under EU law. Despite the Court of Appeal's ruling that no court could suspend Acts of Parliament, the ECJ ruled that national courts could strike down laws which contravened European law. Consequently the House of Lords ruled in favour of Factortame, meaning the act was struck down. Sovereignty is, thus, no longer guaranteed in the presence of regionalism. We must now turn to discuss what then persuades states to subscribe to regional organizations. <fnote>Breslin S. 'Regionalism and Regionalization' Lecture University of Warwick (2005) </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from Held D, McGrew A, Goldblatt D, Perraton J. 'Global Transformations' Oxford Blackwell Publishers Ltd. (1999) p.74 </fnote>It seems that given the rise in popularity of regionalism, governments believe that by entering regional agreements they may be better placed to achieve national objectives and better protected. Smith argues whilst the EU may limit the sovereignty of its members 'there is no doubt that, in economic and political terms, participation in the EU adds to the strength of each of its members. From a purely rational national perspective, the gains can very easily outweigh the losses'. Within NATO, whose emphasis is upon regional security, there is no doubt that collective regional security adds to the defensive capabilities of its members. These generalized benefits are often underlined by benefits for individual members. Within NAFTA, the US is most certainly the dominant power both economically and militarily. If her actions were unconstrained they could have harmful consequences for the region. Thus for her weaker economic partners, Canada and Mexico, it is logical to construct regional agreements which set out rules within which the US must act. In addition, the US benefits from a greater market. NAFTA is an example of economic regionalism of particular significance as it breaches the so-called 'North-South' divide. Leyton-Brown concludes that whilst regionalism may appear to represent a loss of sovereignty, it can equally be seen as the exercise of national choice. A similar explanation can be offered regarding the expansion and reform within the EU given the potential economic dominance of Germany. The EEC was indeed proposed by the French Foreign Minister Schuman as a means of binding the economies of Germany and France in order to make the possibility of conflict 'not merely unthinkable but materially impossible'. Hurrell's assessment of hegemonic powers and regionalism highlights the emergence of sub-regional groups in response to a hegemonic power in an attempt to constrain their actions and gain favours e.g. the Gulf Cooperation Council in response to Iran's increasing dominance. Instead of seeing regionalism solely as a means by which authority is transferred away from states, the process may be seen as a valuable mechanism through which states attempt to manage their involvement in the international arena. <fnote>Quotation taken from White B, Little R, Smith M. 'Issues in World Politics' Basingstoke, Hampshire and London MacMillan Pres Ltd (1997) p.76 </fnote><fnote>White B, Little R, Smith M. 'Issues in World Politics' Basingstoke, Hampshire and London MacMillan Pres Ltd (1997) p.77 </fnote><fnote>Quotation taken from  URL  </fnote><fnote>Breslin S. 'Regionalism and Regionalization' Lecture University of Warwick (2005) </fnote>The economic benefits of regionalism are said to be significant in persuading states to join regional organizations. The EU for example, represents 20% of world trade and has become the world's largest trading bloc and a genuine common market to rival the US. Continual and accelerated expansion has seen the EU become an ever greater 'economic giant' argues Eysekens, with the addition of ten states in 2004. The thirty-four countries within APEC aim to harmonize economic policies and reduce tariffs to enhance the region's negotiating position within global trade negotiations and within the WTO. Regional free trade is targeted by 2010. The vast number of political differences between APEC's members makes their economic cooperation all the more impressive. The East Asian Economic Caucus within APEC is based upon so-called Asian values whose status, although demoted given Japan's desire to maintain beneficial relations with the US, could provide foundations for further political regionalism. Advocates of the economic benefits of regionalism use Akamatsu's Flying Geese Model to explain how the investment and trade from one dominant economic power e.g. Japan, has a knock on effect upon countries within the region as they compete for this trade and investment. ASEAN serves to promote cooperation between the neo-liberal authoritarian Asian tigers such as Japan, with socialist transition economies, notably China, yet also serves as a forum for debate upon issues of security, human rights and Asian values. Through political dialogue and confidence building, no tension has escalated into armed confrontation among ASEAN members since its establishment some three decades ago. This evolving regional security dialogue has been a natural consequence of economic regionalism. Member states have also agreed to use foreign currency reserves to support each other if their currencies come under attack. Without establishing such an extensive bureaucracy as within the EU, economic collaboration has perhaps begun to lay foundations for further regionalism concerning political and security issues within these projects. <fnote>Quotation taken from Russett B, Harvey S, Kinsella D. 'World Politics' Boston, Stratford Publishing Services (1998) </fnote><fnote> URL :8OqeyJgBACwJ:www-1.gsb.columbia.edu/japan/pdf/wp193.pdf+flying+geese+model&hl=en&client=firefox-a </fnote>Regionalism is also said to benefit elites within states. Rather than being held to account by their populations, they may seek defence behind regional cooperation. Christopher Hill terms this tendency the 'cover function' whereby responsibility for difficult decisions can be shifted to the regional level thus avoiding responsibility or justifying unpopular policies. Military elites may also benefit being able to highlight regional commitments to justify increased defence budgets whilst pressure groups may bypass national governments and lobby regional institutions to achieve their aims. <fnote>White B, Little R, Smith M. 'Issues in World Politics' Basingstoke, Hampshire and London MacMillan Pres Ltd (1997) p.82 </fnote>Having assessed the benefits of regionalism, the very assumption that regionalism coincides with a loss of sovereignty can be challenged. States themselves do remain ultimately sovereign in the sense that they can withdraw from regional organizations e.g. Britain could choose to repeal the European Communities Act (1972). Despite qualified majority voting within the EU states remain powerful in that decisions about which issues can be decided by majority voting must be based upon unanimity. The Council of Ministers always tries to reach as wide a consensus as possible. It should be recognised that cooperation within APEC does not produce legally binding agreements. Advocates of the EU emphasise the notion of 'pooled sovereignty'. Sovereignty is shared in that decision-making responsibility is now spread among governments whilst on certain issues individual states can no longer veto proposals on the basis of their sole national interest. Germain argues 'As the European economy progresses, territorial borders will not fade into oblivion...the impact of territorial borders will remain significant despite the deepening of the EU as a regional trading space' given each state's unique history and culture. <fnote>Quotation taken from  URL  </fnote>Thus it seems many states have been persuaded of the benefits of regionalism despite accusations that such processes result in a loss of sovereignty. The questions of whether regionalism is a 'good thing' or whether sovereignty is to be desired are, as Smith describes, essentially normative questions about the way things ought to be in world politics and will be a constant source of political debate and divided opinion. Yet there seems to be a trend towards regionalism within areas of the globe which have up until now sufficed with regionalization. Some argue that within East Asia, an attitude of interdependence is emerging which could well provide the basis for further regionalism. States have encountered two main problems with the traditional concept of sovereignty. Moral concerns have arisen from its capacity to block interference in the affairs of other states e.g. concerning human rights violations whilst theoretically, problems have stemmed from the fact that the notion of an independent sovereign state may no longer be of value in an increasingly interdependent world which requires cooperation on political, economic and military grounds. The forces of globalisation and regionalism may require the concept of sovereignty to be redefined. As we have seen, supporters of the EU emphasise the notion of 'pooled sovereignty'. Perhaps it should come to refer to a state's responsibility to maximise its economic and political status and significance within a demanding new international arena. Strict adherence to the traditional notion of sovereignty may see states 'left behind', sidelined within world politics. One can argue the traditional notion of sovereignty would then be of little value in such circumstances. <fnote>White B, Little R, Smith M. 'Issues in World Politics' Basingstoke, Hampshire and London MacMillan Pres Ltd (1997) p.78 </fnote><fnote>Heywood A. 'Key Concepts in Politics' Hampshire Palgrave (2000) p.39 </fnote>