<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The aim of this essay is to introduce a general understanding of phylogenetic systematics. It concentrated on demonstrating the principles of constructing a consensus phylogeny tree at a molecular level. The procedures have been discussed including assembling a dataset, aligning sequences, constructing a phylogeny tree and presenting data, as well as how to read a phylogeny tree. It also covered evaluation of some methods and the computational implements involved. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Since Charles Darwin pioneered the concept of systematic hierarchy representing an approximation of evolutionary history, there are more and more attentions have been paid on phylogenetic systematics, a term for identifying and understanding the evolutionary relationships normally due to a gradual populational phenomenon, among all kinds of living things on earth, both extant and extinct. In the evolutionary hierarchy, an evolutionary diversity is regarded at many levels from genes, species, to genera and higher taxon. Unsurprisingly, phylogenetic systematics involves tremendous amount of biological information, (Calow, 1998) which challenges the determination of phylogenetic relationships. Phylogenetics is responsible for seeking minimum evolution and inferring evolutionary history by phylogenetic analysis. Thanks to the development of computer technologies, it enables biologists to build up electronic databases with enormous storage capacity, share and transmit information through Internet global network, as well as processing and modeling data. The computational efforts have being rapidly extended in biological science, especially in genomics and sequence analysis, and derived an independent scientific discipline called bioinformatics. (Ouzounis and Valencia, 2003) It benefits taxonomic databases for combining taxonomic information systems with computed-assisted quantitative taxonomic analyses clasdistic analysis (Zhong et el., 1999) so that achieve transmission, storage and retrieval of phylogenetic information. A phylogeny tree is a representation of the evolutionary relationship among a group of genes or organisms. Since genetic resources only accumulate bit by bit and limiting abilities and knowledge heretofore, phylogenetic analysis is always say to reconstruct instead of accomplish a phylogeny tree. The attempt of this essay is to demonstrate the principles of phylogenetic analysis with a variety of different both numerical and computational approaches to construct genealogies at a molecular level rather than species. <heading>Reading a phylogeny tree</heading>On a phylogeny tree, the distinct unit termed taxon that can be any of separate genes sequences, species, phylogeny trees or individuals. (Mount, 2001) Phylogeny trees can be molecularly composed of either or both multi-gene families and a singe gene from many taxa. Branched and nodes represent the connections and divergences between the taxa. Nodes can be either internal or external by considering the hypothetical last common ancestor (LCA) and operational taxonomic unit (OTU). The branching pattern of the tree is called the topology. Branch defines the relationship between the taxa in terms of descent and ancestry with either scaled or unscaled. The scaled branch lengths are illustrated proportionally especially in molecular trees, correspond to the level of evolution between the two nodes they connect, as figure 1 shown. (Baldauf, 2003) The lengths of branched shown in the middle part of figure 1 only indicated the order of the taxa in history. The common ancestor of all taxa in the tree is called root of this phylogeny tree. It's not necessary to be rooted because of unknown common ancestor, often when constructing a number of data sets. <figure/>The two gene sequences shares a common ancestry, are referred to being homologous. It is classified into orthologues and paraloues by the origins of genes. A group of two or more taxa contains both common ancestor and descendents is called clade. (Vierstraete, 1999) <heading>Processes of phylogenetic analysis</heading><heading>1. Assembling a database</heading>To assemble a dataset, the most efficient way is to search the sequences via a number of free databases online. The most commonly used are a few official databases such as GenBank, European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) and DNA Database of Japan (DDJB). Most databases provide information both for nucleotide and protein sequences. The convention regarding representation of data sequence is left to right illustrating 5'-3' single-stranded DNA and N-terminus to C- terminus of polypeptide. The standard one-letter codes are collocated into each position of sequences for both amino acids and nucleotides. However, in primary databases, there are always a number of ambiguities in the sequence. The International Union of Pure Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has produced standard codes for the nucleotide and amino acid ambiguity codes. Due to different programming techniques, databases are found in a few different file formats. Fortunately, most of them are interconvertible by employing software, such as READSEQ. The most widely in use formats are GenBank, FastA, GCG and PHYLIP. The databases of protein sequences are more complicated because of not only larger data, but also their multi-modular structure and motifs, which constituted secondary databases other than primary protein databases. (Brinkman, 2001) The Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) is considered as a mainly used method to assemble a dataset of related sequences where Keywords and similarity are two basic kinds of search strategy. The main search engines for Keywords searching are Entrez (NCBI) and SRS. For similarity search is, BLAST is considered as a main search engine, which also allows selecting sequences from Keywords searching results in its list of hits. (Brinkman, 2001) At this stage, potential non-homologs can be detected and removed to extract preferable dataset and save some works for latter processes. <heading>2. Aligning sequences</heading>Alignment is constructed by inserting or deleting characters representing gaps into the index. In other words, by learning the distances between the gaps that present mutational changes in sequences, sequence alignments reflect the evolutionary relationship between homologous sequences. A global sequence alignment, also called Needleman-Wunsch alignment, attempts to align two sequences along their entire length, whereas a local alignment is also called Smith-Waterman alignment, focuses on local regions of similarity or subsequences. (Miranker et al, 2003) <heading>Pair-wise sequence alignment</heading>The programs designed for pair-wise alignments of protein or nucleotide sequence are mostly capable of producing both globally and locally. Dot plot is one of simplest and widely used graphic matrix analysis methods for scoring similarity between pairs of sequences. (Maizel, 1981) It produces grid two-dimensional array with one sequence along the X-axis and the other along the Y-axis. By comparing each two residues from the same position in sequences, a dot is put in the grid when they are same in turn. As figure 2 shown, the line in the middle of the array indicated the most homologous parts of sequences. If the two sequences were identical, the line would be unbroken. The subsequences, can also detected by lines parallel to the main diagonal, such as box A and box B annotated in figure 2. They indicate less similarity and potential evolutionary relationship. In other words, it provides optimal alignment between sequences without transposing regions in the sequences. <figure/><figure/>A remarkable methods used in pair-wise sequence alignment is dot matrix analysis which responsible for seeking direct or inverted repeats in protein and nucleotide sequences. It tells the region in RNA that self-complementary where has potential forming secondary structure. For example, compare one sequence and its reversed version, the complemented sequence reveals self-complementary regions. Refer to figure 3, region 10 and 20 in horizontal line shown self-complementary potential property. According to the assumption that the best information on gap placement will be found among the most similar sequence, once-a-gap rule is considered as a 'golden rule' for sequence alignment. However, there are often found useful information in the whole alignment on where the gaps belong. (Baldauf, 2003) There are four possible approached in sequence alignments: reduce the number of mismatches; reduce the number of gaps; reduce neither and reduce neither but one gap moved. (Mount, 2001) In this case, it is essential to score to account of conservative and non-conservative of gap penalties, gap extension penalties and substitution. PAM and BLOSUM matrix are two models formulated as log-odds matrices, which often used to give scores of the measurements. (Miranker et al, 2003) Notably, PAM contributes to score silent mutations. <heading>Multiple sequence alignment</heading>Multiple sequence alignment bases on pair-wise alignment and is extended by dynamic programming and modified heuristic algorithms. There are four major approaches have been developed: optimal global sequence alignment, progressive global alignment, block-based global alignment and motif-based local alignment. (Mann and Charleston, 2005) Progressive sequence alignment is most commonly used method in multiple sequence alignment. It consists a series of three steps for multiplying pair-wise sequence alignments. Firstly, it estimates alignment scores between all possible pair-wise combinations of sequences in the set to determine the most similar sequences. Then sequentially adds more distantly related sequences or sets of sequences to this initial alignment and produces a 'guide tree' with clustering algorithms, as shown in figure 4 (a) below. At next stage, refer to figure 4 (b), the sequences are progressively added to determine the alignment in a certain order due to the confidence. CLUSTALX and CLUSTALW are software tools that efficiently contribute to progressive sequence alignment. (Mount, 2001) Optimal global sequence alignment attempts to align sequence along their entire lengths. It is computationally intensive, so comparatively not very useful. Block-based global alignment divides the sequences into a number of blocks and aligns them respectively. It is efficient of dealing with the sequences sharing conserved modules in a consistent order. Motif-based local alignment employs efficient heuristics to solve optimisation calculations for local alignments via computer implements. To find blocks in programs, the Gibbs iterative sampling approach is introduced such as MACAW. (Mann and Charleston, 2005) <figure/><figure/>To choose a most suitable method mainly depends on the property of dataset like whether the sequences are homologous over their entire length and whether they share conserved modules in a consistent order. Figure 5 was devised for systemising the procedures of both pair-wise and multiple sequence alignments. Multiple sequence alignment is responsible for identifying motifs or conserved residues of protein sequences. As figure 5 suggested, multiple sequence alignment also involves analysis of promoters, introns and exons for protein sequence alignment which required more sequence information and scoring models. Multiple sequence alignment appears broader extent of analysis and better inference of phylogeny tree. <heading>3. Constructing a phylogeny tree</heading>Generally saying, a phylogeny tree is constructed by connecting the least evolutionary distant pair of taxa, followed by successively more distance taxa. However, since molecular phylogenetic tree is built from protein-coding regions either nucleotide or protein level, it leads to the slightly different situations when constructing a tree. Referring to the alignment results, there is found more information in closely concerned nucleotide sequences while protein sequences carry more information when they are more distantly related. The series of distance matrix methods used in multiple sequence alignment evolves the cluster methods for building up the phylogeny tree. (Vierstraete, 1999) The clustering methods are regarded either distance-based or character-based. Distance-matrix method, also named clustering or algorithmic method. (Bladauf, 2003) Neighbour joining and UPGMA are most common methods used here. Neighbour joining method stats with a star phylogeny tree, then minimise the total distance when each pair is dragged out. UPGMA firstly selects the best matched alignment from all OTUs, and then join them together by creating a new node. Then progressives assess next closer distance OTUs by considering the earlier one as a single OTU. (Mount, 2001) On the other hand, it does not assume molecular clock. Parsimony maximum likelihood is an approach that chooses between different tree topologies by identifying the one that involves the shortest evolutionary pathway with least nucleotide changes. These changes are compared to the ancestral sequence at the root of the tree to all other sequences have been compared. It's so-called tree searching methods as well. Because parsimony method attempt to fit all possible trees to the data, the method is only suitable for very small number of sequences. Otherwise the consensus tree might contain conserved features of the different trees. (Mount, 2001) Maximum likelihood calculates the likelihood for each tree using an explicit model of evolution where parsimony just looks for the fewest evolutionary changes. As annotated in figure 6, considering each position in the alignments, all possible trees are evaluated and given a score which based on the number of evolutionary changes needed to produce the assumed sequence changes. The likelihood value for each aligned position is then multiplied to provide likelihood for each tree. The most probable tree can be selected by the highest likelihood value which has the fewest evolutionary changes to derive from a common ancestor. (Vierstraete, 1999) Bayesian statistical methods are often applied in maximum likelihood to approach the evolutionary distance estimation. (Krane and Raymer, 2003) It enhanced a longer time-consuming than the distance methods. In addition, likelihood methods of phylogeny tree are regardless of the root location. <figure/>Which method to choose is mostly depends on the feature of the obtained multiple sequence alignment. The flowchart in figure 7 pointed out a general orientation of selecting a better method. <figure/>Some models are developed in order to approach to estimate the true difference between sequences base on the present capability. Dayoff and Blossom are two examples of substitution matrices. Depends on the computational tributes, there are a number of phylogeny analysis kits available on the cuff, such as PHYLIP and PAUP* can be found on Internet. (Baldauf, 2003) After all, to give a best result, it is more often used more than one methods to construct a phylogeny tree. <heading>4. Bootstrapping</heading>It is essential to determine the confidence level of estimation of reconstructed phylogeny tree. This is normally achieved by bootstrapping and parametric tests. Bootstrapping is a method used to resample the data by randomly choosing vertical columns from the aligned sequences to produce a new sequence alignment of the same length. <figure/>Since the reliability of a phylogeny tree completely based on the alignment is composed of, the bootstrapping starts with the alignments of dataset. The whole process is repeated to create hundreds or thousands of resampled datasets. Each column of data may be used more than once or not at all in one reconstructed alignment. As shown in figure 8, the resampled datasets build up resampled trees, with the same number of pseudo-datasets and the number of repeating times. In the final step, all bootstrap values forms tabulate results, which determine the strict consensus tree. Tree topology accuracy also influences by molecular clock, where the estimation is optimised when taxa diverge at a constant rate from a common ancestor. Each subsample is repeated sampling of sites with the same size as the primary alignment. To test the phylogeny tree branches and nodes rather than the whole tree greatly credits the reliability. For branches in the predicted tree topology to be significant, the resampled data sets should frequently, commonly > 70%, predict the same branches. (Baldauf, 2003) Generally bootstrap analysis is always supported by common phylogenetic prediction software. Because there are probably more than one multiple sequence alignment have been used, bootstrapping is often combined with different alignment methods in order to avoid any systematic biases of particular methods of multiple sequence alignment. There are some program packages can make the work simpler. PHYLIP contains a variety of the phylogenetic packages for multiple-bootstrapping purpose. What's more, resampled inference of orthologs and orthostrapper are developed to incorporate bootstrap analysis and compare of phylogenetic trees to differentiate orthologues and paralogues. (Sjölander, 2003) <heading>5. Presenting a phylogeny tree</heading>The main points of presenting a phylogeny tree focus on easy to read and to compare with other trees. In molecular phylogeny trees, branch lengths always give good general impressions of evolutionary relationship across a net-like tree. (Baldauf, 2003) Thus, try to draw the phylogeny tree in scale is very meaningful although it's far from straightforward for expressing any single genes. Most commonly agreed convention to present phylogeny tree is to only report when the bootstrapping value is higher than 50%. To produce a strict consensus tree, all disagreements are treated equally even if only alternative tree is not consistent with hundreds of others that are in agreement regarding a particular branching point. (Krane and Raymer, 2003) Bootstrapping value should be always presented as percentage. (Baldauf, 2003) <heading>Discussions</heading>Although phylogenetic analysis is widely accepted as a powerful tool for identifying and interpreting molecular data for evolutionary relationship, there are still exist a series of theoretical problems with evolutionary changes between sequences. The recognition has been growing that homology-based methods of functional classification were likely result in systematic errors. The predictions of molecular functions also stayed at relatively low confidence level. It is believed that a number of errors were caused by functional multiplicity of proteins through gene duplication, speciation and other processes. Similarly, the poorly identified mutations in nucleotide sequences were also responsible for arising errors. Here a feigned case as an example of analyzing two homologous nucleotide sequences is illustrated in figure 7. Recalling the mutations in nucleotides, substitutions may be caused by transitions, transversions, deletions, insertion and inversion. Thereby, the differences can be determined at three nucleotide sites that are marked in figure 7, within the region contain twelve mutations. Thus, it indicated that there could be many more mutations than the ones can be detected. It is not yet be solved by current capability of phylogenetic models. <figure/><heading>Conclusions</heading>As Theodosius Dobzhansky quoted, 'Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.' (Dobzhansky, 1973) Phylogenetic systematics is regard as a natural and meaningful way to order molecular data. From learning the principles of constructing a phylogeny tree, it enables one have general understanding of phylogenetic systematics, but also the theory of evolution. Phylogeny trees carry an enormous amount of evolutionary information within their branches. In fact, it infers the evolutionary relationship not only between living things, but also genes and genomes. Furthermore, many disparate fields are found relevant to the methods and theories of molecular phylogenetics, too. Correspondingly, some disparate sciences also greatly contribute to the development of phylogenetics, where computer sciences and statistics are the best examples. At present, difficulties of phylogenetic analysis are mainly come from the reliability of the inference of phylogeny tree due to the resource and the methods, and the limited biological information that phylogenetics is starving for. The prospective developments of genomics and bioinformatics are considered to directly ameliorate phylogenetics. 