<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>Participants were asked to complete a questionnaire on three self-conscious emotions: embarrassment, shame and guilt. The results were analyzed to find what the main characteristics of the situations each arises in and if they can be distinguished from each other. It was found that, although there was clear distinction between the three, there were also overlaps that may indicate poor definitions of the three or that they lie on a scale, all being widely spaced variations of the same emotion. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>There are some emotions we feel that can be called self-conscious emotions. The effects of these emotions can be powerful forces in human lives, especially those of a negative nature. In some cases, they can cause serious psychological problems in certain individuals. Some examples of negative self-conscious emotions include embarrassment, shame and guilt. Here, we will investigate some of the characteristics and causes of these three emotions. Self conscious emotions are evaluations of our self compared to society. Lewis (1980, p. 68) suggests that, as such, these emotions require the person feeling them to have three things: "a sense of self", "a set of standards, rules and goals" and the ability to "evaluate the self" in comparison with the standards, rules and goals. These three qualities require a significantly high level of intelligence from the organism sustaining them, and thus it is debateable as to whether any organisms other than human beings experiencing self conscious emotions. Lewis also suggests that we must give ourselves internal attribution (i.e. blame our self) for the act for us to. We can make some predictions about these three emotions. If Lewis (1980) is correct, and we must have a set of socially instilled standards by which we judge failure and success, then we could argue that without society or the presence of other people we would not be able to feel these emotions, as we would never have picked up these standards. Hence we can say that these are socially complex emotions, they are not like anger or fear which can quite easily be instilled in a person. Therefore, in every situation we must be analyzing what it is that society thinks of our actions. In a situation causing embarrassment, most of the time something happens that is not a deliberate act, nor is it socially wrong, but rather just a clumsy, or 'socially inept' mistake. Such an act would probably not cause us embarrassment if it happened when we are alone, so it is a public act. Shame could be defined as an act that we deliberately do, which is deemed socially wrong and which is seen or known about by others. Lewis (1980, p. 70) suggests that the difference between shame and guilt is that shame is when we put our entire self at fault for the act, or "global attribution", rather than just an aspect of our self, or "specific attribution", as in guilt. However, whether someone holds themselves fully or partially at fault for an act is hard to determine from their responses when only accounting a situation. Instead, we can predict that shame will be an intentional, public, socially wrong act. Guilt could be defined as similar to shame, but where the act is private; it maybe only affected ourselves and one other person or a small group of people, with nobody else having knowledge of the act. It is perhaps the voice of society in our head telling us what we have done is wrong rather than the actual people of society themselves. Hence, guilt would be socially wrong, intentional but private. <heading>Method </heading><heading>Participants</heading>For this experiment, the participants were all the students present in a practical class session, all of them first year psychology students at  University. There were no different groups used in this experiment; all participants filled out the same questionnaire. No incentive was offered for taking part in the experiment. Any students in the practical group but not present at the particular session were not included in the experiment. <heading>Materials and Stimuli</heading>The only piece of equipment used in this experiment was the questionnaire given to participants. The questionnaire consisted of three headings, each reading "occasions when you have felt or would feel...", followed by one of the three self conscious emotions, embarrassment, shame and guilt. There was space under each heading for three answers. Participants were also asked to identify their sex on the questionnaire. <heading>Procedure</heading>At the beginning of the practical session, participants were given the questionnaire to fill in. they were instructed to answer the questions as best they could, but that they did not have to complete all three spaces under each of the questions if they could not think of anymore answers. No definitions of the emotions were provided, and no other information was given to participants. Every participant answered the questions at the same time whilst in the same room, without conferring with any other participants. The questionnaires were then taken in. <heading>Results</heading>The responses given by participants were analyzed and tallied on three characteristics, whether the situation was public or private, socially wrong or socially inept, and intentional or unintentional. The results are shown below. <table/><table/><table/>We predicted that embarrassment would involve a socially inept (or clumsy), unintentional act that happened in front of other people. We can see from table one that a large number of responses indicated that a situation requires other people to be present for it to be embarrassing, supporting our prediction. Tables two and three also support our prediction, showing that a large majority of responses also indicated that the act was both an inept one as well as being unintentional. Some classic examples from the responses include falling "off the school bus and flash[ing] your underwear at everyone" and "farting in public by accident"; they are situations that we, and others around us, may even find quite humorous at the time and most probably afterwards. They make us look a bit silly and possibly lower our social status slightly, but are not deemed morally wrong. We said that shame was an emotion that does involve an act that is deemed morally wrong and was intentional, as well as being public. Table two supports this suggestion, showing that most people classed shame as a response to a morally wrong act, but surprisingly tables one and three do not support this prediction. There are an almost equal number of responses suggesting shame as intentional and unintentional. Examples include "ashamed as a child to be seen with boy cousin who was bald" and "when you don't fit in with people and you detest who you are as a person" (an example we will return to later). From table one we can see that shame is also classed more as a private act, such as "feelings of prejudice". Finally, guilt was defined as a socially wrong, intentional private act. All three tables would seem to support this prediction. However, there were a fair number of people who responded with situations deemed as public, for example "giv[ing] away a surprise, for example, parents wedding anniversary". <heading>Discussion</heading>The main problem when considering these emotions is that people often find it hard to determine the difference between shame and guilt, mainly because the two are often poorly defined. Lewis (1980) suggests that the main difference between them is that shame involves global attribution of fault to the self. One response that would seem to support this suggestion is: "when you don't fit in with people and you detest who you are as a person". This was one of the strongest responses, and suggests that in this situation the individual not only feels they don't fit in with those around them but that they may describe themselves as a social outcast. This is a strong example of how we use society in our minds to evaluate ourselves. Tangney, Miller & Barlow (1996) describe how, in some of their research findings, participants included socially inept acts as examples of shame. We some evidence of that here, for example with : "ashamed as a child to be seen with boy cousin who was bald". This may be another example of confusion of definitions, or it may be a suggestion that the emotions are actually variations of the same base emotion. The most interesting thing in the results was the number of unintentional situations given for shame. This is perhaps unexpected, but may be further evidence of embarrassment being resembled with shame. Tangney, Miller & Barlow (1996) recount previous research that found the same effect, of similar experiences being accounted for both embarrassment and shame. Lewis (1980) suggests that the two emotions may be linked by interpretation of the situation; the level of 'ineptness' being the determining factor between the two. All three emotions can be seen to be linked by a progression of the level of criticism by society, whether by real people or internally, in one's mind, in a hierarchy from embarrassment to guilt and then to shame. The main problem with this investigation was the small number of people used. The investigation could be extended by using a larger number of participants, as well as investigating some of the characteristics of the actual emotions as opposed to the situations in which they arise, to determine whether they are distinct emotions or all just variations of intensity of the same emotion. 