<figure/><figure/><figure/>Trade in absolute and relative terms with Asia grew at moderate rates ever since the Portugese under Vasco da Gama landed in Goa in 1498. The Dutch and the Portugese had long competed for gaining control of the oceanic trade network of the Indian merchants which stretched from the Red Sea in the west as far as the coast of Japan and Indonesia in the Far East. However, the real stimuli to trade came with the arrival of the French and especially the English East India Company in India. The massive boost to trade, as noted by Figures 1 and 2, resulted in the formation of a complex trading network between the company and the Indian merchants and political elites. As Figure 3 notes, during the pre-British days Bombay, Surat, Calicut and other west coastal ports of India were the flourishing trading ports from which much of the Asian exports were shipped to Europe. The Europeans found it extremely hard to compete with the Indian merchants, even after gaining much political foothold in the area. Bengal was a relatively untapped state in India for the Europeans and incidentally the most prosperous, and it became the first major economic and later political base of the English East India Company. The China opium trade network was the main cause for the marked increase in Bengal's importance in the company's trade. Opium from Bengal and Malwa was exported to China to buy silver bullion, silk or tea, which in turn was used to buy American and Indian cotton to be exported to the British isles for the mills of Lancashire. Thus the East Indian trading network came to be of fundamental importance to the company and affected all of the participants in this network, Indian merchants being one of them. It is useful to identify the structure of trade to correctly place the Indian merchants within this edifice of company trade. Although the British government had bestowed upon the company a monopoly of the Asian trade, there was a thriving network of freelance traders who started of as adventurers. As P.J. Marshall put it, 'They were in India [simply] to get rich'. Despite strict regulations from the company against any breaking of the monopoly, the private network was gradually but surely replacing the official channels of trade, so much so that in 1667 the company was compelled to allow private trade in all commodities barring pepper and calicoes from India. By the mid 19 th century when the monopoly was officially broken by Queen Victoria, it existed only in theory. Competitive environment was also markedly different, especially in Bengal, after the Battle of Plassey (1757). Before the death of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb (1707), the European East Indian companies had to abide by imperial guidelines for trade which were de facto useless after Aurangzeb, as the Mughal Emperors were too weak to implement them. As far as access to Indian markets was concerned, the East India Company operated through authorised brokers who dealt with reliable merchants both for export commodities as well as imported goods. They were known as the banias, and Michael Morineau has compared them to the cash clerks of the Genevans.  <fnote>P.J.Marshall, East Indian Fortunes: The British in Bengal in the 18th Century (Oxford: Clarendon, 1976), p. 3 </fnote><fnote>K.N. Chauduri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company 1660-1760, p. 148 </fnote><fnote>S. Chaudhuri/M. Morineau (Eds)., Merchants, Company and Trade, p. 296 </fnote>The European East Indian companies were limited to the west coast of India in the early part of their trading incursions (C16 to eC18), with the notable exception of Madras. Their attitudes towards the trading ports can be summed up by a statement from Captain Bowrey on his visit to Banda Aceh in Indonesia, "This city is the fairest and most populous of any that I ever saw or heard of...but indeed it cometh far short for decency and buildings and uniformitie of the meanest city...on the mainland of India". They found already established merchant networks and trading links between the Armenians and Muslims coming from the Middle East, and the local Hindu and Jain traders. Indeed, as K.N. Chauduri has argued, the local populace saw the Europeans more of a threat rather than an addition to their prosperity. As S. Chaudhuri and Michael Mornieau have argued, the atmosphere was more of 'competition rather than collaboration' Perhaps to come to the aid of the struggling Portugese East India company, Admiral Albuqueque raided Calicut with his gunboats as early as 1500 to expel the Muslim merchants. Not only was such conflict limited between Indians and Europeans. There was a vicious conflict to capture the markets of the Indonesian archipelago between the Hindu, Jain, Armenian, Portugese and Dutch merchants, much of which turned into armed struggle. The Muslim merchants of Gujarat also got involved, slicing off a large portion of the South East Asian textile market from the Dutch. K.N. Chauduri has called it a 'violent scuffle' for trade routes. There were also inherent tensions between the merchant communities themselves along religious and caste lines. Elite merchant houses like those of Parracks, Nizamies and Rustumji enjoyed special privileges from the Emperor. Moreover, the European East India companies hardly ever dealt with Muslim merchants because of traditional enmity. However, under Emperor Auranzgeb the Hindus of Gujarat were ruthlessly persecuted including brokers for the company at their Surat factory. This resulted in widespread protests and strikes at the plant. <fnote>K.N. Chauduri, Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean, p. 181 </fnote><fnote>S. Chaudhuri/M. Morineau (Eds.), Merchants, Company and Trade, p. 9 </fnote><fnote>K.N. Chauduri, The East India Company, p. 14 </fnote><fnote>K.N. Chauduri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company, p. 150 </fnote>Neither did the Mughal Empire remain a passive observer to such turmoil within its domain. In 1632, owing to lobbying from Indian merchants, the Portugese were expelled wholesale from the shores of India barring a little enclave in Goa by Emperor Shah Jahan. Although Sir Thomas Roe had obtained legal rights to trade in India from Emperor Jahangir, in 1688 Sir John Child made an attempt, no doubt due to pressure from British merchant circles, to militarily force the Mughal Empire into giving more trading concessions to the East India Company. The company's forces were routed and the English almost expelled from the mainland of India. Even though the English East India Company did manage to prolong its stay in India, owing to continued competition from Indian merchants, it had to abandon its trading posts in the Malabar Coast of India and retreat to Bengal, where it was to consolidate and build its first trading base. The company was not to return to dominate the Bombay and Madras presidencies until well into the Age of Empire, when Indian competition had been uprooted by political force. Even in Bengal, the company remained on the sideline of economic activity until the mid 18 th century, for Indian competition was present there too. The Virji Vohra and Jagath Seth houses of Surat, and the Khwaja Wazid merchant house of Bengal are only a fraction of the threat European trade faced in India at the turn of the 18 th century. <fnote>P.J. Marshall, East Indian Fortunes, p. 6 </fnote><fnote>K.N. Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East Indian Company, p. 111 </fnote><fnote>S.Chaudhuri/M. Mornieau (Eds.), Merchants, Company and Trade, p. 9 </fnote>A. Dow has called Bengal '...the richest, most populous and best cultivated kingdoms of the world.'  <fnote>P.J. Marshall, East Indian Fortunes, p. 5 </fnote>