The English East India Company had been established in 1600 as trading Joint Stock Company. Initially it was content with setting up bases in the West Coast of India for exporting valuable commodities such as spices, calicoes, precious metals and jewels to Europe. Therefore, it sustained a current account deficit in the opening century or its trade with Mughal India. However, by the time the British Crown under Queen Victoria formally replaced it as the official administrators of matters pertaining to India in 1858, it had turned its deficit into a massive surplus. Whereas initially gold and silver bullion flowed into India to account for the expensive luxury commodities being purchased from her, by the turn of the 19 th century India was importing en masse from the product portfolio of the company. Such changes in the fortunes of the East India Company must be attributed primarily to the successful political conquest of the lucrative trading regions of the Indian sub-continent, as the company was able to remove competition and establish a hegemonic presence in these markets. That the company found itself in such a position meant that its priorities, organisations and policy formulation had been undergoing changes through out. However, the question we have to address is to what extent were these developments shaped by the engaging of the company and the Indian mass populace (most notably the raiyats or small landholders, the largest share of the population), or whether it was the interaction between the elite segments of the Indian population that acted as the prime catalyst for initiating these changes. I contend that the East India Company adopted a "top down" approach, whereby they engaged the elite and influential sectors of the populace actively, and which consequently led them to have widespread influence in all the social strata. While not ignoring the impact of company policies on the majority of the population, we need to be careful not to over emphasise it. This interaction between the raiyats and the company only became possible when their erstwhile masters, i.e., the Indian elites were either uprooted or drawn into the complex trading network that had sprung up. A not so obvious question needs to be settled first- "What is an Indian elite?" That political rulers need to be classified as 'elite' is self explanatory, since with them lay the control of the political economy of India. However, I have also included merchants in this category, since a large part of the company's plans revolved around capturing trade routes, or collaborating with Indian merchants to increase profitability. Moreover, most merchants and baniyas (moneylenders) did rather well out of the company trade, and therefore cannot be classed along with the peasants, labourers and artisans, whose fate was markedly worse. <fnote>Kalyan Chaudhuri, A New History of India (Calcutta: Oriental Books, 2000), p. 224 </fnote>Two conceptual puzzles need to be solved to achieve a clear understanding of these wide ranging trends. Firstly, we need to comprehend how the priorities of the East India Company changed and the reason behind these shifts. The supply-demand model of a market is useful in this regard. The fundamental incentive for freelance and company traders was put simply by P.J, Marshall- "They were in India to get rich." The vast and diverse riches of India was the raison d'être for the company, and explains much of its political and economic actions. However, as a result of these actions, the fundamental characteristic of the company's role in India had also undergone major changes. With the establishment of political strongholds in India, the East India Company was transformed from being "an organisation originally created to accumulate profits", to one that "drew its basic sustenance from land revenues". Such arrangements required major organisational overhauling, and consequently the company had to interact with a range of social classes in the provinces which it was now governing. For example, the company had to maintain a permanent bureaucracy and a standing army, the latter being used for dual purposes. First, it was used to defend the company's investment interests such as trade routes or agricultural/manufacturing hubs (such as, Calcutta or Madras). Second, it was also used as a means to expand their influence into India, to penetrate into more and larger markets in the south west of India (Mysore, Maharashtra), the northwest (Punjab) and the Gangetic plains. <fnote>P.J. Marshall, East Indian Fortunes: The British in Bengal in the Eighteenth Century (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976), p. 3 </fnote><fnote>Sugata Bose & Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1998), p. 67 </fnote>A clarification about confining the current analysis within the boundaries of the 100 years that have been chosen is also a necessary precursor to my argument. I have chosen 1757 as the beginning of the period under scrutiny because it was the same year in which Lord Robert Clive defeated Nawab Siraj-ud-Daula in the famous Battle of Plassey. It was the first landmark victory for the East India Company and that too in India's richest province Bengal. It marked the beginning of the quasi company rule in Bengal, as nawabs became increasingly dependent on its support for survival. Since my focus is on the interaction between the company and the elites, I have concluded with 1857, which marked the first widespread and united elite uprising against the company's rule. My methodological approach revolves around briefly examining the place of the elites in the activities of the East India Company prior to Plassey, and how they changed after the battle. I continue to trace the company's expansion spree into India, and highlight the role of the elites in the same. I also dwell upon the concept of the newly experienced modernity in Europe through the Industrial Revolution, and which was also presenting itself to India at this point. This caused a marked shift in the priorities and aspirations of the company. The English East India company found itself on the margins of the thriving trading network on the coasts of India between the 17 th and early 18 th centuries. For example, while the export value of silk and cotton fabrics from Bengal for all European merchant companies in the mid-18 th century stood at Rupees 5 million, the domestic market alone in the province was worth over Rs. 60 million. They found well established business houses ranging from Virji Vohra, Jagath Seths, Parracks, Nizamies, House of Rustumji, Khwaja Wazid, Chettiar and Jain traders in the Coromandel Coast, Malabar Coast and Bengal. As Michael Morineau has argued, "The atmosphere was more of competition rather than collaboration." Generally, the company operated through local brokers who drew up contracts with merchants and it was enforced by the local Hindu political elites. Until the death of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb in 1707, the company had to strictly abide by the laws prescribed for foreign companies. Most Mughal rulers after Aurangzeb were simply too weak to implement the law by its word or spirit. This gave the company an ideal opportunity to use the weakness and disunity of the Indian political elites to establish a foothold in India, which takes us to Plassey. <fnote>Michel Morineau & Sushil Chaudhury (eds.): Merchants, Company and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), p. 7 </fnote><fnote>K.N. Chaudhuri, Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise of Islam to 1750 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), p. 100; K.N. Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978), p. 146; and Michel Morineau & Sushil Chaudhury (eds.): Merchants, Company and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era, p. 9 </fnote><fnote>K.N. Chaudhuri, Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise of Islam to 1750, p. 99 </fnote>The conflict in Plassey had almost entirely to do with the economic aspirations of the East India Company not duplicating that of the nawab. The Mughal Emperor Farrukhsiyar had issued a farmaan (edict) in 1717, allowing the company to trade almost duty free in Bengal. This resulted in an artificial downward pressure on the company's products whilst maintaining the profit margin at erstwhile levels. It was costing the local Indian merchants market share and the nawab's coffers valuable money in tax. Therefore, it was one business interest up against another. The company collaborated with the general of Nawab Shiraj-ud-Daula, Mir Zafar, who assisted it in emerging victorious. Although the nawab's stance was influenced by complaints from a range of Indian merchants who lost out as a result of preferential trade for the East India Company, not all business circles were favourable to him. The local Hindu bankers acted as creditors to the company's traders, and increased business for their clients would naturally entail increased borrowings and interest earnings for them. Therefore, a "community of interest" had developed between these two parties, which resulted in mutual support. The company initially wanted to liase with Siraj, however there were irreconcilable interests at stake. On one hand the imperial Mughal edict did not include state taxes which the nawab sought to extract from the company, while on the other, local elites were not prepared to compromise their thriving business with the growth in the operations of the East India Company. As the matter escalated, and with the "Black Death" incident available as ready excuse, the company's aspirations in Bengal changed dramatically. The battle of Plassey (1757) marked a watershed for the development for the company's ambitions in the province. In one stroke they became the virtual masters of political destiny in Bengal, and consequently held sway over all business transactions in India's richest state. <fnote>Kalyan Chaudhuri, A New History of India, p. 235 </fnote><fnote>Michel Morineau & Sushil Chaudhury (eds.): Merchants, Company and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era, p. 300 </fnote><fnote>P.J. Marshall, East Indian Fortunes: The British in Bengal in the Eighteenth Century, p. 8 </fnote>Frictions between the ruling political elite in Bengal and the company continued after Plassey, as the latter sought to stamp its authority in the administrative affairs of the state. The nawabs resented their loss of authority and constant interference by the company representatives in the most mundane affairs of the state. Nawab Mir Kasim took a stance against the company, collaborating with the rulers of neighbouring state, with the blessings of the Mughal Emperor. Various sporadic conflicts resulted. However, General Hector Munro finally and decisively defeated the confederate forces in the Battle of Buxar (1764). It marked the end of independent indigenous rule in Bengal. Following Buxar, the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam issued the East India Company with the diwani of the province of Bengal in 1765. This entailed that the company could trade freely in Bengal by paying a fixed amount in tax to the imperial court in Delhi. It also granted the company the right to exact tax revenues from the populace of the state. <fnote>Kalyan Chaudhuri, A New History of India, p. 238 </fnote>Alex Dow has called Bengal "the richest, most populous and best cultivated kingdom of the world". The East India Company had to now transform itself from a trading company lobbying for freer trade to a governing body, managing the affairs of India's largest state. The first significant step taken by the company was in 1793, when Lord Cornwallis introduced the "Permanent Settlement" reform. It completely changed the ownership structure in rural Bengal. It transferred property rights of the land from the raiyats to the zamindars (landlords), and in turn made the latter liable to pay a certain proportion of it in tax to the company officials, while returning a percentage to the tenants as remuneration. Sumit Sarkar has argued that these rates were ruinously high, and resulted in the bankruptcies of a range of both zamindars and raiyats across Bengal in the final decade of the 18 th century. Moreover, the company established the Ryotwari system to concentrate land holdings among a few owners, thus making it easy for the tax officials to collect the revenue, as they dealt only with the landlord and did not have to interact with the far-flung rural areas. However, it did turn erstwhile small farmers into agricultural labourers, which consequently entailed that they had no share in the produce when the harvest was good, but were often ejected from employment to cut costs when the harvest was poor. Therefore, the company was getting involved into economic policy formulation that affected millions of people. Such fundamental changes in the ways of operation led to alteration of the company hierarchy. From the 1770s, the governor general maintained an elite group of around 400 civil servants divided into various departments and managing hundreds of native clerks and other lower level staff. The diwani had its most significance in greatly enhancing the company's aspirations in India. With the coffers of Bengal within the grasp of the company, they were to use it to fund their campaigns against other rulers of various parts of India, to try and spread their political clout which could be used to transfer more and more profits to shareholders in London. The paramount position of the company's relationships with the native elites forms the cornerstone for all of the ambitions and challenges that lay ahead. <fnote>P.J. Marshall, East Indian Fortunes: The British in Bengal in the Eighteenth Century, p. 5 </fnote><fnote>Sugata Bose & Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy, p. 69-70 </fnote><fnote>Sumit Sarkar, Modern India (London: Macmillan, 1983), p. 87 </fnote><fnote>Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation (Oxford: Clarendon, 1981), p. 1-8 </fnote><fnote>Sugata Bose & Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy, p. 68 </fnote>With the decline of the Mughal Empire now seeming fundamental, and its demise inevitable, the English East India Company faced challenges from 3 prominent ruling houses in India to its establishment of political hegemony. The strongest out of these were the Marathas, Hindu rulers of an independent kingdom stretching from Maharashtra encompassing most of the Deccan Plateau in south and south west India. The company got itself involved in a conflict over succession, and supported vested interest in the Maratha court. Initially suffering heavy losses, the company finally managed to isolate the warring segments among the Marathas and defeat them one by one in three battles in 1775, 1803 and 1817. <fnote>Kalyan Chaudhuri, A New History of India, p. 246 </fnote>The prosperous kingdom of Mysore had been problematic for the English East India Company for a variety of reasons. Its rulers Haider Ali and later Tipu Sultan had proactively sought European, more specifically French, help in building up their armed forces. French traders also held a position of prominence in the kingdom vis-à-vis their English counterparts. Moreover, a strong lobby of Hindu traders had an important role to play the company's decision to invade Mysore because it had previously failed to convince the native administration to provide access to is markets. All these interests appealed to Lord Cornwallis to play Mysore's neighbours against it and seek an opportunity to invade and remove this resistant force in western India. Over a period of 30 years between 1760 and 1792 Mysore was slowly but surely brought down over three stages of conflict, albeit not without rugged resistance. <fnote>Sugata Bose & Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy, p. 61 </fnote><fnote>Kalyan Chaudhury, A New History of India, p. 250 </fnote>The final power which had to be overcome before the political supremacy of the English East India Company would be unparalleled and unmatched in India was the Sikh kingdom of Punjab. The company failed to make inroads into this small but powerful and rich kingdom primarily because of the realist and strong leadership of Ranjit Singh, who lived until 1823. Upon his death the Sikh kingdom suffered from shortsighted leadership, and provided the company ample opportunities to make itself an irritant. It forced Punjab to enter into a tripartite alliance with the company and Afghanistan, guaranteeing the mutual borders. It could be argued that previously the company's mindset was purely that of a merchant trading company, but now it was changing to resemble imperialism. The East India Company was contemplating a Russian attack from India's northwestern borders, and hence the insistence on Punjab agreeing to defend the integrity of the borders. However, coupled with some disastrously myopic military moves made by the Sikh rulers and the advent of Lord Dalhousie on the Indian political scene, the company found the opportunity to invade and annex Punjab in 1848. <fnote>Kalyan Chaudhury, A New History of India, p. 257 </fnote>There was a decisive shift in the priorities and policies of the English East India Company as the Industrial Revolution set in Britain. At the forefront of the revolution were the cotton mills of Manchester and Lancashire. The China opium trading network and Indian calicoes raw cotton came to be of prime importance. J.W. Wong, in his Deadly Dreams, summarises the juxtaposition aptly. Opium from Bengal and Malwa was exported to China, where it was sold to generate revenues to purchase silk, tea, silver bullion and other valuable commodities which were used to purchase Indian calicoes or American cotton, bound for the mills of Lancashire to be turned into manufactured finished products, bound again for the newly acquired colonies in India and Africa. Karl Marx has aptly summarised it, "The homeland of cotton was inundated with cotton."  <fnote>Sumit Sarkar, Modern India, p. 24 </fnote>A further source of increased revenue was the ruinously high taxation imposed by the local company administration on the populace. Not only did it leave the disposable income of the common people significantly lower than before, it actually made their previous masters, the zamindars, much worse off as well because of the high proportion of the produce demanded as tax. Through out the late 18 th to well into the 19 th century, a range of devastating famines were caused as a result. The two that left the biggest scars on the Indian soil were the 1832 Maharashtra Famine, and another one in Bengal almost instantaneously after the diwani of the province had been granted by the Mughal Emperor to the East India Company. The relationship between the local Indian business elite had much to do with the particular stance the company took in policy formulation. At the onset of the company's administration, a principle of minimal state intervention in the local economy was prescribed to. However, that was never maintained as needs of the shareholders were put first to raise revenue and export it to London. In the cases of the famine, curiously enough free trade was adamantly adhered to. If examined closely, it reveals itself to be an extremely profitable policy for the local baniyas (moneylenders) and sahukars (traders). It is true that harvest suffered during these years, but supply of grain vis-à-vis earlier years was still higher in absolute terms. However, catering for inflation, the real income of the local populace were lower because of a lower harvest in relative terms. This resulted in en masse hoarding of grain by the local traders, which resulted in soaring prices due to demand far exceeding supply. To maintain these artificial levels of price, further dearth was created by exporting of grains into other parts of India where people had the purchasing power to buy this grain. Huge profits were made by a few out of the misfortunes of millions. Such insistence on free market policies and the consequent benefits for the elite merchant communities cannot possibly be passed on as an exception. The local traders were often credit suppliers and contractors of the company. By logical deduction, it seems probable that lobbying on behalf of the merchants led to these specific policies of non-intervention. <fnote>Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation, p. 1-8 </fnote><fnote>David Hardiman, Feeding the Baniya: Peasants and Usurers in Western India (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1996), p. 256-265 </fnote>As India swiftly became the largest destination market for the finished products of the British cotton mills, it became absolutely necessary to ensure that demand continued to rise steadily. For this purpose, a certain degree of de-industrialisation of India had to take place, to remove any forms of indigenous competition to the imports. To achieve this, political control over concerned territories became necessary. In this case, unlike the above example with the baniyas, the interest of the East India Company came in direct conflict with the elites of India. Nonetheless, this does not negate my original stance- that execution of policy, change of priorities and organisation alteration in the company was stimulated primarily by interaction with the privileged classes of India, friendly or hostile. The word 'primarily' is of importance here, because it would be historically inaccurate to exclude the important, however slight, of the masses. For example, the 1857 revolt was started by protests among the rank and file of the British Indian army, who felt that the officers had no respect for their religious beliefs and diets. However, this alone would not have resulted in the scale which the 1857 outbreak acquired, large enough to even temporarily dislodge the company from its stronghold in Delhi. The main reason behind such a backlash was the fact that it was instigated by the elites who lost out. From £3 million in 1765, Bengal's cumulative revenue reached £22 million by 1818. The wars against the Marathas and Mysore would have drained the company's resources, but for Bengal. Bengal provided the stimulus for investment in the army, which enabled the East India Company to embark upon its adventurous scheme of outright annexations or forced capitulation to secure economic concessions. Again, the role of the elites was of key significance. Lord Wellesley (1798-1805) introduced the Subsidiary Alliance system, whereby a native ruler relinquished almost all economic control for apparent political guardianship of the company's forces. Acknowledging this to be an easier way to preserve their throne, many rulers complied. Lord Dalhousie (1848-56) embarked upon a much more reckless conquest spree. Local governments were forcibly removed on three ground- a) outright conquest if the strategic need of the East India Company so demanded, b) annexation by the "Doctrine of Lapse" (which entailed the conquest of a kingdom if it did not have an heir, or if the heir was not fit to govern) and c) annexation on the grounds of misgovernment. The list of additions to company territory is staggering- Punjab, Pegu, Burma, Sikkim and Berar were taken by (a); Satara, Jaipur, Sambhalpur and Jhansi under (b); and Oudh was taken under (c). This gave rise to a disgruntled elite class across much of North India, and when they collaborated to rise up against the company rule in the aftermath of the mutiny in the company army (1857), the effects were felt in London. This elitist uprising rendered a final, fundamental and fatal change to the organisational structure of the English East India Company. Queen Victoria recognised the need to address issues which were important to the native rulers and acknowledged the incapacity of a private company created solely for profits to be able to successfully carry out this task. In 1858, the monopoly of political power in the Indian sub-continent was passed onto the British Crown from the East India Company. Due to the removal of the company's monopoly in the India trade a while back, sticking to trade only was no longer profitable for the company and it led to its stature being drastically reduced. In fact, for decades the company had been focussed more on political control of the land and generating revenues from taxing the populace or the ruler in return for protection. The interaction with the Indian elites had shaped, furthered and concluded the flourishing of the English East India Company between 1757 and 1857. <fnote>Sugata Bose & Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy, p. 71 </fnote><fnote>Sugata Bose & Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy, p. 61 </fnote><fnote>Kalyan Chaudhuri, A New History of India, p. 257 </fnote><fnote>Kalyan Chaudhuri, A New History of India, p. 258 </fnote>I have argued that the interaction with the most privileged and powerful classes of India shaped the direction of the political and economic policies of the English East India Company. The masses and their concerns remained very much on the sidelines both as a determinant of company policy, as well as a check on the actions of the governing elites. Now that we have established that elite action and reaction was the main catalyst behind the development of company policy, we need to distinguish between the nature of the "elite-company nexus" during the pre-1757 era and in the period under scrutiny, and how it developed over the 100 years under analysis here. Firstly, a fundamental transformation was highlighted by Michel Morieanu, when he argued that "the age of competition had been replaced by the age of collaboration". Increasingly, the once diametrically opposite trading interests seemed to converge. The mutual interest of both parties lay in uprooting existing regimes that were hostile to their profiteering. Secondly, there was a change in the role of the Indian economic elite. Previously, they had lobbied hard to stifle competition from the East India Company, and the near expulsion of the English in 1688 bear testimony to their impacts on policymakers in the imperial court in Delhi. With the East India Company increasingly dominant on the political scene, they switched their allegiances and worked closely with the new masters of the land to try and further their personal interests. Thirdly, the East India Company was trying to get foothold into a viciously competitive market in the early 18 th century, and therefore its relationship with the Indian elites was adjusting, confrontational or competitive. When the diwani of Bengal being granted to the company, the erstwhile traders suddenly had to transform themselves into colonial bureaucrats. Trade was replaced by taxation as the main source of revenue. Consequently the relations with the elites changed too. It is the company who had the privilege of siding with one vested interest over the other, and not being merely "one of the vested interests" as before. Fourthly, through being in charge of administration, the company came to impact the lives of a lot of common Indians, but they never really set the pace for company agenda. The East India Company on the eve of the Industrial Revolution was formulating its strategies of expanding economically and politically in India primarily keeping the elites of India in the equation. <fnote>Michel Morineau & Sushil Chaudhury (eds.): Merchants, Company and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era, p. 9 </fnote>