The most lasting legacy of Edward Said's Orientalism (1978) - it has been argued- has been the "dislocation of the modern West", bringing down the "body of knowledge" that signified Orientalist writings about the East from their "Olympian heights". Said's key argument revolved around the various representations of the Orient- focussing on what the Orientalist wrote- not how- about an 'other' which was essentially created by bypassing any dialogue between the different cultures, and operating within a very specific context of imperialism and hegemony. Said's work had been preceded by considerable postcolonial writings, and it reinvigorated the debate subsequently in the 1980s with the creation of the Subaltern Studies group of historians. After providing a glimpse of the major facets of Orientalism, and the responses it generated, this paper will argue that understandings and discussions of the East- focussing here particularly on India- continue to be influenced by the fundamental feature of Orientalism. The articulation of that feature is credited to Ronald Inden, who argued that Orientalism's deepest influence was denying "human agency" to the East, and providing universalising "models of how people ought to or must act." Explicitly or inadvertently, both Orientalists as well as postcolonial critiques of all ideological spectres have failed to counter this highest level of hegemony. <fnote>Gyan Prakash, "Orientalism Now", History and Theory 34:3 (1995), pp. 199, 211; Gyan Prakash, "Writing Post-Orientalist Histories of the Third World: Perspectives from Indian Historiography", Comparative Studies in Society and History 32:2 (1990), p. 384 </fnote><fnote>Edward Said, Orientalism: Western Conceptions of the Orient (London: Penguin, 1995), pp. 5, 21, 27 </fnote><fnote>Ronald Inden, Imagining India (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990), pp. 1-2 </fnote>In many ways, the 'classical' Orientalism of the 19 th century continued to influence much of the 20 th century understandings of India, both in the writings of the Cambridge School, as well as their critiques who failed to move out of the broad generalisations thus created, and merely responded to them. Firstly, Richard King has identified a broad distinguishing discourse, whereby society, science, rationality and masculinity are solely attributed to the Enlightenment. Conversely, religiosity, irrationality, mysticism and femininity are considered exclusive characteristics of the Orient. Secondly, contemporary debates in linguistic studies as well as ancient history continue to pertain to the traditional Oriental discourse of "constructing the 'self' through the 'other'". For example, Max Muller's search for Europe's "childhood" in the Sanskrit language and the Aryan race continues to be espoused, with the 'other' (in this case India) labelled "the eternal child", underlying its supposedly static nature. Third, just as Arthur Balfour argued in 1910 that the Orient "...exists in a sense, as we know it", legacies of Hegel and James Mill's History of India (1817) continue to survive, commenting on the disunity of the Orient. This can be seen in Vincent Smith's writing- "In political institutions, no evolution took place. No sovereign arose endowed with commanding abilities and capable of wielding together the jarring members of the body politic." While colonial and postcolonial nationalist historiography has responded by referring to the 'golden age' of the Maurya and Gupta empires, the crucial question of whether a centralised Westphalian state is the minimum requirement to prevent colonisation has been largely unexplored. Herein lies the continual hold of Orientalist knowledge that Said wrote of. <fnote>Richard King, Orientalism and Religion: Postcolonial Theory, India and the "Mystic East" (London: Routledge, 1999), p. 13 </fnote><fnote>Bill Ashcroft and Pal Ahluwalia, Edward Said: The Paradox of Identity (London: Routledge, 1999), p. 58 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit, p. 386 </fnote><fnote>Ashcroft and Ahluwalia, op cit, p. 64 and Ronald Inden, op cit, p. 8 </fnote><fnote>Ronald Inden, op cit </fnote>Said's work sparked off defensive reactions across academic disciplines to what was considered "Western tradition", and rebuttals by contemporary Orientalists like Dennis Porter and Bernard Lewis. However, the problem- as Gyan Prakash has pointed out- remains in what is taken to be the representation of the West, and invariably this is determined by Orientalism in the first place. This digresses into a discourse that could be termed 'Occidentalism'. Such reverse essentialism was considered a part of Said's Orientalism and criticised by James Clifford. Moreover, such discourses often deny the autonomy of the historical actors themselves. In Orientalism, Said himself cited the writing of Flaubert, who spoke of the Egyptian woman who was always represented by her husband, a societal trait the writer took to be "typically Oriental". An illustration is the debate around the sati tradition (widow burning), which was uprooted during the 19 th century by colonial officers and some members of the Hindu elite. While some contemporary writers sought justification of the tradition from Hindu texts, Orientalists denounced it as an example of 'Oriental despotism' and took it upon themselves to "civilise" the natives. What goes unnoticed in the debate- as Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak has argued- is the "silencing of the subaltern woman", whose history is presented by two contesting frameworks detached from her own agency.  <fnote>Ashcroft and Ahluwalia, op cit, pp. 74-6 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit, p. 408 </fnote><fnote>Edward Said, op cit., p. 6 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, "Subaltern Studies as Postcolonial Criticism", The American Historical Review 99:5 (1994), p. 1488 </fnote>To fill the void generated by Orientalist and nationalist historiography, a group of historians came together in the 1980s to establish Subaltern Studies. The founding editor- Ranajit Guha- argued that their aim was to write the histories of the "demographic difference" between the total population of India and those groups they considered to be 'elite'. While Jawaharlal Nehru had written his Discovery of India (1946) largely to rescue Indian nationalism from being hijacked by narrow sectarian interests, Subaltern Studies focussed instead on the heterogeneity of the 'mainstream', pointing out groups that had been essentialised not only by the Orientalists, but also by the nationalists. More fundamentally, the group- Partha Chatterjee in particular- has focussed on the "marginalisation of the 'other' forms of knowledge". This tradition has influenced postmodernist and Marxist writers too, as works by Romila Thapar (1978) and Bernard Cohn (1987) on the social constructs of the Orientalists and nationalists vis-à-vis the "real" Orient of the subaltern groups demonstrates.  <fnote>Richard King, op cit, p. 190 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit, p. 1483 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit, pp. 400-1 </fnote>This approach, however, often fails to break the 'self-other' dichotomy between the elites and the marginalised groups, besides falling into the familiar trap of essentialising the supposedly non-essentialising characteristics- "appropriation of subalternity", according to Chatterjee- of these groups. Moreover, the poststructuralist methodology has been criticised for "privileging particular informants", particularly when the localised writers were often writing in their own imperial and/or social contexts. Gyan Prakash attempts to present a defence by arguing for the need to question the traditional labels such as "native" and "woman" (in the aforementioned sati example), and explore new categories such as "native woman" with this relativist approach. However, it is difficult to avoid the irony that much of the Orientalist writing- produced by colonial officers working in different parts of the empire- drew on precisely the same technique- that of producing particularistic pictures of the localised Orient. Finally, as recent work in psychology has shown, individual actions are often subconsciously 'automated' by their external environment. Therefore, the Foucauldian discourse Said drew on in Orientalism acted on the localised agents of the subaltern groups in the same manner as it would have on the colonial writers, especially if these groups were in fact 'subaltern', thereby limiting their own power to shape the discourse. This reverts back to the problem many critics feel is inherent in Orientalism where Said problematically espouses Gramsican counter-hegemony in a Foucauldian discourse. <fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit., p. 1481 </fnote><fnote>Rosalind O'Hanlon and David Washbrook, "After Orientalism: Culture, Criticism, and Politics in the Third World", Comparative Studies in Society and History 34:1 (1992), pp. 161/2 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, "Can the "Subaltern" Ride? A Reply to O'Hanlon and Washbrook", Comparative Studies in Society and History 34:1 (1992), p. 183 </fnote><fnote>John Bargh and Tanya Chartrand, "The Unbearable Automaticity of Being", American Psychologist 54:7 (1999), pp. 462-479 </fnote><fnote>Akeel Bilgrami, "Interpreting a Distinction" in Homi Bhabha and W.J.T. Mitchell (eds.), Edward Said: Continuing the Conversation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), p. 29 </fnote>Said, in Orientalism, differed from the Foucauldian view of "inescapability of relations of power and domination" within a discourse. The failure of the postcolonial critiques of Orientalism has been in creating a genuine alternative discourse. Nationalist and Marxist critiques of Orientalism failed to break out of Eurocentric discourses. Nationalism staked a claim to "reason and progress instituted by colonialism", while Marxism "universalised Europe's historical experiences". Subaltern Studies has successfully avoided the nationalist claims to appropriate the "real Orient", but it has not been able to reverse the "normalisation of 'other' forms of knowledge", something championed by Orientalism. As Dipesh Chakrabarty argues, "themes of historical transition" are prominent in non-Western histories. Such transitions emphasise Europe's position as history, reason and progress, rendering all other forms of people as subaltern, and their histories as subsidiaries of the "established" history that is Europe. Citing the example of jute worker movements in Bengal, he argues that class based analysis (Marxist) or the absence of a "liberty tree" (E P Thompson) is grossly inadequate, given the importance of caste and religion. Traditional Marxist responses would assert that the Indian workers 'weren't there yet' in their stage of development. <fnote>Rosalind O'Hanlon and David Washbrook, op cit., pp. 149-50 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit., p. 1475 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit., p. 399 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit., pp. 1484-5 </fnote>Broadly speaking, Orientalism has created two discourses- the 'self-other' discourse which underlines the essential differences between Europe and the Orient, and the response that it has provoked from writers aiming to reOrient, conceding Europe's supposed qualities as catalysts for progress, and denying their absence in the Orient. It is curious to note that both- while supposedly opposed discourses- accept the universality of Europe's values and ideas. Peter Heehs thus considers the responses to Orientalism as mere components of the homogenising discourse. He has classified postcolonial writings into critical (1950s and 60s), reductive (1970s and 80s) and reactionary (1990s) approaches. While the critical approach reduces itself to examining empirical issues through Western frameworks, the reductive method fails to present an autonomous Indian agency. Reactionary writing has been the most vociferous (especially in the 1990s with the ascent of the Hindutva movement) in arguing for "re-Indianising" the discourse to trace the "imagined community" of India, but it not only borrows crucial aspects of colonial Orientalism (such as the idea of a united and centralised India), but continuously finds- as Sudipta Kaviraj has argued- an 'other' to the Indian 'self' (Muslims, Europeans, etc.). They are all, therefore, located within the straitjacket of Orientalism. <fnote>Peter Heehs, "Shades of Orientalism: Paradoxes and Problems in Indian Historiography", History and Theory 42:2 (2003), pp. 172-5 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., pp. 178-195 </fnote>An example of an academic debate ought to illustrate the point. Writing from a traditional Eurocentric perspective, David Landes has argued that Europe for the past millennia has possessed conducive socio-political-economic institutions, coupled with a temperate climate, entrepreneurial zeal and a lack of Malthusian pressure on resources, which made it the natural birthplace of the Industrial Revolution in the 19 th century. In responding to his argument, Kenneth Pomeranz has systematically gone through all the aspects of pre-Industrial Europe mentioned by Landes, and argued that Asia possessed similar, if not advanced characteristics during the 18 th century. While attributing Europe's industrialisation to accidents of geography (proximity to coal in Britain) and colonisation, he tacitly accepts the Eurocentric recipe for a modern industrial society. Crucially, he acknowledges the existence of a linear notion of progress, from which Asia- for whatever reasons- digressed. This is a classic case of non-European histories being reduced to mere 'accessories' of the meta narrative that is Europe's history, as Chakrabarty's earlier argument goes. <fnote>David Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations (London: Little, Brown and Company, 1998), p. xxi </fnote><fnote>Kenneth Pomeranz, The Great Divergence (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), p. 70 </fnote>The problem in Oriental historiography- as Ronald Inden argues- is with the rather inflexible usage of universalised terms such as free market, liberalism, democracy, welfare state, etc. I would even argue that narratives of non-European societies through a Western framework (without tacit acknowledgement of its thus limitation) "presents itself as a form of knowledge that is both different from, and superior to" the Orientals' knowledge about themselves- in essence, an Orientalist discourse. Most writings pertaining to the Orient take Europe as the only "knowable" entity (since the structures of knowledge are European), viewing the Orient as merely an empirical study to be conducted through this skeleton. It has also been argued that this entails that all subsequent writings about the Orient (at least as long as Western political and intellectual hegemony does not recede) will continue to be classified as Orientalist, in one way or another. O'Hanlon and Washbrook question postcolonial critiques how the Oriental can refute Western discourses without understanding them, and how he can understand them without engaging them, and how, therefore, can he avoid being drawn into the discourse and avoid "totalising abstraction" and "endless relativism" of postmodernism at the same time. Prakash offers a partial response, arguing that Oriental historiography must engage itself in a discourse "not determined" by Western conquest. This seems inadequate, because Orientalist writings about India have often taken place without an imperial context (in the case of French and German Orientalism). Perhaps what is required is a discourse not impacted upon by Western systems of knowledge- in essence, studying the Orient on its own terms. For example, Indian political philosophy, despite being extremely rich, has been prevented from analysing Indian history on the grounds of "being tainted with theological assumptions". <fnote>Ronald Inden, op cit., pp. 18, 37 </fnote><fnote>Aamir Mufti, "Global Comparativism" in Bhabha and Mitchell (eds.), op cit., p. 111 </fnote><fnote>Rosalind O'Hanlon and David Washbrook, op cit., pp. 149-50 </fnote><fnote>Gyan Prakash, op cit., p. 184 </fnote><fnote>Richard King, op cit., p. 28 </fnote>Whether one looks at "the clash of civilisations" or the "axis of evil", essentialisations about the Orient are rife in contemporary Western- and consequently global- discourses. These not only reinforce the traditional Orientalist definitions of the 'self' (the West), it prompts the Orient to defend its own 'self' as defined by its 'other' (the West), thereby indirectly accepting the initial generalisation. Postcolonial Oriental historiography- in this case Indian- has failed to live up to Said's "fundamental human and intellectual obligation"- to reconcile a humanist method of writing history with the ideas of a Foucauldian discourse. The alternative which I have proposed- creating an Oriental discourse based on its own value systems- is yet to be explored. Consequently, writings about the East continue to bear- with varying degrees and often implicitly- the characteristics of the Orientalism of the 19 th century. The ghost of James Mill's History of India, in short, has not been buried. <fnote>Rosalind O'Hanlon and David Washbrook, op cit., p. 156 </fnote>