The theory of the firm is based upon the assumption that all firms seek to maximize profits regardless of the market in which they operate. The implicit assumption in the question is that the ultimate long term goal of the firm is that of survival and in the short run firms have to first pursue profit maximization. This essay supports the case that, to the extent firms face fierce competition and threat of hostile takeover, they can be observed to maximize profits for survival. However where there is separation of ownership and control, firms might decide to pursue other non-profit maximizing goals like those of sales and growth maximization and are still able to survive. A few caveats highlighted in this essay are that in reality it may not always be possible or desirable for firms to maximize profits and that profit maximizing firms may not necessarily survive. <fnote>In this case we would take survival to mean staying in business </fnote>Firms are defined as complex entities with at least three types of members. (1) Workers who are largely paid fixed wages and are told what to do (2) Managers (Agents ) who are responsible for making decisions on what to produce, for whom and how it is produced (3) Owners (Principals) who fund the firm's investments and bear the financial risks associated with the business. Economic profit is the income that is remaining for the owners of the firm after paying for the factor of production that they utilize, and its calculation is shown in the following equation: Economic Profit= Total Revenue - Total Economic cost Insofar as both decision making and the analysis of firm's behavior are concerned, the focus is more on expected profit than on realized profits. Managers are primarily interested in the present value of the expected stream of profits. (Katz &Rosen,1998, pg198) <fnote>Principal- Agent conflicts which explain the alternatives to profit maximization aims of the firms would be examined in greater detail in later part of the essay </fnote><fnote>Total revenue= Sum of payments firm receives from the sales of its output, ie: TR=Price x Quantity Total cost= Firm's total expenditure on the inputs used to produce outputs where expenditures are measured in terms of opportunity cost. ( Factor price, technological possibilities, production characteristics are held constant) Accounting profit differs from economic profit in that it is an ex post concept based upon past transaction and historical fact. Unlike economists, accountants do not include opportunity cost in their calculation of profits. </fnote>Profit maximization occurs where Marginal cost (MC) = Marginal revenue (MR). Referring to figure 1 below, beyond output level x*, MC>MR, firms can raise profits by cutting back their production. Conversely where MR> MC, by increasing its output firms can raise profits. Thus long run equilibrium is established at the profit maximizing level of output, x* where MC=MR. <figure/>However the marginal output rule by itself is insufficient to determine firm's output choice for survival. If for every choice of output level the firm's average revenue (AR) is less than its average economic cost (AEC) the firm's maximum profit is obtained by shutting down. Hence other than producing at the profit maximizing output where MC=MR, it is only viable for firms to continue its operation if at this output level MR is also greater than AVC (average variable cost). <fnote>AR= Total revenue/ total output </fnote>According to Armen Alchian, firms that do not begin with profit maximization in mind will eventually do so as non-profit maximizing firms are driven out of the market. In general, behavior resembling something other than profit maximization is most likely to surface in firms where profits are expected to be ample enough to please stockholders, thereby opening the door for other considerations to influence managerial decisions. In highly competitive markets where profit margins are thin, security is shaky and ability of firms to absorb losses is weak, there exists (as Darwin's thesis maintains) a fierce struggle in which only the fittest will survive. Therefore market forces allow little room for discretionary actions that diverge from the goal of profit maximization. <fnote>Armen Alchian, "Uncertainty, Evolution and Economic Theory." Journal of Political Economy 58 (June 1950):211-21 </fnote>Moreover if the current management fails to maximize profits, someone else might be able to get control of the firm through a hostile takeover. Under a good management, the firm's profits could be increased and the resulting stock price would be Vh (h for "high") per share. If corporate raiders (good management) can purchase the company at a price less than Vh per share, they can make money by taking over the company. Statistical analysis of takeover bids suggest that "existing managers can squander 1/3 of the firm's value before the threat of displacement becomes truly serious" (Rosen, 1990, 16) Nevertheless, the threat of hostile takeover would induce the incumbent management to maximize profit rather than risk being overthrown. <fnote>Hostile takeover occurs when a group of investors purchases a controlling interest in a company against the management's wishes and advice to the current stockholders </fnote>Next we will examine the antithesis to the proposition put forth in the question. In the case where there is a divorce between ownership and control of the firm, the principal- agent conflict might surface and firms might choose to pursue other non-profit maximizing goals for survival. The principal-agent conflict arises because the principal (owners) hires a second party, the agent (managers), to perform some task (managing the firm) on his/her behalf. Ownership gives a person a claim on the profits of the firm and the greater the firm's profit, the higher the owner's income. Therefore owners (shareholders) of the firm would seek to maximize profits. On the other hand, managers involved in the day-to-day operations of the firm might choose to maximize their individual utility. Managers derive utility from prerequisites like big offices, many subordinate workers and expensive meals (Oliver Williamson, 1964). Left to their own devices, managers might have the firm spend heavily on these items at the expense of profits. Fanning (1990, 29) found that when WPP group PLC took over the J. Walter Thompson company, the firm was spending $80,000 per year to have a butler deliver a peeled orange each day to one of its executives. In the case where all competing managers fail to maximize profits then there would be no pressure for firms (specifically managers) to pursue profit maximization in order to survive. <fnote>The proposition refers to the case that firms need to maximize profits in order to survive. </fnote>Nevertheless sometimes it is difficult to separate manager's amenity maximization from profit maximization. A corporate jet can be a profit maximizing response to the fact that a top executive's time has high opportunity cost but it could also be viewed as an expensive executive toy. It is also argued that even without the external control mechanisms (competition) internal control mechanisms exist to align the management's desire for greater prestige with owners' aim of profit maximization. Stock options bring a confluence between utility maximizing aims of managers and profit maximizing aims of shareholders. Managers are attracted to maximize profits as their wages increases with it. Profit maximization is only worth pursuing if the firm gets to keep the profit. However if stock options are used there could be a risk of Goodhart's Law which states that to control is to distort because managers might focus on policies to boost the share price of the company instead of striving to maximize profits. In addition another disadvantage of using stock options is that if overall the stock market goes up, the executives may be able to reap the benefits without having made improvements in the company's actual performance. This is detrimental to the long term survival of the firm. Due to the importance of the experience curve effects, many firms have targets relating to sales volume and market share. William Baumol (1967) hypothesized that a manager's prestige is attached to the size of his company's revenue or sales. Thus instead of maximizing profits, firms might opt for constrained revenue maximization. Referring to figure 2 below the firm achieves maximum revenue at output Xr (where MR=0). However the firm achieves equilibrium at Xc where the output level is greater than that of the profit-maximizing level (Xp) but is less than Xr because managers must provide a minimum level of profit to satisfy shareholders. Once profits (╥) reach acceptable levels, some firms are inclined to place higher dollar sales ahead of higher profits as the main object of concern. <fnote>According to the research done by BCG (Boston Consulting Group), the experience curve effect is manifested when as a result of increased activity (more experience), workers become more efficient. Thus cost of production is lowered and this could lead to lower prices which could translate into greater profits and improved market dominance. </fnote><figure/>Profits maximization is not the only means to secure the ends of survival for firms. Growth via greater market penetration offers a firm a stronger, more secure market position vis-à-vis competitors, suppliers and customers. Growth by diversification into a wider range of products also free firms from too much dependence on one or a few products and serves as a hedge against the possible demise of bread-and-butter products. If one product or phase of a firm's operations slows down and becomes unprofitable, the firm can still survive and even grow on the strength of its other activities. Furthermore in the new knowledge economy where additional units of software are produced at almost negligible cost, falling MC means maximum revenue approximates to maximum profits. Growth may provide economies of scale (decreases MC) and prevent take-over in some circumstances. Therefore short term neglect of profit maximization to maximize growth may help firms secure a stronger market position. We shall now move on to examine the three caveats to this question. Firstly, as Kenneth E.Boulding and J.K. Galbraith astutely pointed out, a firm could maximize profits and still not survive. This occurs when there is an inadequate cash flow, shrinking market and takeovers by acquisition-minded firms. In crisis situations when the firm's long run existence is at stake, survival objectives can take precedence over profit objectives. Increasingly firms have been observed to allocate a larger budget to marketing their products as either being "environmentally friendly" or "does not abuse child labor" at the expense of their profit margins. This is because with greater emphasis placed on corporate social responsibility (CSR) consumers may boycott firms with irresponsible or unethical code of conduct. Therefore though these firms may be maximizing their profits, without the support of the consumers, ultimately they would not be able to survive or even if they do manage to stay in business they would not be able to survive well enough to ensure their continual existence. <fnote>Steven Pressman, "Fifty major economists", London and New York,Routledge,1999 </fnote>Secondly, some firms might even find it advantageous to avoid maximizing profits for the following reasons: (1) they fear the profits would attract competition from firms which have the potential to enter the industry (2) fear of provoking anti-trust actions (3) the belief that holding profits down to "satisfactory" levels will restrain union wage demands and will promote stronger public relations. Moreover, it is not always the case that maximum profit is required for survival. To quote Fletcher L.Byron, (chairman of the Board, Koppers company, Inc), "a profit is reasonable when it provides for the survival of an enterprise. Survival is possible when profits are sufficient to perform their two life-giving functions which are to pay investors for the use of their savings and to increase the productive base of an enterprise so that it can remain a useful entity." The reasonable level of profit need not be the maximum profit. The final caveat to the question is that even if firms recognize that profit maximization is important for survival they might are unable to maximize profits. It has been proposed that decision makers typically do not exhaustively sort through every possibility in search of the most profitable alternative because the search process, given market uncertainty and imperfect information about demand, costs, competitive responses of rival firms and future economic conditions, will be too time-consuming and cost more than it is worth. It is impossible and impractical for the management of General Motors to choose the prices and quantities of thousands of cars (different models with various options) that are sold in different markets around the world. Thus according to Herbet A.Simon, "Administrative theory is peculiarly the theory of intended and bounded rationality of the behavior of human beings who satisfice because they do not have the wits to maximize". <fnote>Firms are unable to maximize profits due to market imperfections </fnote>In conclusion, there is a case that firms must maximize profits in order to survive under the following circumstances: (a) competitive forces are relatively intense and the threat of hostile takeover is palpable (b) large groups of firms are involved and nothing has to be predicted about the behavior of individual firms (c) alignment of management goals with the profit maximization goal of owners. Nevertheless, as the saying goes "all roads lead to Rome". Therefore profit maximization is but one of the plethora of available paths leading to firms' survival. This essay has examined the other two alternative strategies of sales and growth maximization which could also ensure the survival of firms. Lastly, as the caveats highlighted, in reality, more often than not, it is not necessarily the case that firms must, want to and are able to maximize profits in order to survive. 