As a writer of short stories the author's main objective is to keep the reader interested and to avoid any opportunities for tangent thoughts relating to themes or issues arising from the story. Therefore, the effects of his composition are always in the forefront of Mérimée's mind. The 'nouvelle' is supposed to be read all in one go and Mérimée ensures this possibility using a number of techniques. The first reminder we see in both 'Mateo Falcone' and 'Tamango' of Mérimée's attempt to control the reader is the use of a narrator; the author is not telling the story. The stories are based on a few key events that only take place over a matter of hours or days. The use of a narrator is an important element in Mérimée's composition as it helps to control the reader by distancing them from the characters. This is significant as one of the dangers of a short story is that the reader gets too concerned with characteristics and his attention can be diverted from the narrative. Ergo, Mérimée can, in this way, stay completely objective - neither opinion nor judgement is cast and we, as a reader, are left to make up our own minds about the characters and their actions. One example of this is the killing of Fortunato; in any other story after such a horrific image of a father killing his son, one would expect some sort of moral judgement to be cast by the author. Instead Mérimée simply ends: "(Fortunato est) Dans le ravin. Je (Mateo Falcone) vais l'enterrer. Il est mort en Chrétien; je lui ferai une messe." Another technique used by Mérimée to control the reader and remain objective is his florid, impersonal style; he uses 'on' to enhance his calm objective storytelling - he also narrates casually: "Je ne sais combien de temps".  <fnote>Son of Mateo Falcone </fnote><fnote>Mateo Falcone, pg 68 </fnote><fnote>Tamango, pg 103 </fnote>Another aid to control the reader is found in Mérimée's ability to change the pace of the story. "le bout de la chaîne... Le cadran était azuré...la boîte nouvellement fourbie...au soleil elle paraissait toute de feu... La tentation était trop forte." Here, Mérimeée uses an increase of punctuation to slow down the reading. This is a technique of Mérimée's composition to make the reader take particular note of the description, in this case the awe Fortunato feels for the watch offered to him. Mérimée succeeds in portraying a trait of character here - namely Fortunato's greed - merely by changing the pace of his prose. The opposite effect is used also by Mérimée to speed up and therefore intensify key, dramatic scenes: "Les deux chefs se joignirent sur un des passages" This time Mérimée uses a repeated 's' sound and little punctuation to help the story flow and provoke a quicker, more intense reading. Mérimée changes tense from the past historic into the dramatic present: "Il s'élança dans les bras de son adversaire, et lui saisit la main don't il tenait son sabre. L'un s'efforce de retenir son arme, l'autre de l'arracher. Dans cette lutte furieuse, ils tombent tous les deux". This, again, speeds up the reader at a dramatic point in the narrative and makes the tale more immediate and exciting. <fnote>Mateo Falcone, pg 61 </fnote><fnote>Tamango, pg </fnote><fnote>Tamango, pg 94 </fnote>Vivid, yet concise description is used to control the reader. This allows Mérimée to force the reader into taking particular notes of key scenes: "la montre oscillait, tournait, et quelquefois lui heurait le bout du nez. Enfin, peu à peu sa main droite s'éleva vers la montre". Here Mérimée uses vivid description to ensure that the reader is aware of the importance of the watch - it is a symbol of Fortunato's betrayal and Mérimée succeeds in making it visual. <fnote>Mateo Falcone, pg 61 </fnote>Mérimée doesn't allow the reader to lose concentration at any point in the story. He does this by making it very difficult to anticipate what is coming next in the narrative. There are a number of twists in the story designed to shock the reader; for example, although entitled 'Mateo Falcone' there is actually very little reference to this man at all in the story. When we do see him he is perhaps somewhat different to what the reader may have expected; it is surprising that a man who holds the virtue of loyalty so dear, would kill his own son. Indeed the whole relationship between father and son is surprising as a close father-son bond would perhaps have been anticipated, especially as the son and heir is so proud of his dad. The fact that Mateo Falcone himself, a crook and a cold-blooded killer, has any sort of moral code is unexpected, let alone any religious beliefs to the extent of making Fortunato pray before being shot. Mateo Falcone, throughout the opening of the story is built up as a hero and to shoot his own son in cold blood comes as a shock. In 'Tamango' a similar technique is used to achieve the same effect; it is surprising that Tamango is rescued by the very slaves he had betrayed, and the ease in which he was captured before hand was an anti-climax. Again, at the end, we see a twist in that "il mourut à l'hôpital d'une inflammation de poitrine." this is certainly not gratifying for the reader but does control him - ensuring kept concentration and no time for reflex ion on previous points. <fnote>Tamango, pg 103 </fnote>However, having said that Mérimée does not aim to gratify the reader whilst reading the story, he perhaps does provoke contemplation afterwards. Thanks to the dramatic twists, vivid descriptions, objectivity and changes of pace in the narrative, the reader does not have time to think about issues arising from the story, characteristics, or to make a moral judgement. Mérimée does succeed, however, in shocking the reader but this shock is delayed until the end of the story. Mérimée uses irony too to add to the reader's thoughts after the end of the narrative. Fortunato's name is one such irony, as is the name of the ship (l'esperence) and Ledoux in 'Tamango'. At the very end of 'Mateo Falcone' we see that Fortunato is to be replaced by "Tiodoro Bianchi" - ironically sharing his first name with the corporal and his last being associated with white skin colour. Two things that Mateo Falcone stands against. <fnote>Tamango, pg 68 </fnote>Therefore, it is clear, after analysing the various techniques used by Mérimée, that he does have in mind the effects of his composition at all times. He does above all attempt to control the reader to make the story more effective. Although not always gratifying during the narrative, Mérimée provokes independent thoughts, arguments and judgements at the end of the book. 