When attempting to compare the representation of the press in Heinrich Böll's Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum and Monika Maron's  Flugasche, one must firstly examine how the press itself is portrayed in the two studies before attempting to draw parallels between them. It is true to say that both the novel Flugasche and the novella Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum give the reader a large number of examples of the a very negative depiction of the press. The pieces differ, however, as the reasons for these pessimistic representations mirror contradicting social themes of the times the books were written. It is incidentally, somewhat ironic that the very 'ideal' of the press being free is what is, on the one hand the problem in Flugasche where it is censored by the German Democratic Republic state, but in the case of Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum, the presence of this freedom within the Federal German Republic destroys Katharina who is left helpless and without state protection. Böll's novella, his first piece of work not to include the war as a main theme and concentrate instead the contemporary issue of the press, is a satirical piece dominated by political motives of the German 'Left' and the 'Springer press', and is used to reflect his opinion of the press; as a universal cancer and portray 'the media as meddlers'. The paramount theme, therefore, is 'die korrupte und verlogene Boulevard-Presse'. Günter Wirth concurs stating that: 'Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum...[ist]...die subtile Beschreibung eines Rufmordes kapitalistischer Pressemonopolie und seiner Konsequenzen." The piece highlights the ability and willingness of the press to exploit the German Federal Republic population and benefit from people's readiness to see and believe evil in others. <fnote>Allen, B., The lost honour of Katharina Blum, in Library Journal, 100. , (1975), p.781 </fnote><fnote>Karasek, H., Böll: Wie es zur Gewalt kommt in Der Spiegel 20, (1974), p.121 </fnote><fnote>Wirth, G., Plädoyer für das Erbarmen. In: Jurgensen, M ., Böll: Untersuchungen zum Werk, (1975), p.97 </fnote>The press, represented through the newspaper 'Die Zeitung', in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum is described as an immoral institution; '[Böll is] a writer who applies the lens of fiction to matters of morality in its widest sense'. One example of this in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum is the sickening persistence of the reporter Tötges, who is, in himself a personification of the press. He is desperate to get a story; will hound primary school teachers and his counterparts are shown to travel to disturb a doctor in the mountains merely to ask him about the character of their target; Katharina Blum. Tötges feels that he must 'immer am Ball [bleiben]' and the sickening persistence reaches its apogee at the point where 'verkleidet Tötges sich daraufhin als Handwerker, kann zu Frau Blum vordringen und sie mit den "Fakten" konfrontieren'. It is this interrogation, along with the fabricated version of the truth that Tötges writes in the 'Zeitung' that kills Katharina's mother and is one of the factors which also leads to her eventual destruction by the press through this reporter. At this point in the narrative another immoral characteristic of the press is also displayed - Tötges mirrors his profession in appearing fake and almost patronising by bringing the sick woman flowers before this harsh questioning of her. <fnote>Bryant, R. K., The Value of Truth, in: National Review, 27, (August 1975), p.843 </fnote><fnote>Böll, H., Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum, Cologne (1974), p.33 </fnote><fnote>Nordbruch, C. H. R., Heinrich Böll: Seine Staats- und Gesellschaftskritik im Prosawerk der sechziger und siebziger Jahre, Frankfurt (1994), p.131 </fnote>The representations of the press in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum are, therefore, different to that in Flugasche as the press in Maron's novel is not depicted as immoral; it is the state which governs it which is attacked. One example, however, of morality in Flugasche is seen in the reaction of Josefa to the town B. and her determination to write the truth about it, instead of an inaccurate version which would survive censorship and be printed. Early on in the novel Josefa is portrayed as a radical character and one who is uncomfortable with the government's ability to muzzle the press and suppress the truth about the extent of environmental degradation, 'Was soll ich [Josefa] hier, Luise, wenn ich nichts ändern kann.  Josefa is determined and succeeds in writing the truth about the atrocities of the town of B. the description she gives it emphasises her determination: 'Und diese Dünste, die als Wegweiser dienen könnten. Bitte gehen Sie geradeaus bis zum Ammoniak, dann links bis zur Salpetersäure. Wenn Sie einen stechenden Schmerz in Hals und Bronchien verspüren, kehren Sie um und rufen den Artz, das war dann Schwefeldioxyd." Her character is one of moral justice and this is what enables her to rebel against the 'norm' she is expected and almost forced to follow. These points illustrate that although the press is heavily censored and prevents the publication of many writers in the German Democratic Republic, it does not succeed in all cases of extinguishing radical ideas. <fnote>Maron, M., Flugasche Frankfurt (September 2002), p.17 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.16 </fnote>The complete fabrication in some instances of the testaments of witnesses or character referees in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum is a further negative representation of the press by Böll. Simple inaccuracies such as the 'sensationalle falsche Berichten [und] bewußte Lügen' are an immoral depiction of the press. Doris Auerbach likens the Zeitung Böll describes to a 'scoop-hungry tabloid and its habitual rapings of the dull truth'. These can be found when Tötges interviews Katharina's mother; her statements to the journalist are distorted in his article. This representation of the press becomes even more negative when the reporter tries to defend himself: 'daß er als Reporter drauf eingestellt und gewohnt sei, 'einfachen Menschen Artikulationshilfe zu geben''. An interesting scene in the film Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum is the one at the very end; that of Tötges' funeral. The image of the camera and the reporter moving along the line of attendants, commentating on the events is a powerful one. This shows that the press is willing to impose itself on the intimacy of a funeral to get a story. Another conceivable angle would be that this image reflects the life of Tötges and this invasion of his privacy - of which (like Katharina Blum) he is helpless to prevent. Either way this is a negative portrayal of the FGR press in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum. <fnote>Nägele, R., Heinrich Böll. Einführung in das Werk und die Forschung, Frankfurt (1976), p.166 </fnote><fnote>Auerbach, D., Dissertation Abstracts International, 35 (1974) p.1084 </fnote><fnote>Böll, H., op. cit., p.107 </fnote><fnote>Film: Schöndorff, V. and von Trotta, M., Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum (1975) </fnote>It was the case in the German Democratic Republic that, due to the censorship of the press by the state, one would not be allowed, as in the case of Josefa, to write a piece which did not fit in with a praise of the communist regime. A 'hauptlicher Propagandist der SED' stated that 'Unsere Zeitungen [those in the German Democratic Republic] sind eine politische Institution'. <fnote>Scherz, Deutsche Presse seit 1945, Munich (1965), p.61 </fnote>Maron describes Josefa as someone who becomes increasingly more resigned as the story continues. She goes mad and becomes a pariah even before she has started to write the piece on B. She wrestles with her conscience and it is the mere decision to do something that is morally right which she is made to feel uncomfortable for. She thinks that 'den (der) herzerfrischenden Realismus...manchmal etwas sehr weit gehe. ' and she really dreams of radical ideas: 'sobald ich [Josefa] die Augen schloß und meiner Phantasie das Thema Städte und Autos in Auftrag gab'. The fact that people especially the employee at the factory see her as naïve leads to her destruction. She becomes nervous and agitated and when she meets with the publisher cannot rest and is extremely uneasy: 'Meine Hände zitterten... Mein Mund war trocken und brannte... Mir wurde heiß, und in meinen Ohren began es zu rauschen. ' Josefa is also plagued by the misunderstanding and the frustration of not having her article printed: 'Ich habe doch nur geschrieben, was ich gesehen habe und was sie [die Regierung] vielleicht nicht gesehen haben. ' Maron shows Josefa as beginning a nervous breakdown; she cannot sleep and starts to neglect her son - one day she wakes up and has completely forgotten to take him to school and realises that she has only been feeding him tinned meat. At the end, although her article is to be printed, the press has destroyed her ability to live as a GDR citizen; she leaves by taxi and it is implied that she will either go to commit suicide or defect, which is, in the eyes of her, practically the same thing. <fnote>Maron, M., op. cit. p. 45 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.89 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.191 </fnote>Unlike the censored press in the GDR which was controlled by the state, the Federal German Republic's equivalent 'liegt in den Händen privatwirtschaftlicher Unternehmen' and had the freedom to say - to a certain extent - what it liked. Indeed the aim of the press in the FGR was to be so that 'Alle Medien als Mittel der Massenansprache unter einem gemeinsamen Wissenschaftsbegriff'[would be]. <fnote>Bertelsmann Lexikothek Verlag, Tatsachen über Deutschland, Gütersloh (1978), p.319 </fnote><fnote>Feldmann, E., Theorie der Massenmedien, Munich (1962) p.43 </fnote>In the case of Katharina Blum we see an innocent and pure female be seduced by a man and destroyed a relentless society. The name Katharina is from the Greek word Katharos, (Kάτήάροσ), which means literally 'pure one'. Many believe that Blum could represent beauty or could link her to Catherine of Siena. Katharina Blum is 'victimised by the reporter, a writer for a publication very much like the 'Bild-Zeitung''. Böll shows the press as to having made a spectacle out of Katharina Blum and her story is on the font page everyday. We hear the testaments of Katharina's friends and employers but then see her turn into a passive and vengeful figure. The press exaggerates the facts and paints a very negative but, more importantly, unfair picture of Katharina. They try 'den "Fall Blum" zu politisieren und...suggeriert im Leser die Vorstellung einer weitverzweigten Verschwörung, an der die 'radikale Person' und ihre Bekannten Anteil hätten. ' Further negativity comes from Böll, as explains Aleidine Moeller, in that 'Tötges covers the story, emphasizing especially the sexual overtones of the story'. Katharina Blum is sick after seeing a headline and Böll uses this powerful image to stress the negative effect the press is having on her. She receives hate mail and violently smashes up her apartment in anger. <fnote>Stewart, K., The American Reviews of Heinrich Böll in  University of Dayton Review II, (1974) p.5 </fnote><fnote>Nordbruch, H. R., op. cit., p.131 </fnote><fnote>Moeller, A. K., The Woman as a Survivor, New York (1991), p.91 </fnote>Whereas Katharina used to be liked by all her friends in the bar where she often goes, when she appears there since appearing in the Zeitung the guests show no respect for her privacy and almost appear to want to make it known to her that they know all about it after reading the articles: 'alle Leute, die Katharina kennt, lessen die Zeitung. ' One supposed friend is so excited by the appearance of one of her acquaintances that she has even kept cuttings of all the articles. 'Katharina loses her respect and position in society through these articles' and, although her destruction has been a gradual process, it is the final one of these articles which finally tips her over the edge, the film shows the large headline and the front page entitled: 'Mother dead. Götten caught.' These two simple yet hard-hitting sentences sum up Katharina's present, horrific situation. She has lost everything. The fact that the press has actually undoubtedly caused at least some of this trauma for her, coupled with the remarks as she walks through the bar, leave her completely destroyed and without reason to such a point that she senses it logical and the only response to murder Tötges - the personified press and ergo inflictor of all her horror. Her only direction is towards Götten; 'sie selbst habe sich...in der Stadt herumgetrieben, um Reue zu finden, habe aber keine Reue gefunden; si möchte gern dort sein, wo auch ihr 'lieber Ludwig,' sei. ' A further damming of the press by Böll is illustrated in the fact that she has no remorse and her love and respect for the written or spoken word, she once had, is completely lost. <fnote>Nordbruch, H. R., op. cit., p.132 </fnote><fnote>Moeller, A. K., op. cit., p.91 </fnote><fnote>Böll, H., op. cit., p.9 </fnote>Therefore, Böll describes a very negative picture of the press in the novella by narrating in great detail the unfair, exaggerated and entirely derogatory account the Zeitung gives of, not only the case, but of Katharina Blum as an individual as well. Her transformation from a nice, well-liked stable member of society to a murderer without remorse runs parallel to her appearances in the Zeitung and how the imbroglio progresses. One can have no doubt that these atrocities inflicted upon her directly result in her dramatic downfall. As a reader, we become even more disturbed realising that all this said scandal is in fact something that should be, to any reasonable person, merely part of the train train quotidien. Here Böll wishes to make the point that whilst a person may be sharp, intelligent and rational, people as a collective are rash and quick to judge, believe the worst and condemn a new 'evil'. This is a negative depiction of the press as, in this instance; it is a media tool that is geared towards provoking this knee-jerk response. Furthermore, the drama is intensified merely to enhance the sale of newspapers and no concern goes to the individual, who is left completely destroyed. Both central characters, therefore, in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum and  Flugasche are portrayed as being destroyed emotionally by the press. However, the type of destruction and the reasons for it differ. One other independent pessimistic representation of the press in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum is the closeness of the Zeitung with the authorities. Unlike the ideal of having these two powerful and beneficial forces aiding each other in the field of crime - as is the intended case in most societies - Böll describes here a relationship of sleaze and corruption, which seeks to bring down and destroy an individual character instead of supporting a member of the population they are supposed to help and protect. The representation of the press as a negative presence in both Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum and  Flugasche in depicted also in the acceptance and resignation of the population in the two nations that the problem of the press is simply the way it is and nothing can be done about it. In Flugasche the vast majority of the GDR population are shown to be passive and accept that the press is a government and not a people tool. Christian is one such example: '"es gibt gewisse Gepflogenheiten, Normen im menschlichen Zusammenleben, die ein Erwachsener für gewöhnlich kennt. Die können dir gefallen, die können dir nicht gefallen, aber zur Kenntnis nehmen mußt du sie schon, wenn du irgend etwas ausrichten willst."' The people know exactly what to expect and realise that anything to the government's distaste will not be printed; 'Aber sie werden es nicht lessen, weil es nicht in der Zeitung stehen wird. ' A similar situation arises in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum and Frau Blorna states: '"Sie machen das Mädchen fertig. Wenn nicht die Polizei, dann die ZEITUNG, und wenn die ZEITUNG die Lust an ihr verliert, dann machen's die Leute."' Here Böll illustrates that the press controls the lives of the population and almost dictates public opinion. <fnote>Maron, M., op. cit., p.191 </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.59 </fnote><fnote>Böll, H., op. cit. p.36 </fnote>The texts differ in their representation of the media in that; whilst Böll 'offers no realistic solutions' and, according to Durzak, Katharina's protest 'is essentially private and does not significantly impair the yellow press or its questionable practices', Maron is arguably not entirely pessimistic; 'Das Schreiben selbst entzieht sich jedem Reglement' - here we see a slight indication that, although the press prevents the publication of articles against the state's wishes, it cannot stop the writing or thinking of such ideas and this point offers a slight hope for Josefa. In Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum Katharina is a self-fulfilling prophesy and her rebellion does not have any gain for her, so writes Sewell: 'While Katharina's individual protest may provide a temporary catharsis, it reduces even further her hard-earned social integrity and is politically futile." This, however, is not the case in Flugasche as, although Josefa has still been destroyed by the press and the state and so cannot appreciate it, her article, nevertheless, is actually printed and she succeeds, in this way, in what she set out to do. Another example of a little victory for Josefa is that the zuständige Genosse' says that he wishes that 'es würden alle Journalisten so ehrlich und kämperferisch für die Sache eintreten. ' These slightly more positive representations, however, are completely overridden by the many more negative ones which ensure that, on the whole, Flugasche remains almost an entirely negative portrayal of the press and state in the GDR. <fnote>Zachall, R. K., Heinrich Böll: Forty Years of Criticism, Columia USA (1994) p.86 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote><fnote>Maron, M., op. cit., p.111 </fnote><fnote>Zacnall, R. K., op. cit., p. 86 </fnote><fnote>Maron, M., op. cit., p.169 </fnote>The representations of the press in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum and Flugasche reflect the differing social policies of the GDR and the FGR as regards to the media. In Flugasche, Josefa hates the state-controlled press and resents the fact that it is censored so the truth can never be known. In Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum, however, Katharina looks helplessly for protection from the state that will simply never come. It is more than a little ironic that Katharina Blum longs for the very thing which drives Josefa to destruction. In this way Böll and Maron, whilst striving to achieve different things, subconsciously give an analyst of these two pieces bad depictions of the two extreme circumstances the contemporary press can fall to. This suggests that, for the media to be a successful tool of public information, a sensible medium must be found. After studying Flugasche one would say freedom of the press is important in a modern society but state control should not be so minimal as to allow the destructive sequence of events described by Böll in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum. In conclusion it is clear that there are many similarities between the representation of the press in Heinrich Böll's Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum and that given by Monika Maron in Flugasche in so far as both portrayals are negative. They both narrate a frustrated, yet strong-willed central character who is, in spite of this determination, overcome by the powers of the press and left completely resigned and destroyed. In the case of Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum Katharina becomes exactly what the press has labelled her, and in this sense is a self-fulfilling prophesy. They differ, however, in that although it is the press entirely put to blame in Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum, such blame falls not to the press itself specifically but largely to the state who govern it and its power of suppression and fabrication in Flugasche. 