<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The ability to "use our senses" relies on a number of sensory systems that enable detection, perception and cognition of environmental stimuli. Every sensory system has a specific way of responding to stimuli, yet the end result essentially remains the same: the generation of an action potential to stimulate nerve cells with a nerve impulse that will transfer this signal to the central nervous system. In this essay sensory transduction is illustrated by briefly explaining the different cell signalling mechanisms involved in the sensation of touch, heat, light, sound and smell, to allow for discussion of their similarities and differences. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Sensory systems allow us to sense various stimuli constantly provided by the environment. This essay focuses mainly on the processes of sensory cells involved in the detection of these stimuli by specialised peripheral receptors, transduction along signalling pathways and encoding into a pattern of nerve impulses. Stimuli can be of mechanical, visual or chemical nature. Acoustic sensations as well as those of touch and heat rely on the activity of mechanoreceptors, which are mostly ion channels of some sort. In contrast to that, vision and olfaction are achieved by detection of photons and odourants, respectively, which act as ligands on receptors that are coupled to G proteins. The ultimate goal of generating a nerve impulse, to be perceived and interpreted by specialised areas of the central nervous system is the common task of all sensory cells, which otherwise are very distinct from one another on the structural level. All sensory systems function differently, yet there are a lot of similarities as well. It is difficult to establish comparisons on all aspects alike sheer due to the complexity and specificity of the cell signalling pathways involved, thus comparison has to be limited to some of the most obvious characteristics of sensory perception. <heading>Touch and Temperature going hand in hand</heading>Cutaneous touch and temperature perception are two senses that have quite a lot in common. Touch and temperature are detected by receptors, which are primarily found in specialised epidermal cells e.g. Merkel cells for touch or specialised nerve cells called nociceptors. As there is generally no ligand involved in touch perception or temperature perception, unless the skin is suspected to irritant chemicals or acid, the identification of mechanically sensitive receptors by ligand or toxin binding is not possible. Thus the detailed molecular compositions of mechanically activated proteins and the exact ways of activation remain unclear. But in either way, the response to touch or temperature does cause activation of mechanically gated ion channels and change of ion concentrations within the cell, which in turn cause the cellular membrane potential to change, therefore generating an action potential and ultimately resulting in a nerve impulse. The types of proteins most intimately involved in somatosensational processes belong to the transient receptor potential (TRP) channel family. Up to now, 28 genes in six subfamilies have been classified as TRP channels in humans. These channels are largely non-selective and classified by their primary amino acid sequence or structure, which commonly entails a certain number of ankyrin repeats, five transmembrane helices and a membrane pore, rather than their properties or selectivity, due to their diversity.6 A model protein for TRP channels is the vanilloid receptor 1 (TRPV1) as it is the only one so far that could be isolated and characterised on the basis of its ability to bind a ligand, in this case capsaicin, the molecule responsible for the hot taste of spicy food. Among many other nerve cells, TRPV1 is expressed in nociceptors of the skin, which appear to increase their cytosolic concentration of Ca 2+ and Na+ ions in response to several stimuli. One is obviously capsaicin, which activates TRPV1 at a concentration as low as 1 M, as well as substances with a pH below 6 and temperatures above 40-42 °C. Interestingly, the presence of one of these factors intensifies the response to another e.g. the reaction to heat is greater at lower pH, maybe because these conditions are associated with cell injury and infection.7 It is not certain how exactly touch in form of pressure or stretching can activate touch sensitive receptors. However, mutations of Caenorhabditis elegans elucidated that genes encoding microtubule subunits, membrane-associated structural proteins, and collagen are essential for touch sensitivity, thus this set of proteins could play a role in conveying force to a channel from each side of the membrane.4 On the other hand, activation by temperature might be attributed to conformational changes of the channel, since essentially all proteins are temperature sensitive. But there are several TRP channels with unusually high temperature sensitivity, which can be found preferably in pain and temperature sensing neurons of the skin. Besides TRPV1, TRPV2 is thought to be susceptible to noxious heat above 50 °C while TRPV3 and 4 are activated by temperatures from 22-40 °C. Temperatures below 22 °C on the other hand, activate TRPM8. There is little selectivity for ions, but especially Ca 2+ permeability is markedly increased upon activation of these channels.6 <heading>Hearing by Hair Cells</heading>Another sense that relies on mechanical transduction is hearing. The mechanisms involved in the detection of sound waves, however, are far better understood than the detection of other mechanical stimuli. And in contrast to the several different touch or temperature sensing cells with their vast number of receptors, only one type of specialised epidermal cells exists in the cochlea of the human ear, namely the hair cell. This is not to say that there are no other cells involved, but hair cells are the primary sensory cells with organelles that enable purely mechanical transduction. These organelles are stereocilia, tiny cylindrical, actin-filled rods of different lengths that emerge from the upper cellular surface in a hexagonal array. A sound wave entering the cochlea sets the stereocilia in motion, causing them to slide along one another and exert pressure on tip links, which are fine filaments connecting the stereocilia. Tip links are thought to be directly connected to Ca 2+ ion channels, which will open or close, depending on the direction of the movement. Influx of Ca 2+ ions causes opening of Ca 2+ gated K+ ion channels and subsequently depolarisation of the membrane, thus the generation of an action potential. Changes in potential release a neurotransmitter from the basolateral surface of the cell to synapses connecting to the auditory nerve. The resulting postsynaptic signal leads to a nerve impulse, which is then transmitted to the brain. Rapid return to the resting potential is possible through K+ specific channels, which allow the ions to leave the cell. Hair cells that are tuned to higher frequencies express channels with smaller relaxation time constraints than cells tuned to lower frequencies, moreover, the number of K+ channels in a cell increases with the preferably detected frequency of this particular cell.4, 8 Aside from being remarkably temporarily accurate and sensitive due to the lack of slow chemical processes and employing a direct mechanical approach for transduction, amplification of sound waves are another outstanding feature of auditory transduction. The proposed, and as of yet most likely, mechanism is thought to involve the hair bundle organelle. Unlike amplification of signals in visual transduction, which relies on the biochemical cascade taking place within rods or cones, it is the cell organelle itself that enhances vibrations caused by sound waves. And stereocilia may even vibrate in the absence of exterior stimuli, which seems as unlikely as the emission of photons by rods and cones, or the production of odourants by olfactory receptor cells.9 <heading>GPCRs unite light and smell</heading>Contrary to that, phototransduction as well as olfaction are processes involving a relatively complex cell signalling pathway, which commences with a G protein coupled receptor (GPCR). In fact, rhodopsin, a complex of the protein opsin and the chromophore 11-cis-retinal responsible for detecting light, and the ca. 350 different olfactory receptors both belong to the family of GPCRs Type A, and have a characteristic 7 transmembrane structure. The human genome contains about 500 to 750 genes encoding odourant receptors, which are found in gene clusters containing up to 80 genes on every chromosome except for the 20 th and the Y chromosome. Despite of only 30% of these genes being functional, this still accounts for about 1% of the whole genome, thus constituting the biggest gene family by far. The first member of the olfactory receptor family in humans was cloned and identified in 1999. Meanwhile, a complete gene cluster containing 7 pseudo- and 11 functional genes on chromosome 17 was isolated, sequenced and cloned to further investigate protein function and ligand binding properties. A lot more research was done on rhodopsin, and deducing its crystal structure provided significant insights concerning relationships between structure and activity in related GPCRs, for example the above mentioned olfactory GPCRs. The specific arrangement of seven-transmembrane helices for example is stabilised by molecular interactions, which are conserved among type A receptors and the helix movement model of GPCR activation was proposed on the basis of the study of rhodopsin as well.10 Rhodopsin is expressed in about 125 million rod cells, which are located mainly along the retinal periphery and responsible for detection of rather low levels of ambient light. In order to do so, the outer segments of rods entail up to 1000 rhodopsin filled membrane disks as to maximise the surface area exposed to light. Cones are mostly found in the fovea centralis of the human retina, and do not have such highly specialised cellular structures, since the major role of their three different types of rhodopsin is to enable colour vision at high light levels instead of sensitivity to low levels of light. Olfactory receptors, on the other hand, are expressed in cilia projecting from millions of sensory neurons located in the main olfactory epithelium. Only one kind of receptor is expressed per cell but it is as of yet unclear how expression is regulated. The axon of each odorant receptor is targeted to a particular point in the olfactory bulb, such that all cells expressing the same receptor synapse with one set of interneurons, patched together in glomeruli. The pattern of electric activity in the olfactory bulb reflects which receptors have been stimulated and is therefore unique for every odourant since each odourant activates a certain number of specific receptors to a different extent. Also, most receptors are activated by more than one odourant. This enables the human olfactory system to detect about 10000 odourants, although there are only 350 receptors, at remarkably low concentrations and with high specificity - it can, for example, distinguish between the R- and S-isomer of carvone, a small organic molecule, as peppermint and caraway. Transgenic techniques revealed that the coding sequence of a receptor serves as a label that specifies the matching of olfactory neurons to their target glomeruli. This was done by substituting the coding sequence for one receptor in the gene encoding another. The neurons expressing the modified gene were found to project to glomeruli near those appropriate for the donor protein.11, 12 Olfactory receptors operate in conjunction with the GTP-binding protein G (olf), thus binding of an odourant, usually a small organic molecule of specific shape and stereochemistry, leads to activation of G (olf), by conversion of GTP to GMP. This in turn activates an adenylate cylase, which converts ATP to the second messenger cAMP. cAMP opens a cation-channel, causing influx of Ca 2+ and Na+ ions from the nasal mucous. In addition, calcium activates an ion channel facilitating the efflux of chloride ions out of the cell. The cilium's membrane potential is depolarised by this current flow. If the sensory potential reaches a certain threshold, an action potential is forwarded at the axon. The cell signalling pathway in photoreception shows some similarities, albeit it involves several additional steps. Absorption of light by 11-cis-retinal causes its isomerization into that of all-trans-retinal, and changes rhodopsin into its active form. Activated rhodopsin promotes the exchange of GDP for GTP on hundreds of G protein transducin (G t) molecules, to produce an active, GTP-bound form of G t(. While an olfactory sensation results in the increase of second messenger levels, G t( interacts with the subunits of phosphodiesterase (PDE6), activating the catalytic and subunits, to initiate the hydrolysis of cGMP. A decrease of the cGMP concentration in the rod outer segments (ROS) causes cGMP gated ion channels in the plasma membrane to close. Na+ and Ca2+ ions are prevented from entering the cell and the ROS are depleted of Ca2+ due to the continuous function of the plasma membrane +Na+ -Ca2+/K+ exchanger. This causes a drastic reduction in the circulating current and activates the guanylate-cyclase-activating-protein (GCAP), which is inactive when bound to Ca2+. As the name suggests, GCAP activates guanylate cyclase (GC) that catalyses synthesis of cGMP from GTP supplied be the guanine nucleotide cycle, which comprises guanylate kinase (GK) and nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDPK). Calmodulin loses Ca2+ as well, and dissociates from the cGMP-gated channel, which results in a lower affinity for cGMP.14 Contrarily to all other sensory cells, which produce nerve impulses upon detection of a stimulus, nerve impulses from photoreceptor cells are sent to the brain in the absence of light. So ultimately, the activation of rhodopsin leads to changes in the net production of cGMP and because cGMP levels determine the number of open ion channels, the external light stimulus is converted into a biochemical pathway, leading to hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane and interruption of the nerve impulse.14 Thus it is not surprising that activation of the phototransduction pathway functions in a similar way to inhibition of the olfactory transduction pathway, which leads to rapid desensitisation of olfactory neurons in case of high intensity or prolonged presence of the odourant. As Ca 2+ and cAMP accumulate in the cell, phospodiesterase is activated by Ca 2+ ions, which converts cAMP back to AMP. Furthermore cAMP itself activates protein kinase A, which inhibits further influx of Ca 2+ and Na+ ions by phosporylating crucial residues in the ion channel. Thus the current flow is interrupted.12 Phosphorylation of rhodopsin, on the other hand, is prevented in the absence of light by formation of a recoverin (Rec) - rhodopsin kinase complex. So for the phototransduction process to go full circle, an additional step is needed. It is terminated by the dissociation of Rec from rhodopsin kinase, enabling the latter to phosphorylate activated rhodopsin as a prelude to arrestin binding. As arrestin binds to rhodopsin, the effect on G t is terminated. Finally, the release of all-trans-retinal enables opsin to engage in 11-cis-retinal binding and restoration of rhodopsin's original inactive ground state. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Sensory systems are just as diverse as the multitude of stimuli they have to respond to, yet they share a common goal, that is translation of environmental sensations into signals that can be interpreted in the brain. The senses discussed are thought to have evolved divergently, yet certain common characteristics can be found, which indicates that these shared mechanisms are "as good as it gets". Membrane bound receptors are the primary cellular entities, detecting stimuli, and nerve impulses are the final outcome from all sensory cells. In all cases, ion concentration changes within the cells are essential for generation of an electrical signal. Calcium ions are the ones most widely used either as second messengers to control the action of certain proteins (e.g. in the case of phototransduction) or to directly influence the cellular membrane potential, contributing of the action of sodium, potassium and sometimes chloride ions. Changes in intracellular ion concentrations are either induced directly by mechanically- or voltage-gated ion channels that function as receptors in the case of hearing or sensing of temperature, or require a whole range of biochemical processes. The proteins most commonly involved in cell signalling pathways are G protein coupled receptors, G proteins, adenylate or guanylate cyclases, phosphodiesterases, protein kinases and ultimately second messenger gated ion channels. All sensory systems have some kinds of adaptation and inhibition mechanisms to prevent overstimulation of the central nervous system, and these mechanisms are generally specifically tuned to the stimulus in question. <heading>General References</heading>Augustine, G.J., Fitzpatrick, D., Katz, L.C., LaMantia, A-S., McNamara, J.O., Purves, D. and S.M. Williams (2001) Neuroscience, 2 nd Edition published Sinauer Associates, Inc. Baltimore, D., Berk, A., Darnell, J.E., Lodish, H., Madsudaira, P. and L. Zipursky (2000) Molecular Cell Biology, Chapter 21:951-960, 4 th Edition published W.H. Freeman. Batzler, J., Berger, I., Knöttner, D. and S. Wiesler (2003) Signaltransduktion in Sinneszellen. Universität Heidelberg, Germany.  URL  Berg, J.M., Stryer, L. and J.L. Tymoczko (2002) Biochemistry, Chapter 32:897-915, 5 th Edition published W.H. Freeman. Hudspeth, A.J. and N.K. Logothetis (2000) Sensory systems. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 10, 631-641. <heading>Specific References (in order of appearance)</heading>Clapham D.E., Moran M.M. and H. Xu (2004) TRP ion channels in the nervous system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 14:362-369. Benham, C.D., Davis, J.B. and A.D. Randall (2002) Vanilloid and TRP channels: a family of lipid-gated cation channels. Neuropharmacology 42: 873-888. Hudspeth, A.J. (1997) How hearing happens. Neuron 19: 947-950. Ashmore, J.F. and F. Mammano (2001) Can you still see the cochlea for the molecules? Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 11: 449-454. Sakmar, T.P. (2002) Structure of rhodopsin and the superfamily of seven-helical receptors; the same and not the same. Curr. Opin. Cell. Bio. 14: 189-195. Hatt, H. (2003) Von der Nase bis ins Gehirn: Düfte nehmen Gestalt an. NEUROrubin 2003:13-17, University Bochum, Germany.  URL  Reed, R.R. (2004) After the Holy Grail: Establishing a Molecular Basis for Mammalian Olfaction. Cell 116: 329-336. Abdulaey, N.G., Palczewski K., Ridge, K.D. and M. Sousa (2003) Phototransduction: crystal clear. Trends Biochem. Sci. 28:479-487. Dizhoor, A.M. (2000) Regulation of cGMP synthesis in photoreceptors: role in signal transduction and congenital diseases of the retina. Cell. Signalling 12:711-719. 