'Hello' is the most common way of initiating conversation in the English speaking world. As medical students we are taught how to commence a medical relationship with a patient in great detail. The conclusion of such a relationship, preceding the death of a patient, receives comparatively little attention. How do we say 'goodbye'? The manner in which a doctor frames the human response to human finitude has important consequences for the life-threatened, the terminally ill, their family members and the doctor themselves. The science of thanatology is the study of death and dying, loss and grief. Topics related to thanatology are primarily covered during semester one in the human diversity module. Thanatology includes suicide, euthanasia, bereavement, sudden death and protracted death. Providing a balanced course in thanatology can only be a matter of opinion because it is not possible to cover all of these topics, what is gained in breadth is lost in depth. I found the experience challenging because Death and Dying was taught in five hours over two weeks and I felt that it should have been accorded more time and importance. I feel insufficiently prepared to communicate with the life-threatened or their families and have tried to overcome this inadequacy by exploring the teaching of thanatology to medical students. <enote>Sprang, G and McNeil, J (1995). The many faces of bereavement: the nature of natural, traumatic, and stigmatized grief. New York: Brunner/Mazel inc. </enote>The limited emphasis placed on thanatology at medical schools in Britain has been interpreted by many theorists as symptomatic of the wider population's aversion to discussing matters relating to death. Death over the past 100 years has become increasingly unmentionable in western societies. Death has become invisible and silent. This secularisation has led to post-funeral mourners being left to cope alone during a time of continuing need for support. Doctors have an expected role as humane counsellors for bereaved families. Studies have shown elevated rates of morbidity and mortality and of visits to general practitioners among samples of recently bereaved persons. This pattern is not seen in populations with strong familial networks. In Muslim communities in the United Kingdom the extended family provides a great deal of support for the bereaved. Because of the physical proximity of relatives and the custom of talking through the experience a feeling of loneliness and isolation is less common.  <enote>Aries, P. (1983) The hour of our death. London: Penguin. </enote><enote>Kamerman, J. (1988) Death in the midst of life: social and cultural influences on death, grief and mourning. Englewood cliffs, NJ: Prentice hall. </enote><enote>Gorer, G. (1965) Death, grief and mourning in contemporary Britain. London: Cresset press. </enote><enote>Scambler, G. Dying, death and bereavement; In Sociology as applied to medicine; edited by Scrambler. 4th ed. Chapter 8. UK; Harcourt publishers, (1999). </enote><enote>Bartrop RW et al (1977) Depressed lymphocyte function after bereavement. Lancet 1:834-836. </enote><enote>Schleifer SG et al (1985). Depression and immunity lymphocyte function in ambulatoy depressed patients, hospitalised schizophrenic patients and patients hospitalised for herniorrhaphy. Archives of general psychiatry 42: 129-133. </enote><enote>Qureshi, M J H (1995). Muslim customs surrounding death. BMJ 310: 669a-669. </enote>Ironically for the teaching of thanatology at medical school, the invisibility of death in the twentieth and twenty-first century is substantially due to the fact that since the 1930's and 1940's death has become increasingly hospitalised. In 1990 23% of deaths occurred in people's own homes, and 72% in institutions: 54% in hospitals, 4% in hospices and 14% in nursing or residential homes. Doctors are called upon to officiate at the time of death. However, for some doctors, death is an unacceptable outcome and must be prevented at all costs. It is perceived as the ultimate failure. Often, junior colleagues come to the practice of medicine without having been exposed to death in their own personal lives and this makes the subject even more foreign and difficult. In addition they must take into account the views of the patient and the patients family in often highly charged situations. This leads to the provision of less than an exemplary service. <enote>OPCS (1992). Mortality statistics: general review of the registrar general on death in England and Wales. London: HMSO. </enote><enote>Aries et al (1983) </enote>The education of medical students through the medical school faculty is held to be the most important locus wherein a successful effort will result in improved thanatologic health care delivery. The human diversity module aimed to provide an introduction into the field of thanatology with the Death and Dying lectures. Objectives included; the method of breaking bad news, understanding the speciality of palliative care as contrasted with mainstream medicine and considering the biopsychosocial factors that impact on a persons dying process. The two sessions began with a lecture presented by consultants in palliative care and were followed by discursive group work. This is the standard method of teaching thanatology at British medical schools. However, many doctors state that they were inadequately prepared by their medical schools for the task of caring for dying patients. Doctor's rely more on their own experience than on formal teaching from medical school when dealing with death and bereavement. <enote>Saunderson EMal. (1999) General practitioners' beliefs and attitudes about how to respond to bereavement: Qualitative study. BMJ 1999; 319: 293-296. </enote>Our lived experience, or that of close friends and relatives, is probably one of the most valuable resources, helping us to a more immediate understanding of human illness than any medical textbooks, or even a narrative can. It is difficult to learn about the experience of the doctor's grief reaction to the serious illness and death of a patient without having experienced it. Therefore I suggest it would be very insightful for groups of willing students to visit a hospice. This is especially pertinent considering the 4 year MBChB programme brings students in contact with patients early in the course in order to appreciate the concept of diversity in the population. In western societies the dying are often marginalized and medical students need to be reminded that they must care for people throughout the life course.  <enote>Platt R (1965). Thoughts on teaching medicine. BMJ 1965; 1ii: 551-552. </enote><enote>General Medical Council (1993). Tomorrow's Doctors. General medical council 44 Hallam street, London W1n 6AE </enote>The Oxford international centre for palliative care runs a number of informative and exploratory courses aimed at health care professionals. The theme throughout all of these workshops has been exploring the use of creative arts in the context of dying and death. There are many aspects of the conclusion of a person's life which take on a spiritual dimension. These dimensions are better investigated through art, music and literature than through more formal teaching. A visit to this centre would be beneficial for many medical students by allowing them to see the process of dying in a holistic way and not just as physiological phenomena with associated psychological problems. <enote>Annual report (1999) OICPC. Oxford International centre for palliative care. Oxford: Oxford university press. </enote><enote>Picardie, R. (1998) Before I say goodbye. London; Penguin books. </enote>A ground-breaking course in thanatology is being taught at Harvard medical school. The end-of-life course for first-year medical students pairs them with terminally ill patients for a year. The course, developed by palliative care experts Dr. Susan D. Block and Dr. J. Andrew Billings represents an opportunity for students to integrate their experiences of terminal care into their medical training. This longitudinal approach to the study of end-of-life experiences is what many doctors suggest should be taking place in British universities. This would help many medical students dispel the dread they feel about death, and help them to eliminate the mystery and taboo that surround the conclusion to life. A palliative care educational videotape produced by Emmy-award winning filmmakers Pierre Valette and Bill Jersey has been made about the Harvard Medical School course. The film entitled Ready or Not is a behind-the-scenes portrait of the medical students enrolled on the course. It is 35 minutes in duration and comes complete with a guide for facilitating group discussions about the content of the film. The set of activities require approximately two hours and have been more beneficial to medical students than the type of group discussions that followed the Death and Dying lectures. <enote>Romer Al et al (2001).  URL  </enote> medical school's teaching of thanatology would also be bettered by encouraging students to write their personal reactions to the topics covered in the Death and Dying seminars, which may or may not be shared with others. Free writing is a technique often used in professional education and has been demonstrated to promote personal development, empathy, communication skills, and psychosocial insight. These are vital goals for a medical student to strive towards because a doctor who is self-aware is more likely to be able to identity empathetically with the patients' predicament. The death and dying lectures could cover the topic of intimacy and 'appropriate' distance between doctor and patient. It would be interesting to investigate the differences between friendship and a professional relationship. In conclusion, thanatology is a vital part of the medical curriculum. This is especially because death has become secularised and increasingly hospitalised. This has led to death being surrounded by taboo. Thanatology is underrepresented in many medical course syllabuses in Britain, which I find challenging. Many doctors report feeling under-prepared to deal with end-of-life issues because their medical school training was inadequate. However, this situation can be remedied if medical students are encouraged to visit hospices and interact with people nearing the end of their lives. It is important for medical students, who are tomorrow's doctors to be able to initiate and conclude a relationship with a patient and achieve a sense of closure. In order to absolve themselves of guilt, sadness and anger on the death of a patient doctors need to be able to say ''goodbye''. 