The health secretary, Alan Milburn has vowed to dismantle the ''paternalistic'' culture of the NHS with decision-making being decentralised from Whitehall to the local community.1 The governments proposal to transform all primary care groups into primary care group trusts by 2004 would see them having greater autonomy in setting up initiatives and in overcoming the variability, fragmentation and isolation that have been the weaknesses of primary health care in the NHS.2 Various studies have shown that the association between social class, income, education and health is socially structured, as opposed to randomly distributed throughout the population and they do vary in line with living standards.3 The government has instigated many initiatives to overcome income inequalities in the UK and the health inequalities that are their sequelae. The health inequalities that exist in Godivaville are typical of a town that is socially and economically disadvantaged with high morbidity and mortality rates. To tackle health inequalities it is necessary to accurately assess the variations in health in Godivaville and to look at the distribution of social class and ethnic minority throughout the area. This will give an indication of where resources should be allocated in order to have a maximal impact. The health inequalities that exist today in Godivaville can also be found in other developed countries, for example in the USA 4 and the Netherlands.5 Reasons for especial concern regarding current class inequalities in England are that they are larger than in some other European countries.6 Secondly the class differences in health have been increasing rather than decreasing over the past twenty years and are unparalleled amongst countries examined.7 My fellow local workers and I have been meeting to discuss the various health inequalities in Godivaville. Firstly we have drawn on national research evidence to help us evaluate why health inequalities exist and secondly what can be done to lower them. In 1977 the government set up a working party on inequalities in health chaired by Sir Donald Black, thus the report became known as the Black report and was published in 1980.8 1971 mortality data and the Registrar-Generals measure of social class were used. Deprivation and poverty in the lowest classes, IV and V were shown to be correlated with premature death and lower life expectancy. The report put forward four types of explanation of social class differences in health: artefact, social selection, behavioural/cultural and materialist. In terms of explanations for health inequalities, these categorisations have been developed into a set of considerations regarding the accumulation of exposures to risk factors over the life course.10 The Black report identified materialist explanations as the most significant factor in health inequalities. These include local levels of economic and social deprivation as well as income distribution and psychosocial aspects of employment.10 The Black report was updated under the title 'The Health Divide' in 1992.11 The health gap was shown to have widened even further renewing calls for the prioritisation of health inequalities. The conservative government responded by publishing their white paper The Health of the Nation (1992)12 which emphasised that the responsibility for good health lay with the individual. They did not implement the changes with cost being the main reason stated. In 1997, the New Labour government set up an Independent inquiry into inequalities in Health chaired by Sir Donald Acheson.13 The main findings of the Acheson report (1998) were that health inequalities were due to various risk factors associated with socio-economic position, on an individualistic basis these include dietary choices, the consumption of drugs like tobacco  14 and alcohol and active leisure-time pursuits. On a societal basis, the Acheson report suggested that societies in which a wide gap exists between rich and poor are more prone to social problems such as high rates of violence and other crime. Societal factors influence the individual's health in a series of complex ways which fall within the field of Psychoneuroimmunology, which provides evidence that stress is strongly linked to social relations, employment relations, and conditions of work.15, 16. Richard Wilkinson in his Unhealthy Societies 17 emphasised that the current class inequalities are due to feelings of relative deprivation generated by income inequalities and insecurity of unemployment. Stress is increasingly reported to be associated with immunosuppression 18 and mental health problems. Acheson notes that people with good social networks live longer and are at lower risk of diseases such as coronary heart disease. The most effective way of tackling health inequalities in Britain as a whole and locally in Godivaville is to reduce poverty and income inequalities that subsequently lead to health inequalities. The Black report suggested an increase in social security and a fairer distribution of benefits. The main aim was the abolishment of child poverty. Acheson reiterated the need to reduce income inequalities and reduce poverty. Increased accessibility to healthcare was also recommended with priority given to parents and children. It is important to have a holistic approach to health inequalities because they are inter-linked with other privations. Various organisations within and beyond the NHS must work in tandem. Health action zones (HAZ's) seek to achieve this goal. The primary aim is to specifically improve the health of the least well off. Patient-driven policies are pursued which impart a sense of empowerment and decrease apathy and depression.19, 20. They have an area-based approach and help to build social networks within populations as recommended by Acheson. However, HAZ's have been accused of myopia because they only reach a minority and are therefore limited. HAZ's are still very much a work in progress and represent a long-term financial commitment by running for up to 7 years. I believe that HAZ's in conjunction with other national policies, e.g. the introduction of Health improvement programmes (HimP), will be beneficial because they explicitly address the localities immediate needs. The government has launched 'in cash' and 'in kind' initiatives to decrease poverty. Unemployment is higher in Godivaville than in other towns. With Welfare to work - The New Deal, a range of programmes is in operation to encourage unemployed people to move into work. Special focus has been put on the needs of lone parents who are over-represented in Godivaville compared to national averages. Employment zones aim to help the long term unemployed to improve their employability. For those unable to work 'in kind' services increase the standard of living. The New Deal for communities (NDC) pathfinders tackle social exclusion in the context of the Social Exclusion Unit's report - 'Bringing Britain Together; a national strategy for neighbourhood renewal.21 Money will be targeted at the most deprived areas in order to tackle unemployment, racism and crime and to improve health and create a sense of community. Sure start is a cross-departmental strategy specifically focusing on the health of children (0-4 years) and their families in an attempt to improve their health outlook. This upstream policy aims to prime children so that they thrive when they get to school. Education Action Zones (EAZs), established by the DfEE in 1998 are another upstream policy aiming to help children achieve their full potential in areas of high social and economic deprivation. Concurrent to tackling income inequalities it is vital to increase access to primary healthcare. Problems accessing primary care services tend to be among particular groups for example, the homeless, drug users, refugees, ethnic minorities, and in particular areas; inner cities, sparsely populated rural areas, housing estates in deprived areas. The Social exclusion unit aims to reduce social exclusion faced by people when they experience a combination of linked problems such as unemployment, poverty, poor housing and family breakdown. A detailed knowledge of the problems faced by ethnic minorities is essential because they are found in greater numbers in Godivaville than in other towns. If a large proportion of an ethnic minority delay seeking health care due to language barriers it is the responsibility of the primary care group trust to overcome this health inequality.22,23 It is also vital to address the needs of older people who use the NHS more than any other group. There is evidence to suggest that the disabled and older people may be more vulnerable to the effects of poverty and ill health.24,25 The NHS plan 2000 provides new services including by 2004 a £900 million package of new intermediate services to allow older people to live more independent lives. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This report has discussed some of the theories as to why health inequalities occur. The various national schemes that have been undertaken have suggested poverty and its psychosocial implications are the major cause of health inequalities. Evidence also propounds that the poor have decreased access to primary healthcare. Healthcare inequalities in England are greater than in some other European countries and are increasing. This is worrying because the whole point of setting up the NHS was to deplete healthcare inequalities. The strategies I have suggested should in theory help to reduce the impact of poverty and social exclusion within Godivaville, although longitudinal studies will be needed to gage their effectiveness. 1487 