The existence of free media is often regarded as the practical implementation of freedom of speech - one of the institutions underpinning modern liberal democracies. As Judith Lichtenberg argues in the introduction to Democracy and the Mass Media, media assumes two quite distinct roles in politics: both as a "neutral observer" and as "one of the primary actors on the political scene." The dual role of media in politics is perhaps one of the main features distinguishing the journalist from the political scientist: whilst journalists have an obligation both to stimulate public debate and to accurately report on political events, political scientists must limit themselves to being "neutral" observers without actively intervening in the processes they are studying. The aims of this essay are to explore media treatment of the extended parental leave proposal put forward by the Labour government on 28 February 2005 and to discuss in what ways a journalist's approach to this issue differs from that of a political scientist. <enote>Wheeler, M. (1997) Politics and the Mass Media. Oxford: Blackwell, p.6. </enote><enote>Lichtenberg, J. (1990) "Introduction", in Lichtenberg J. (eds.) Democracy and the Mass Media. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p.1. </enote>The examined media - four national newspapers - all strive to make a distinction between "neutral" news accounts and opinions of particular journalists by separating the paper into different sections. Naturally, descriptive accounts of major political events tend to be quite similar in different newspapers. For instance, extracts 1-3 are almost analogous in terms of factual content, despite being drawn from different sources: all treat Blair's appearance on the Radio 4 show, refer to Hewitt's statements and quote Cridland's expressive use of the word "cripple." Since these three articles all appeared in the News section of their respective newspapers, they do not explicitly reveal any particular stance on the issue: this is the section in which the journalist - similar to the political scientist - should assume the role of the "neutral" observer. The fact that all newspapers essentially tell the same story might imply that the "neutrality" requirement has been met. However, shifting attention to another shared feature - the extensive use of quotes from outside "experts" and interest groups - suggests otherwise. This technique could be regarded as an attempt at what Mark Wheeler refers to as "journalistic professionalism," part of which involves "drawing on alternative sources and presenting rival interpretations... [to] necessarily provide a plurality of opinions." With Wheeler's elucidation in mind, identifying at what point the journalists have all failed in this case becomes a fairly straightforward matter: the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) and the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), both of which are quoted in all three independent newspapers, could be expected to serve very similar interests (those of employers, rather than of families or employees). The Daily Telegraph even quotes a third organisation - the Business Services Association - with interests almost identical to those of BCC and CBI. Unsurprisingly, the representatives for all three organisations firmly disapprove of the proposed policy, and it must be concluded that none of the journalists has really succeeded in representing "a plurality of opinions." This example illustrates how easily journalists may turn a "factual" news account into an argumentative piece of writing, simply by quoting groups or "experts" which are likely to advocate the desired standpoint. In this case, it should be noted that some of the examined newspapers actually do give up space for groups with interests other than those mentioned above: The Independent reports on the activities of Captain America and Fathers4Justice in a small paragraph of the main text, whilst The Daily Telegraph interviews a representative for Maternity Alliance in a side article (extract 4). Despite these attempts, it could hardly be argued that any of the three newspapers has fully succeeded in providing true "plurality of opinions"; for example, none of them has convincingly portrayed the potential benefits of implementing the new policy. In accordance with Wheeler's definition, it is arguable that extract 8 represents a greater degree of "professional journalism" than extracts 1-3 in this sense. In extract 8, two conflicting interest groups - Fathers Direct and CBI - have both been given ample opportunity to comment on the issue, allowing for a wider "plurality of opinions" to be represented. <enote>Wheeler, Politics and the Mass Media. p.7. </enote>In the light of this example, it becomes apparent how a political scientist differs from a journalist in being a "neutral" observer. Whilst an appropriately balanced account of opinions may constitute "neutrality" for a journalist (usually facing stringent time constraints), "neutrality" for a political scientist has to meet significantly higher standards. For instance, a political scientist would not quote statements of interest groups without further interpretation, as this is a practice confined to peer-reviewed work of other scholars. In addition to consulting interest groups or "experts" on new political policies, questioning the public - who is actually affected by the policy - is a popular approach with many journalists, as illustrated in extracts 5-7. The two methods are in many ways similar, and it is arguable that journalists should aim to represent an as wide range of opinions as possible also when consulting the general public, supposing they have the ambition to remain "neutral" observers. However, on comparing extracts 5-7, it becomes obvious that none of the journalists has even attempted to assume that role in this case; just choosing whether to investigate the issue of parental leave by interviewing a "small business owner" or an expecting parent must be deemed a political act in itself. Based on what the journalists have chosen in these extracts alone, it could be inferred that The Daily Telegraph targets business professionals and supporters of capitalist systems, whilst The Independent promotes the interests of those advocating greater social security. Remarkably, this assumption concurs with the general notion of the political position of these two newspapers as centre-right and centre-left respectively., It must be argued, however, that there is a significant danger involved in journalists taking on the role as a political actor in the News section of a newspaper in this way, as this practice tends to confuse the distinction between factual reports and argumentative editorials. Nonetheless, most journalists will probably defend this approach by claiming these real-life "case studies" to be imperative for creating lively and engaging journalism, bearing in mind that the media has an obligation to stir up and stimulate public debate. <enote>Wikipedia. "The Daily Telegraph".  URL . Accessed 24 October 2005. </enote><enote>Wikipedia. "The Independent".  URL . Accessed 24 October 2005. </enote>Similar to the journalist, investigating the opinions of the general public is of significant interest for the political scientist. However, for the political scientist, it is crucial that this can be done without interfering with the objects of study (that is, people's opinions) and that every possible measure is taken to minimise subjectivity. In addition, she would have to ensure that her particular observations actually represent reality. The latter is often accomplished through the use of quantitative analysis (such as random sampling and statistical significance) - procedures which journalists, subject to time constraints, cannot possibly undertake. Following these steps will not result in "objective" accounts, but hopefully provide a more balanced image than the "snapshot" offered by journalists. Whilst journalists may be content with reporting observations, political scientists use them as the basis for scientific analysis. Journalists seldom attempt to carry out any scientific, or even structural, analysis based on their findings. Regularly, however, they use news materials as the groundwork for columns and editorials, where one side of a debate is overtly advocated. A variety of approaches are used to convey the message more convincingly: Thomson (extract 9) uses informal language ("If you decide to chuck it all in...") and addresses her audience (professional women) as "You" to indicate that she is speaking to them directly. Similarly, The Daily Telegraph (extract 10) uses "We" to make the readers feel more involved. Whilst these techniques would be unacceptable in factual news accounts where journalists are meant to be "neutral observers," they are fully tolerable, and even desirable, in this context: this is where the journalist assumes the role as "one of the primary actors on the political scene." Unlike analyses made by political scientists, journalists do not have the pressure to build their arguments from empirical evidence. It is worth noting, however, how journalists sometimes refer to detached sources to boost their credibility. For instance, the editor of The Daily Telegraph refers to "abundant peer-reviewed research" to strengthen her point in extract 11. A political scientist making such a claim must refer back to each of the consulted reports, so that her readers can verify the statement; the journalist, on the other hand, has no such obligation. Although most newspapers attempt to make a clear-cut distinction between factual and editorial material, this investigation has shown that they often fail to do so in reality. A majority of the examined newspapers had adopted a one-sided stance when reporting on the issue of extended maternity leave even in the reported accounts, failing to represent a true "plurality of opinions." Thus, whilst most newspapers indeed serve their role as a powerful political actor, it must be questioned whether they live up to the role of being "neutral observers." Although a journalist cannot be expected to attain the same degree of "neutrality" as a political scientist, more balanced accounts would evidently be desirable. 