Trade union representation in the workplace is currently being debated in France as some union confederations, namely the CGT and CFDT, and employers question the existing framework of representation in the light of whether it weakens trade union legitimacy in the workplace (Hege 2000). This is an important topic because workplace legitimacy may help increase support for the unions and encourage collective bargaining that is more effective. Trade union support tends to be measured by membership levels, which are low in France (Visser 2000). It is difficult, however, to use this measurement as a reflection of union support as incentives to join a trade union are low. Firstly, the presumed representative status of the main union confederations means that workers, members and non-members, will benefit from collective agreements. Secondly, workers perceive that state intervention will bring about improvements in working conditions rather than collective bargaining (Milner 1999). This is just one example of an ambiguous interpretation of union influence which, in this case, leads to an underestimation (Jeffreys 1996b). It is important to look beyond these simplistic measures, therefore, and this essay will consider the appropriateness of using measures of elected union representatives as a reflection of union support or influence. This essay will discuss in detail whether there has been a reduction in elected union representatives, where these representatives are dominant and how this reflects union organisation rather than influence. Union influence, meaning and measurement will be analysed. The relative roles and duties of representatives (Visser 2000) are not detailed, and analysis will focus mainly on comits d'entreprise as current data is more widely available. This essay will argue that assumptions of a reduction in elected union representatives and a decline in union influence are contestable and measurements are difficult. Furthermore, a decline in elected union representatives, in isolation, would more accurately reflect union organisational weaknesses, rather than a decline in influence. Comits d'entreprise, compulsory in companies with more than fifty employees and dlgus du personnel, compulsory in companies with more than ten employees are subject to workplace elections. In 1994 the latter existed in only 37.8 per cent of workplaces (INSEE 1998) and the former covered around 5.5 million of 14 million private sector employees in 1998 (Dufour 2000). Representative structures are associated with larger firms (Milner 1999) and, more importantly, unionised firms suggesting a link between union presence and the establishment of representative structures (DARES 1998). In fact, Dufour (1998a) indicates that 'low union affiliation might...be a threat to the very functioning of the representative bodies elected by the workers'. Hence, an initial unveiling of one form of trade union influence upon the workplace and workers and an indication of low levels of union organisation in small and medium sized workplaces. Overall, elected union representatives from the five main confederations did decline from 1981-1993 in the private sector, benefiting the non-union candidate. Yet, analysing the confederations individually from 1981-1995 the CFDT, CFTC, CGT-FO and CFE-CGC experienced either gains in votes or relative stability and the other unions made gains until 1993. The CGT vote declined consistently from 1971 but in 1995, this decline levelled off (Visser 2000). Non-union candidates, therefore, have gained support at the expense of the CGT. Interpreting this decline as a decline in support for the trade union should, however, be treated with caution. Although it could be argued that the loss of support for the CGT reflects disaffection of workers due to the ideological commitments of the union, it could also be argued that with the CGT, as with the other confederations, the decline or relative stagnation of elected union representation could be attributed to the lack of emphasis placed on organisation and representation within the workplace. Firstly, from the traditional desire from both trade unions and employers to neutralise the workplace as a place for bargaining (Eyraud and Tchobanian 1985). Secondly, from the administrative overburdening of unions, with scarce resources, particularly since the Auroux laws (Goetschy and Jobert 1998) and thirdly, from the concentration of 'activists in state-constructed bureaucratic function' (Jeffreys 1996b: 509). These factors will have affected both the unions' ability to organise and their commitment to organising in the workplace. The bulk of non-union representatives elected onto comits d'entreprises and into dlgus du personnel positions are in small and medium sized firms. In 1995 the five main confederations polled 81.4 per cent of votes for comits d'entreprise elections in firms with 1000 employees or more whilst the non-union vote was 6.4 per cent. In firms with 50 to 99 employees the non-union vote was 63 per cent and the five main confederations together polled only 33.4 per cent of the votes. This pattern of voting was similar for dlgus du personnel elections (DARES 1998). This evidence indicates the strength of unions in representation structures within larger firms but not necessarily the lack of influence in smaller firms, as there are significant obstacles to gaining a complete, accurate presentation of union support in the workplace. The 'ideological commitment' of activists within firms affecting commitment to membership recruitment, the fact that some union members will stand for comits d'entreprise elections as individuals, not as union representatives, and the willingness of non-members to take action (Jeffreys 1996b) are important considerations if we are to attempt to assess union influence in relation to elected union representatives, particularly in smaller firms. Furthermore, recent evidence on comits d'entreprise elections shows that the non-union vote has actually declined as 'non-union candidates...(see) their gains made over the last 20 years checked' losing 'considerable ground to the major union confederations in the smallest companies' (Dufour 1998b). The recent publication of the 1998 comits d'entreprises results supports this view and reveals that the CFDT has been particularly successful in smaller workplaces (Dufour 2000). Thus, since 1995 there has been an overall reduction in support for elected non-union representatives and the main confederations have managed to recapture lost ground, whilst acknowledging that non-union representatives still take up a large proportion of positions (Jeffreys 1996b). The 'joint drive for unionisation in companies' launched by CGT and CFDT (Rehfeldt 1999) in 1998 is manifest, in this instance, as unions gain support in workplaces through greater organisation and a focus on membership as a means to strengthening trade union representation in the workplace. Lack of trade union organisation in areas of the private sector rather than a very limited interpretation of influence is apparent. It is too simplistic to suggest that the identification of a recent increase in support for elected union representatives reflects an increase in union influence or vice versa. A wider interpretation of influence is necessary. The number of elected union representatives is only one of many potential quantitative measures of union influence. Other quantitative measures include membership density, the number of collective agreements signed, strike levels, the amount of legislation supporting trade unions and electoral participation at industrial tribunals. Boulin (1996) suggests that with the increase of company level collective bargaining 'trade union influence should perhaps be measured by the number of agreements signed rather than by the level of labour unrest, which is continuing to fall'. With the introduction of mandating and the two Aubry laws on the reduction of working time, there has certainly been an increase in company level collective bargaining, particularly in SMEs (Bilous 2000). It is argued, moreover, that this better reflects union organization. Besides, the level of labour unrest should not be discounted as a measure of union influence, as will be evidenced below. Jeffreys (1996b: 516) states that 'influence of French unions must be measured not merely by their membership but also their audience'. This audience is measured at industrial tribunal elections and elections for comites d'entreprise thus suggesting that workplace elections do provide a valuable measure of union influence. However, election participation has fallen and results should be interpreted with caution (Dufour 1998a). Accuracy of election data is disputed and there are lengthy time delays of reporting elections results (Dufour 2000). Thus, further evidence supporting the utilisation of other measures to provide a more accurate reflection of union influence. Besides, weak organisation in the workplace should be considered alongside influence since 'non-union lists (are) being put together in the absence of anyone ready to organise a union one' (Labb, 1994 cited in Jeffreys 1996b: 518). Labb (1994) also notes that if union lists are organised they usually win, further implying that indicators of elected union representatives reflect the relative organisation of unions rather than a very limited interpretation of influence. Hence, setting aside elected representatives, how should union influence be interpreted? Union influence can be explained in terms of influence on workers, employers and governments. Firstly, influence on workers is manifest in the unions' ability to mobilise. Jeffreys (1996a: 19) indicates that the strikes of 1995 proved that unions were able to mobilise workers on a large scale despite an environment unfavourable to collective action. The failure of this strike action was, however, that non-members were willing to take action but there was a desperate need of organization by the unions in the private sector 'where trade unionism has effectively disappeared'. The introduction of working time regulation in June 1998 and January 2000 has provoked a significant amount unrest (Husson 1999) which demonstrates that, if reflected in the level of industrial conflict, union influence is not in decline. Secondly, a measure of the influence on employers is the ability of the unions to bring about change in company strategy, through, for instance, industrial action. For example, strike action by the CGT and SUD over the reduction of working time in the post-office impelled management to re-negotiate future plans on job creation (Husson 1999). Another recent example involving strike action by security guards that 'began to disrupt the entire economic chain' lead to significant concessions made by employers, although the intervention of the government was significant in this case (EIRO 2000). Union influence on employers is ambiguous, as employers in the private sector, particularly in SMEs, have been able to by-pass unions due to their organizational weakness (Bridgford 1990). Yet, where unions are strong they are able to exert pressure on management and motivate workers to mobilise, as evidenced above. With the aforementioned unity of the CGT and CFDT, influence on employers, through increased membership, organization and trade union solidarity, may be strengthened. Thirdly, union influence on government is apparent from legislative measures supporting the trade union movement, regardless of the outcomes; the involvement of the unions in welfare bodies and the consultation of unions in government policy formulation (Goetschy and Jobert 1998). The government tends to recognize trade unions as important. Firstly, because of a tradition of state interventionism, governments have encouraged 'social dialogue between capital and labour' (Goetschy 1998). Hence, the involvement of the unions. Secondly, the unions' ability to mobilise workers can disrupt effective management of the economy thus inciting the French government to intervene and provide the unions with a role. Although the institutionalization of unions by various governments has lead to suggestions that the unions have abandoned the workers in favour of influence at the top (Milner 1999), if unions were to look towards the shopfloor and increase organization, there would be significant scope for enhanced influence in the workplace and beyond, through more active use of representation structures, supported by an established role at national level. We may deduce, from this discussion, that arguments over union influence are limited if only certain measures are utilized. Besides, if measures are used in an attempt to reflect union influence they should incorporate the current level of union organization. It is apparent from the evidence presented above that there has been a reduction in the number of elected union representatives within the French workplace but this reduction ceased in 1995 and we have subsequently seen an increase in support for elected union representatives. However, a reduction, or increase, should not be interpreted in isolation as a decline or increase in union influence. Union organisation and representation in the workplace has tended to be weak as the unions have focused on setting minimum standards at national or sectoral level. Resources have been devoted at these higher levels thus limiting organisation in the workplace. Trade unions and employers, for different ideological reasons, have been committed to neutralising the firm as a level for bargaining and anti-unionism by employers has negatively affected trade union representation at company level (Boulin 1996). Thus, the evidence presented above on the halt of non-union representative gains in elections shows us that trade unions have perhaps recognised their weaknesses and are realigning their focus to membership and increasing the legitimacy of trade unions in the workplace (Hege 2000). This focus is showing signs of success, bearing in mind the constantly changing environment facing the trade unions, and brings to light the conclusion that the past reduction in union representatives reflects more a lack of organisation of trade unions rather than a narrow interpretation of influence. The measurement of union influence is complex and ambiguous and the relative level of elected union representatives is not a sufficient measure in isolation. It is acknowledged that the weakness of this argument lies in the difficult interpretation of union influence and the complex measurement and interpretation of a relative decline or increase. 