<heading>Introduction</heading>The debate on the 'knowledge economy' has intensified in recent years as the ideas and concepts associated with the debate have become the subject of government policy making, management strategies and academic texts (Bradley 2000:114). There have been discussions on changes in the nature if capitalism, work, education and leisure without any seriously critical examination (Hull 2000). Thus, the endorsement of these concepts and ideas by certain governments, for instance, the UK's New Labour government, is a cause for concern. This essay will examine recent literature on the knowledge economy and discuss, firstly, varying definitions and interpretations of the knowledge economy and related ideas. Whilst focusing on recent literature, analysis will inevitably acknowledge more dated theories and concepts as there have been major similarities of discourse within the relevant literature over time. Secondly, a more detailed discussion on whether the 'rise' of the 'knowledge economy' reflects fundamental changes in the nature of capitalism and work. It will be argued, in agreement with sceptics of knowledge economy (Webster 1995; Lyon 1994; Warhurst and Thompson 1998; Hull 2000; May 2000), that there is insufficient evidence of fundamental changes in the nature of capitalism and work in the so-called knowledge economy. The 'utopian' societies envisioned by Drucker (1993), Leadbeater (1999), Hodgson (1999), Giddens (2000) and Burton-Jones (1999) are based on contestable assumptions and are, to say the least, idealistic. Their interest lies in 'the sweeping statement, popular slogan and digestible knowledge gobbit, regardless of how inconsistent with or embedded in existing bodies of knowledge' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:20). Whilst a sceptical stance of the assumed shifts in the nature of capitalism and work is maintained throughout, it is accepted that major advances in technology have altered certain characteristics of society and work and the potential for experiencing the ideals of the knowledge economy exists. However, the barriers to achieving these ideals are fundamental and ever present and it is argued that this fact aptly reflects continuity in the nature of capitalism and work. <heading>'Knowledge economy', 'new economy', 'information society'... </heading>The question 'what is the knowledge economy?' is fundamental to this discussion as the interpretation of this concept will reduce ambiguity. Numerous terms, definitions and phrases have been coined in an attempt to capture and assess the continuing advances in technology and the resulting reorganisation of world economies, from, for example, manufacturing sectors to service and 'knowledge' sectors. Examples of these terms include the 'information society', 'knowledge-based economy', 'weightless economy', 'new economy' (Leadbeater 1999), 'global knowledge capitalism' (Burton-Jones 1999), 'post-capitalist society' (Drucker 1993) and, more interestingly, the 'brainpower era' (Thurow 1997). It is important to note that the concepts underlying these ideas are not new as Schumpeter's notion of the 'fifth Kondratiev', Malchup's 'information society' and Bell's notion of 'post-industrial societies' make evident (Noon and Blyton 1997). Furthermore, notions of a knowledge economy are related to discussions on 'flexible specialisation' (Piore and Sabel 1984), 'post-Fordism' and the regulationist concept of 'neo-Fordism' as each of these delineates a form of change related to the crisis of manufacturing in the 1970s and persistant advances in new technology (Amin 1994). Yet, it is acknowledged that these concepts are related, not interchangeable. For instance, Giddens (2000:69,79) indicates that the 'knowledge economy' reflects the dominance of dynamic 'knowledge' sectors such as finance, computers and software, telecommunications, biotechnology and the communications industries, where highly skilled, flexible 'wired workers' are employed within collaborative small business networks in an entrepreneurial culture. Curry (1993), on the other hand, suggests that the 'new economy', a related term, is based on smaller firms, industrial districts, flexible firm strategies and production networks and flexible technology, which echoes the flexible specialisation thesis (Piore and Sabel 1984). Thus, the emphasis of the 'knowledge economy' literature tends to be service and 'knowledge sectors' whereas the flexible specialisation thesis is primarily centred on manufacturing (Hyman 1991). It is argued that an analysis that combines these two approaches will emphasise that commodity production continues to be important and, more broadly that 'manufacturing matters' (Coher and Zysman 1986). Thus, answers to the question 'what is the knowledge economy?' are multifarious and the term is ambiguous. The term, in this instance, will be used to represent theories that assume 'a radical break from the past' and reject 'analysis based on a capitalist mode of production in favour of ahistorical and conservative 'industrial society' expositions' (Pollert 1988:42; 1991). Whilst a simple definition is not provided here, the scope of this essay is implicit within the above discussion. <fnote>As cited in Christopher May's review of Charles Leadbeater's Living on Thin Air:The New Economy (1999) in New Political Economy </fnote><heading>Rise of the 'knowledge economy'</heading>The knowledge economy is 'well on the way to being all-conquering' (Giddens 2000:69) with 'knowledge fast becoming the one factor of production, sidelining both capital and labour' (Drucker 1993:18). In addition, growth of technology stocks in the US, the increasing demand for adult education courses and the 'free agent nation' symbolise the importance of knowledge in the economy and 'individuals are finding a wealth of new opportunities to develop and exploit their own knowledge capital' (Burton-Jones 1999:221). These pronouncements and others (Leadbeater 1999, Hodgson 1999) are simplistic generalisations and are based on assumptions of profound changes in the nature of capitalism and work. Prior to a more detailed analysis of these changes and discussion of these criticisms, it is worth noting that the appeal of the above academic rhetoric and management discourse is evident in government reports in the UK, for example, a recent report entitled 'Opportunity and skills in the knowledge-driven economy' (DfEE 2000). The presumed existence of a 'knowledge-driven economy', is interesting as Finegold and Soskice (1988) maintain that the UK is driven by a 'low skill equilibrium' based on minimum training and low skilled employment. Moreover, a 'general low level demand for skill reinforced by structural characteristics of the economy' (Bradley 2000:129) suggests that assumptions of changes in capitalism and, more specifically work, should be regarded with caution. The issue of work and skill in the knowledge economy is discussed further below but firstly, a detailed analysis of 'changes' in the nature of capitalism. <heading>Changes in the nature of Capitalism </heading>In recent literature advocating the rise of the 'knowledge economy', fundamental changes in the nature of capitalism are made explicit. The 'post-capitalist society' (Drucker 1993; Leadbeater 1999) is the most extreme of these proclamations and is rejected as a misinterpretation of the fundamental nature of capitalism. As Thurow (1997:326) suggests, 'capitalism cannot self-destruct' and notions of a post-capitalist society imply that the features of capitalism, 'the primacy of market criteria, commodity production, wage labour, private ownership and corporate organisation' (Webster 1995:161) have been radically altered. These features of capitalism are discussed separately below. <heading>Market criteria</heading>The primacy of the market is axiomatic and 'the market principle has been extended into almost every walk of life' (Hutton 1995:12). By way of illustration, the deregulation of financial markets in advanced economies, particularly in the US and UK has lead to a 'finance-led marketization or commodification of the world economy' (Cerny 1997: 173). The increasing primacy of international financial markets engenders the maximisation of shareholder returns and this is presented as a fundamental impediment to the development of the ideal, or all-encompassing, knowledge economy. It is argued that management focus on shareholder returns leads to shorter payback periods on investment and growing 'tensions between financial globalisation and the requirements of production and trade' (1997:174). In the so-called knowledge economy long-term investment in education, learning and skills is implicit as building a knowledge base 'will release the full potential of the information economy' (Giddens 2000:73). Yet, the assumption that firms will invest for the long-term is contestable, as the returns on human capital investment will be indiscernible to shareholders. It could be argued that part of the responsibility of building a knowledge base lies with government. However, the UK government maintains an ambivalent position and has decided not to intervene with 'a stronger statutory framework or obligation on employers to train' believing that 'in the a modern economy, we must look at a more imaginative set of levers that help ensure employers make the right decisions about the importance of skills and developing people to their business (DfEE 2000:13). The driving forces of Leadbeater's (1999:14) 'new economy' are 'finance, knowledge and social capital' and with an emphasis on finance it is apparent that the knowledge economy is and will be limited and based on short-termism. By way of illustration, the volatility of the high technology market has been evidenced recently and the down-turn in the economy was particularly sharp for companies in the high-tech industries, rather than in the so-called old economy (Financial Times 2001). It is clear that high-technology companies are unstable and more contingent on the vagaries of the market than 'old economy' firms. If this feature of the knowledge economy increases, it will reflect an intensification of the primacy of the market and, moreover, capitalism. <heading>Commodity Production</heading>Regarding commodity production, Piore and Sabel (1984) argue that there has been a crisis of mass production and that flexible specialisation is emerging in its place. The end of mass commodity markets and production is contestable (Williams 1987) and an 'insatiable demand for consumer electronics' supports this assertion (Noon and Blyton 1997:113). It is argued that a new form of mass market has emerged with 'the fragmentation of style rather than any real 'paradigmatic' or fundamental change in consumption which implies a change in production' (Curry 1993:108). Furthermore, it appears that mass commodity production and Fordist labour processes are still evident (Murray 1987; Amin and Malmberg 1994:233) but production is being relocated to non-western countries to allow advanced economies to concentrate on developing high-technology, knowledge sectors (Giddens 2000). This is a highly contentious issue and has lead to suggestions of an international division of labour (Thurow 1997:78) which is evidence of capitalist development towards increasing inequality on a global scale (May 2000; Persaud 2001). Thus, the idea that flexible specialisation and the knowledge economy are generalised trends 'obscures the real processes of capitalist development' and, in this instance, commodity production (Curry 1993:118). Hence, theorists supporting shifts in the nature of capitalism are 'merely apologists for the continuing exploitation of the poor in the global capitalist system' (Hull 2000: 148). In advanced economies, therefore, high technology manufacturing industries constitute 'a declining minority of employment' (Hyman 1991:272) and it is evident that these firms 'are capitalist and locked into the imperatives of capitalist accumulation' (Curry 1993:119). Furthermore, the commodification of and production of knowledge is manifest with the emergence of companies such as Hyperknowledge, a consultancy firm who provide 'a variety of software and services enabling organisations to extract, search and share, intuitive knowledge from a variety of sources such as people's mind's'(my italics) . <fnote>Cited in Hyperknowledge company brochure. The firm's clients include NASA, Cisco systems and Vodafone Air Touch. Website  URL . </fnote><heading>Wage Labour</heading>The knowledge economy, according to Hodgson (1999) and Burton-Jones (1999), changes the nature of the employment relationship towards increased workers control of the labour process and the firm. Related to this, Hodgson argues that, although the employer still owns the means of production, capitalist wage labour ceases to exist as the workers' labour-time is 'sold' in a different manner (Hull 2000). It is interesting to note that finding evidence to support this notion is difficult. A change in the employment relationship may exist for an elite of knowledge workers where 'management and investors have had increasingly to share at least some of their power with the creators of intellectual property, the men and women whose knowledge and ideas fuel the high-technology information technology society' (Rifkin 1995:175). Yet, even these knowledge workers are subjected to capital exploitation in the form of surplus value as employers seek to profit from their labour (Hull 2000). Furthermore, it is argued that knowledge workers, rather than being the privileged elite in the workplace, are either 'embedded in the corporate bureaucracy' with 'the fruits of their knowledge captured in silicon and sold by the corporation as a commodity' (Coher and Zysman 1986:260) or engaged in precarious, insecure forms of employment (Warhurst and Thompson 1998). The experience of work and knowledge workers is discussed in detail below. <heading>Private Ownership and Corporate Organisation</heading>It is evident that private ownership and corporate organisation continue to dominate in contemporary capitalism. For instance, the 'knowledge economy' is based on high-technology small firms and business networks in the private sector (Burton-Jones 1999; Giddens 2000:79) and evidence of growth in the small business sector is suggested as an indicator of a knowledge-based economy or 'knowledge capitalism'. Yet, this simplistic conclusion neglects two important factors. Firstly, in relation to the flexible specialisation thesis, Hyman (1991:260) notes that small businesses are 'characteristically precarious, and dependent on a subordinate relationship with large-scale capital'. This is evident in Japan where large firms hold onto a more secure market position by subcontracting to smaller firms (Murray 1987). The trend towards subcontracting and, to use another example, outsourcing, allows larger firms to 'take advantage of both functional and numerical flexibility' (1987:91) relieving them of the responsibility of expensive knowledge workers and, at the same time, benefiting from their knowledge. Secondly, 'the centrality of multinational conglomerates is increasing and particularly in the most technologically dynamic sectors of the economy' (Hyman 1991:266). This indicates that a knowledge economy based on the devolution of power or decentralisation of organisations is ambiguous and alongside a concentration of private ownership, continuity in the nature of capitalism is discernible. The assertion that 'knowledge capitalism is the most powerful creative force we have yet developed to make people better off' (Leadbeater 1999:10) is somewhat weakened by the preceding discussion as requisite changes in the nature of capitalism are not apparent. It is acknowledged that people are 'better off', in monetary terms, but this is restricted to a minority of the workforce. For the majority it appears that capitalism continues to reflect the primacy and intensification of the market principle, widening inequality, control of the means of production by large corporations, 'commodity fetishism' and trends towards precarious forms of employment in the labour market. It is somewhat ironic that a 'paradigm of the knowledge economy's success' is Silicon Valley (Hull 2000:146) as this model provides a neat example of capitalist continuity. The business networks, high technology firms and knowledge workers in Silicon Valley (Amin and Malmberg 1994:233) suggest a successful transition to a knowledge economy. Yet, regarding the large number of workers in the supporting service sector 'the knowledge economy looks little different to previous modes of economic organisation' (Hull 2000:146). The 'success' of Silicon Valley and other models, including the 'Third Italy', Baden-Wurttemberg and the M4 corridor (Amin and Malmberg 1994:230) is limited as firms and 'knowledge workers' within these models are still subject to the vagaries of capitalist accumulation. Firstly, employees do not own their companies, which tend to be multinationals and, if workers have a shareholding in their company, their influence is presumably marginal. Secondly, companies objectives continue to be focused on the creation of shareholder value which is increasingly being created through the commodification of knowledge as this reduces risk, in the form of knowledge workers' knowledge monopoly. Thirdly, the increasing precarity of the labour market and the demand for flexibility of employment signifies that 'the right to hire and fire remains an important prerogative of management' and emphasises the 'constant reality of labour against capital' (Curry 1993:101) Thus, there have been inadequate changes in the nature of capitalism for societies to fully benefit from and experience the ideals of the so-called knowledge economy and this rise of knowledge discourse and advances in technology do not sufficiently reflect major changes in the nature of capitalism. <heading>Changes in the nature of Work</heading>The knowledge economy literature tends to argue that, in developed countries, there is a growing trend towards work in knowledge sectors as manufacturing labour declines due to technological developments, the service sector grows and the demand for knowledge work increases (Giddens 2000; Leadbeater 1999:10,14,110). This is an outcome of technological advances in the production of goods and information technology where the 'sources of competitive advantage - innovation, design, branding, know-how - are at work in all industries from retailing and agriculture to banking and software' (Leadbeater 1999:10). It is acknowledged that technology and, more specifically, information technology and automated production processes play a more integral part in work practice (Webster 1995) and that technical and professional workers such as scientists, engineers, consultants and marketeers form a large occupational group (Warhurst and Thompson 1998). However, this should not be regarded as confirmation of an encompassing growth in knowledge work, 'wired workers' or positive changes in the nature of work. The arguments to support this assertion are discussed below. In a knowledge economy it is suggested that there is a growing demand for highly skilled workers and that to succeed in the new economy, workers must be better educated, highly skilled, and adaptable (Leadbeater 1999). However, these assumptions are based on insubstantial trends and evidence and, in fact, evidence to the contrary is very persuasive. Regarding the demand for high-skilled labour, Rifkin (1995) argues that there are a shrinking numbers of jobs in manufacturing, services and agriculture and that the few jobs being created in the knowledge sector are too specialist to employ displaced labour with 'the hope of being retrained or schooled for a new job in the elite knowledge sector painfully out of reach' (1995:37). It is argued that in the knowledge economy 'growth has occurred not in knowledge work but in low-paid donkey work of serving, cleaning, waiting and helping in the private health and care services, as well as hospitality industries' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:5). Thus, the demand for knowledge workers is presumably limited to existing specialist and professional sectors and whilst evidence suggests these sectors are expanding, it is too simplistic to assume that the jobs created have a substantive knowledge content as 'jobs commonly retain a low-skill character, especially in the fastest growing sectors' (Bradley 2000:129). Moreover, incidences of more highly educated workers 'does not necessarily indicate a higher level of knowledge in jobs' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:4) as, for instance, evidence suggests that in 'banks, supermarkets and offices, the introduction of microelectronic technology is typically associated with the routinization and intensification of labour' (Hyman 1991:267). In addition, the contingent nature of skill definition and demand (Noon and Blyton 1997) and the tendency to 'relabel job titles' (Warhurst and Thompson 1997:4) makes analysis of skills supply and demand ambiguous. It is interesting to note that in Britain managers tend to 'redefine their skill needs away from craft to semi-killed labour' and a significant reason for this is managements' mistrust of labour (1998:8). Therefore, whilst acknowledging that it is not a general process, as Braverman argues, deskilling is evident in the 'information society' (Lyon 1994). Flexible employment is important in the knowledge economy and this argument leads to a contradiction within the related literature (Hull 2000). In the new economy 'knowledge workers' or 'symbolic analysts' will be owners of their companies, through shareholdings, and will experience greater autonomy (Leadbeater 1999). However, at the same time 'flexibility will be taken for granted' (1999:80) and companies will employ contract employees 'embedded in flexible networks, rising to each new challenge with a different constellation of knowledge-based workers' (1999:146). The contradiction is clear and evidence indicates that these workers are not experiencing 'operational autonomy' as they are controlled through 'performance related pay and promotion systems in which targets attained determine salary levels and career trajectories' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:13). Thurow (1997:16) has noted that, if companies' are seeking to gain competitive advantage from knowledge, they 'should be integrating their skilled workforce ever more tightly into their organisations' and this discredits the notion that flexibility of employment and the 'free agent nation' will lead to a successful knowledge economy. Moreover, flexible knowledge workers tend to be the victims of downsizing, subcontracting and contingent contracts and would 'happily return to secure employment' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:20). It is argued that flexible employment within manufacturing, for instance, promotes dual labour markets and insecurity and 'the split between core and periphery workers is no longer a problem but an opportunity' (Curry 1993:10,11). Furthermore, if 'the degree of insecurity in employment depresses the level of skill' (Bradley 2000:120), the notion of up-skilling as a feature of flexible specialisation and the knowledge economy is called into question. Thus, flexibility of employment not only reflects increasing insecurity and precarity of employment in non-knowledge sectors but it is a concern for workers within knowledge sectors. In the new economy the assumption of flatter organisation structures with increased co-ordination and teamworking (Leadbeater 1999) is based on the premise that workplaces are essentially non-conflcitual and harmonious (Pollert 1988). Yet, in conjunction with the preceding evidence, the organisational hierarchy continues to dominate, despite modern technology (Thurow 1997) and the workplace 'is still recognisable for the vast majority who too often remain poorly motivated, overworked and undervalued' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:19). These accounts are notably pessimistic, but the espoused shifts in the nature of work should be located in their social, political and economic context. By way of illustration, the institutions able to redress the balance of power in the workplace, namely trade unions, have been weakened in many advanced economies and are finding the penetration of new companies increasingly difficult. It is argued that employment in new companies in the expanding knowledge sectors is regarded as being immune to and a move away from the exploitation witnessed in the traditional factory. Yet, if the call centre is to be regarded as part of the rise of the new economy, it is evident that workers experience little 'autonomy to try and fail' as Leadbeater (1999:83) suggests and the exploitation evidenced by the TUC report on call centres demonstrates that not all companies in the knowledge economy 'resemble clubs' (TUC 2001). In wider terms, Elger (1991) notes the most important trend evident in all sectors is that people are working harder. Thus, predictions that information technology and technological advancement would lead to an increase in leisure time appear increasingly out of touch, particularly in the UK where the long-hours culture is widely experienced (Arrowsmith 2001). Thus, evidence of changes in the nature of work advocated in the knowledge economy literature is ambiguous and it is argued that, despite suggestions that 'knowledge is the only source of long-run sustainable competitive advantage' (Thurow 1997:74) there have not been fundamental changes in the nature of work, at least for the majority of the workforce. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The rise of the 'knowledge economy' does not reflect fundamental changes in the nature of capitalism and work. It is argued here that the form of knowledge economy apparent in many developed nations signifies continuity, if not an intensification of contemporary capitalism (May 2000). Polarisation of skills, global inequality, increasing precarity and insecurity in the labour market reflect novel forms of organisation of employment within a relatively consistent system of capitalist accumulation. The rise of the knowledge economy has lead to shifts in the organisation of work, as high-technology automation and information technologies are more widely integrated into advanced economies. Evidence that manufacturing jobs are decreasing and the decline in manual labour is seen as confirmation that we are witnessing a shift in the nature of work. Yet, the shift from the factory to the office does not represent the eradication of exploitation and surplus value, or the existence of a post-capitalist society. The implications of these conclusions are firstly, that governments' implementation of policies to improve education and develop skills in a knowledge-based economy is premature considering that the changes in the nature of capitalism and work needed for these policies to be effective are not visible and evidence of the rise of the knowledge economy neglects widening global inequality and the deterioration of conditions of employment for the majority of the workforce. Furthermore, it is argued that the primacy of capitalist accumulation and shareholder value would need to be significantly moderated in order for the rise of the knowledge economy to reflect fundamental, positive changes in the nature of capitalism and work. It is acknowledged that generalisations of the rise and existence of the knowledge economy in advanced economies limits the arguments presented. There are relatively distinct models of capitalism and some European countries experience less inequality as stronger institutions and less emphasis on the market foster a social market economy (Cerny 1997). Yet, it is argued that trends towards the knowledge economy discussed above are generalisable to a certain extent as countries are becoming increasingly exposed to international markets and this is destabilising social market economies and their institutions. A further limitation of the analysis is the ambiguity of terms and variety of theories that are associated with the knowledge economy. Subsequently the wide and complex set of literature on the concept of the knowledge economy and knowledge itself are not fully represented in the preceding discussion. 