<heading>Introduction</heading>This essay sets out to look at the Heckscher-Ohlin model which is a model of international trade developed by Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin in the 1920s. One important result of the model is the factor-price equalization theorem, which will be explained in the essay. However, this theorem makes no assumption about demand conditions. Therefore, this essay will continue to look at different demand conditions in countries and see whether the factor-price equalization theorem holds. <heading>Heckscher-Ohlin Model</heading>The Heckscher-Ohlin model is a 2x2x2 model where there are two countries (H and F), two factors (labour and capital) and two goods (X and Y). Both countries have identical production functions which are constant returns to scale. There are fixed total supplies of labour and capital which are fully employed. These factors flow between industries in a country but do not flow between countries. In all markets including factor markets, there is perfect competition. There is no distortion in all markets such as government interventions. While marginal rate of substitution is independent on scale of consumption, the model expands to allow for trade by assuming that people in both countries demand both goods and tastes preferences are same in both countries. Most importantly, the relative endowments of factors of production of both countries are different. Relative endowments are defined in terms of the ratios between capital stocks and the labour forces in the two countries.  FORMULA  (1.1) In equation 1.1, country H is relatively capital-abundant and labour-scarce because it has a higher capital-labour ratio while country F is relatively labour-abundant and capital-scarce. The Heckscher-Ohlin model assumes private ownership of capital. Owners of capital earn rents, r, while labour receives wages, w. Cost is minimized for production at w/r. Therefore, if both industries face the same relative factor payments w/r, then the industries will choose their factor mixes such that  FORMULA  (1.2) Similarly, (w/r)y > (w/r)x. As w increases relative to r, producers will be willing to use more labour for production and in equation 1.2, good Y is relatively capital-intensive and good X is relatively labour-intensive because the capital-labour ratio used in production is higher in good Y compared to good X. Thus, country H which is capital-intensive produces more of good Y and country F produces more of good X. This is illustrated in the figure below. <figure/>In Figure 1, the equilibrium price ratio is steeper in country H than country F. This yields  FORMULA  (1.3) The Heckscher-Ohlin model assumes that resource differences are the only source of trade. Countries have different factors of production and each good requires different factors to produce them. This is how they affect comparative advantage. <heading>Factor-Price Equalisation Theorem</heading>One of the main results of the Heckscher-Ohlin model is the Factor-Price Equalisation Theorem. Free trade will influence prices of goods and this in turn influences the returns of the factors of production. The relationship between relative good prices, p, and relative factor prices, w, is illustrated below. <figure/><figure/>In Figure 2, the initial equilibrium is at point A where Ya and Xa units of goods are produced. The equilibrium price ratio is pa. However, when there is an increase in price of good X to pb, production then shifts to point B. At this point, corresponding to the factor box diagram in Figure 3, the wage-rental ratio is different from wa of point A. This is because for constant-returns-to-scale production functions and homogeneous preferences, all isoquants have a constant slope along any ray from the origin. The wage-rental ratio at point B corresponds to point C. However, at point C, the slope is steeper than the slope of the line that is tangential to both isoquants at point A. Thus, it follows that the wage-rental ratio at point C is higher than point A An increase in price of good X will increase the relative return to the factor used intensively in that industry, which is labour. Economy would then move to produce more of good X and the excess demand for labour would cause a rise in w sufficient to establish a new equilibrium. Excess supply of capital will bid the rent of capital downwards. The relationship between relative good prices and relative factor prices when there is no factor intensity reversal is a one-to-one mapping as in Figure 4. <figure/>The concept of unit-value isoquant can illustrate the theorem best. A unit-value isoquant is a locus of input combinations that yield $1 worth of output. This is illustrated in Figure 5. <figure/><figure/>Different production functions yield different unit-value isoquants. This is why the X and Y isoquants intersect in Figure 6. In Figure 6, an isocost line which is tangent to both unit-value isoquants is chosen. This isocost line has an intercept of 1/ra (one dollar's worth of capital) and 1/wa (one dollar's worth of labour). The isocost line is also an indication of cost minimisation and shows that both goods are produced. If a unit-value isoquant is not tangent to the isocost lines, a pair of factor prices (w,r) will not prevail because there is specialisation in only one good in the economy. Therefore, for both goods to be produced, the isocost line must be tangent to both isoquants. The region between kx and ky in Figure 6 is the diversification cone. It is a set of factor endowment combinations that are consistent with producing the same set of goods and having the same factor prices. If the endowment ratio just equals kx or ky, the economy specialises in only one good, x, or y. If the endowment ratio lies between kx and ky, the economy produces some of both goods. Thus, if kh and kf are the capital-labour ratio of country H and country F respectively, they indicate that countries H and F face the same wage-rental ratio, wa, because both overall endowment ratios are within the diversification cone. An important thing to note is that, the countries face the same elasticity of substitution for the two factors, capital and labour, and this model is assumed to have no factor-intensity reversal. Therefore, both countries must produce both goods and under identical constant-returns-to-scale production technologies, free trade in commodities will equalise relative factor prices through the equalisation of relative commodity prices. This is the Factor-Price Equalisation theorem (FPE). <heading>Extension of the FPE</heading>In the factor-price equalisation theorem, there is no assumption made about demand conditions. Following the previous assumptions made in this essay (identical production functions and constant-returns-to-scale, perfect competition and no factor-intensity reversal,) the model now takes into account different tastes. Assuming that countries have identical endowments and that the two utility functions of the two countries are homogeneous while differing: <figure/>In Figure 7, p h and p f are the autarky prices in country H and F respectively. Residents in country F have a biased taste towards good Y while residents in country H like more of good X. Stronger preference in good Y in country F has driven up prices of good Y in country F while this good Y is cheaper in county H because there is less demand for it. When there is free trade, residents in country F would import cheaper good Y from country H until the prices of good Y have been driven up to be equal in both countries and there is no incentive to import any more good Y. Price equalisation leads to factor price equalisation. Thus, when there is no factor-intensity reversal, factor-price equalisation theorem holds under any demand conditions. However, if there is factor intensity reversal, trade patterns would depend crucially on the nature of demand conditions. The factor-intensity reversal is a situation where (K/L)y > (K/L)x for a set of relative factor payments w/r and (K/L)y < (K/L)x for a set of relative factor payments w'/r'. This is illustrated in Figure 8. <figure/>In Figure 8, (K/L)r is the factor-intensity-reversal ray. If a country's capital-labour ratio is close to this factor-intensity ray, then the production frontier of this country is almost linear. In Figure 9, the production possibility frontier of country H is almost linear. <figure/>The production possibility curves for the two countries intersect more than once and this affects the trade pattern. If the highest community indifference curve for country F is tangent at point A f, this corresponds to point A h for country H. If trade is allowed, country H would export good Y and country F would export good X. This is the case that has been proved at the beginning of this essay. Then, trade would equalise factor prices. However, in this case now, this only happens if the diagram below Y0 is ignored. If tastes are biased towards good X in both countries, an indifference curve U' that is different from U0 will occur. New tangent points (A'h and A'f) will indicate that country H would export good X and country F exports good Y. Again, trade would equalise factor prices. However, again, this must be that the diagram to the left of X0 be ignored. When there is factor-intensity reversal, demand conditions clearly affect the pattern of trade. If both countries have similar preferences (both countries bias towards the same good), then trade will occur with each country exporting a different good and factor-price equalisation theorem holds. However, if both countries have different tastes and the indifference curve of one country is above Y0 and another one to the right of X0 as in Figure 9, the pattern of trade cannot be determined, the Heckscher-Ohlin model does not hold. Therefore, factor-price equalisation theorem, which is a result of the model, does not hold. Another result of factor-intensity reversal is that, both countries may be exporting relative capital-intensive goods or relative labour-intensive goods. Thus, rental for capital (or real wages) will go up in both countries. Trade causes factor prices to be more unequal than before trade. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The Heckscher-Ohlin model has interesting implications such as internal income distribution. Demand conditions such as different tastes between countries still hold the same relation between good prices and factor returns when there is no factor-intensity reversal. However, when there is factor-intensity reversal, demand conditions will determine whether the factor-price equalisation theorem can hold in such cases. 