Price determination has received an increasingly important position in contemporary literature, as it is essential to our understanding of the complex issues of unemployment and inflation. The increasing attention of policymakers regarding inflation targets has necessitated further research in this field. Nevertheless, there is surprisingly little literature on both single country and cross-country price determination analysis. Still, some interest has been put in different theories of price determination, and the two most central theories are the purchasing power theory (the law of one price) and the mark-up theory. The purchasing power theory asserts that prices are determined in the long run by world competition, thus the theory emphasises the importance of import prices. The mark-up theory developed by Kalecki states that producers set prices as a mark-up over average variable costs, partly as an insurance against variability in input prices and partly to earn profits. Martin advocate, through his theoretical and empirical assessment of the UK economy, that reality is somewhat in the middle of these two main theories. He shows that interactions between domestic and foreign actors cannot be neglected when it comes to theories of price formation, thus both domestic costs and import prices are important in determining the domestic price level. Accordingly, there is no clear view in the literature about which variables determine prices at the aggregate level. I aim to utilise the mark-up theory in my paper; however, papers that estimate the price mark-up equation is, rather unexpectedly, not very prevalent. Furthermore, I attempt to investigate whether there is an omitted variable bias in the standard price determination models by including an index for the coordination of wage determination. We can think of two theoretical justifications for including coordination as an explanatory variable. First, as coordination between unions increase, firms realise that their competitors suffer from the same rise in wages; hence a higher mark-up is defendable. Second, higher coordination could create barriers of entry and could make higher mark-ups sustainable. The implications of both these theoretical justifications are that a higher degree of coordination increases the mark-up, ceteris paribus. As far as I am concerned, there has hitherto been no attempt to explicitly address this issue. Earlier studies have focused solely on the price curve dynamics of the price determination, and accordingly assumed the wage curve to be fixed. <fnote>See Dornbusch (1992) for further details. </fnote><fnote>Kalecki (1943) and Kalecki (1971). </fnote><fnote>Martin (1997). </fnote><fnote>See for example Martin (1997) and Clements and Sensier (2003). </fnote>Nunziata elucidated institutional factors as highly significant in influencing wages. He estimates the determinants of labour costs in 20 OECD (Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development) countries, and finds both a direct effect on wages, through wage pressure despite excess supply in the labour market, and an indirect effect via the matching process of unemployed individuals to available job vacancies. Furthermore, bargaining coordination, employment protection and benefit replacement ratios are significantly affecting labour costs and consequently wages. Nunziata finds that bargaining coordination is significantly decreasing wages, while employment protection and benefit replacement ratios have a significantly positive relationship to wages. Even so, it seems hard to theoretically rationalise that employment protection and benefit replacement ratios can affect prices. <fnote>Nunziata (2001). </fnote>Thus far the only article combining mark-up analysis with wage bargaining is an article by Sen and Dutt. Nonetheless, the article has merely theoretically appraisal of the issue and does not present any empirical testing of the presented theory. The paper shows that the size of the mark-up does not merely depend on the product market factors, but also on the bargaining strength of the unions. Moreover, their model shows that changes in aggregate demand does not affect the money wage, real wage, price, and the mark-up. Variations in aggregate demand only change the output of firms, thus Sen and Dutt's model can be seen as a model that provides a theory of the stickiness of prices and wages. <fnote>Sen and Dutt (1995). </fnote>Ashworth et al and Asteriou et al both specify and estimate price equations in OECD countries, but none of the papers include elements of wage-setting coordination in their analysis. Yet, their analysis is interesting from the price determination point of view. Ashworth estimates a non-stationary panel data set for 13 OECD countries. Their findings suggest a pro-cyclical mark-up, i.e. firms charge higher prices in booms. As a proxy for intermediate goods the authors use the oil price, and estimate it to be significant and positive. The estimation puts a roughly equal weight on unit labour costs and import prices in the price equation, which correspond relatively good to other empirical studies. <fnote>Ashworth et al (2003). </fnote><fnote>Asteriou et al (2002). </fnote>Furthermore, Asteriou estimates manufacturing mark-up equations for 15 OECD countries introducing uncertainty as a new element of attention. Uncertainty is estimated to lower margins. The long-run relationships can be modelled as a variable mark-up driven by productivity, labour costs, technical progress, competitors' prices, deviations from trend output and uncertainty. Albeit these last two papers do not explicitly include coordination in their analysis, I still get an insight to the magnitudes of the coefficients in the price equation that is valuable as guidelines for my own estimation. Ashworth find evidence for a pro-cyclical mark-up in his paper. Nevertheless, there is, interestingly enough, empirical support for both pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical mark-up in the literature. Some examples of counter-cyclical mark-up are Bils and later Ireland who argue that firms utilise booms and excess demand to capture new customers, thus lowering the mark-up during booms, which clearly implies a counter-cyclical mark-up. Some researchers, inter alia Rotemberg et al, advocate that collusion is less likely in booms, while a last case is Chevalier who presents a model where imperfections in the capital markets result in a counter-cyclical mark-up. Chevalier contends that liquidity constrained firms are induced to increase mark-ups during recessions as a source of financing. <fnote>Bils (1989). </fnote><fnote>Ireland (1998). </fnote><fnote>Rotemberg et al (1986) and Rotemberg et al (1995). </fnote><fnote>Chevalier et al (1996). </fnote>