<heading>Description of the main features of the data</heading>When describing the main features of the data I will choose to look at the variables included in my preferred model of exam performance to limit the extent of the analysis. As we can see from the distribution of marks in Quantitative Techniques it is approximately normal around its mean of 65 %. The standard deviation is quite large, contributing to the relatively wide 95 % confidence interval (39.31-90.55). Consequently, not much confidence can be put in the point estimate of the exam results in QT. Lecture and class attendance also have high standard deviations of around 22, but a higher mean than QTmark (means of 80.94 and 82.39, respectively). Attendance to revision lectures has a different distribution, where some 110 students attended none of the revision lectures. This partly explains the relatively high standard deviation of 40.04, together with the around eighty students that attended 100 % of the revision lectures. Students tend to go to either none or all of the revision lectures; consequently the dispersion of the variable is high. <fnote>Graph in the appendix. </fnote>As we can observe from the correlation matrix shown in the appendix, there are only some of the dummies that have correlations above 0.40, which is not relatively high. This means that we are likely to avoid the problem of multicollinearity in the regression. Furthermore, out of 329 observations, around 250 of the students have an A in Maths (MathA) from A-levels. The number of parents who attended university (ParUni) are equally distributed on 0, 1 and 2 parents (with between 120 and 140 observations on each) for the 402 observations. For the variable UK we have 382 observations, and around 125 students are non-UK students. Around 275 out of 403 students are studying an Economics degree (Econ) in this sample. For reasons such as missing data the sample size differ between the variables, and this also causes the sample size of the regression analysis to be limited, because Eviews will omit observations if at least one of the variables has a missing value. A part of analysing the survey is also to check if the data is viable, that is if there are some errors included in the data provided. For Age, we have a maximum of 59 years, which I have not assumed to be wrong. However, the minimum of Age is 1 year, which can correctly be assumed to be an error. Furthermore, the variable AlevelsA have a few errors too. First of all, there are two outliers of 17 and 87 A-grades in A-levels, which obviously can be concluded to be errors. I will exclude these observations from the following analysis; otherwise it will cause the regression analysis to be flawed. <heading>Regression of exam performance against attendance measures</heading><heading>Separate bivariate regressions</heading>I have estimated separate bivariate regressions of each of the attendance measures, and the regression outputs are given in the appendix. Regressing lecture attendance against exam performance gives: <fnote>AttL is the proportion of classes attended (in percent). </fnote>(1)  FORMULA  The coefficient  FORMULA  is the percentage increase in exam performance from a 1 % increase in lecture attendance. The coefficient from the regression output is 0.145, meaning that a 1 % increase in lecture attendance will lead to a 0.145 percentage point increase in exam performance. A constant of 53.26 is literally meaning that without lecture attendance a student will achieve above 50 % in the exam, which may or may not be a reasonable conclusion. Performing a t-test at the 5 % significance level gives the following hypothesis: <fnote>The t-statistics can be found in the appendix. </fnote>H 0:  FORMULA  H 1:  FORMULA  From the regression output we can also find this exact number under t-Statistic, and this leads us to reject the null hypothesis we formulated. In other words, there is significant evidence that attendance to lectures is positively related to exam performance. Similarly, one can perform t-tests for class attendance (AttC) and revision lectures attendance (AttR); and the calculations are shown in the appendix. For class attendance the t-stats are 5.65, so at the 5 % significance level we reject the null hypothesis. This implies that class attendance is also significantly important in determining the exam results. T-stats for the revision lectures attendance are obtained similarly and equal to -0.13, hence we cannot reject the null hypothesis at the 5 % significance level in this test. There is consequently no significant evidence that attendance to revision lectures boosts your exam performance when performing this simple regression analysis and testing its significance. <fnote>AttC is the proportion of classes attended (in percent). </fnote><fnote>AttR is the proportion of revision lectures attended (in percent). </fnote><heading>multivariate regression</heading>The multivariate regression output of exam performance against all three attendance measures are presented in the appendix. I will perform an F-test of the joint significance of these coefficients of attendance. The regression equation and null hypothesis are: (2)  FORMULA  H 0:  FORMULA  H 1:  FORMULA  FORMULA  At the 5 % significance level we will therefore reject the null hypothesis, meaning that the joint effect of the attendance parameters is significantly different from zero, thus attendance have an impact on exam performance in this uncomplicated multivariate regression. In this regression as well as the bivariate regression, the coefficients for lecture and class attendance are positive and the coefficient for revision lecture attendance is negative. Nevertheless, only the coefficients for class and revision lecture attendance are significant at the 5 % level.  FORMULA  gives the percentage change in exam marks for a 1 percent increase in the class attendance. The other coefficients are interpreted equivalently, since both QTmark and the attendance parameters are measured in percentages. <heading>Dummy variables</heading>I will now perform a regression of the exam performance (QTmark) on lecture attendance and the number of A grades at A-level (AlevelsA). I will include dummy variables for each of the previous years' students using 2002 as my reference category. The regression equation included the dummy variables will be like this: <fnote>DYEAR99 is the dummy variable for year 1999; it scores 1 for observations in 1999 and 0 for all other observations. The other dummies are explained similarly. </fnote>(3) FORMULA   FORMULA  is the percentage change in exam performance from a 1 % change in lecture attendance. From the regression output of equation (3) we can see that a 1 % increase in lecture attendance will lead to a 0.13 percentage point increase in exam performance. The coefficient is highly significant with t-stats of 4.4. Similarly, FORMULA  is the proportionate change in exam performance from one more A-grade in A-levels. The coefficient is 2.92 and highly significant; which means that one more A-grade in A-levels should increase the exam performance by 2.92 percentage points. The coefficient  FORMULA  gives the proportionate change in exam performance from respondents in year 1999 compared to students in the reference category 2002. The dummy variable gives the value 1 if the observation is from 1999 and 0 otherwise. That means that if the observation is from another year, the intercept will not be influenced. The coefficient is -1.65 (although insignificant), which means that the exam performance for students in 1999 is on average 1.65 percentage points lower than for students in 2002. The coefficients for the two other dummy variables can be interpreted in a similar way. The dummy variables created in this question are additive dummies which only impacts the intercept of the regression. If the observation is from 1999, this shifts the intercept by  FORMULA , so that the new intercept is  FORMULA , equal to 50.58-1.65 = 48.93. To test whether the dummy variables have a significant impact, we have to perform a Chow test. The restricted and the unrestricted models are shown in the appendix. H 0:  FORMULA  H 1:  FORMULA  The F-stats we obtain by performing the test are 6.82. This implies that we reject the null hypothesis at the 5 % significance level, meaning that there are indeed significant differences between the four sub samples. Looking at the regression output, we see that the coefficients for 2000 and 2001 are significantly negative. This may be caused by the fact that in 2002 A-level maths became a prerequisite for the Economics degree. Consequently, many of the students in previous years don't have A-level maths and are suffering from inferior exam performance compared to the 2002 students, who all have A-level maths. <heading>Separate regression equations for each of the years</heading>I will now estimate regression of exam performance on lecture attendance and A-grades at A-level as in Question 3, but I will separate the equations for 1999, 2000, 2001 and 2002 respondents, respectively. The regression equations will be similar, but the sample size will be different for the four equations. The equation for year 1999 is:  FORMULA  The other equations are given in the appendix, were the regression output also is shown. When comparing the regression analysis from the different sub samples we can clearly see that the coefficient for lecture attendance is positive for all years, however, it is only significantly positive for 1999 and 2001. For the AlevelsA variable there is a different picture. The coefficients for this variable are high for the first three years of the survey, however, only highly significant for year 2000. In year 2001 it is even not significant at the 5 % significance level with t-stats of 1.958. For 2002 we obtain an interesting regression output, where the proportional change in exam performance from one more A-grade at A-level has a negative impact on exam performance. Nevertheless, this result is clearly insignificant, and by constructing a 95 % confidence interval we clearly see that the interval includes zero, thus the coefficient can also be positive. This makes sense, because it would be strange that achieving one more A-grade at A-levels should be negatively related to exam results. H 0:  FORMULA  H 1: At least one of the restrictions does not hold. The Chow test is carried out to test coefficient constancy across the four sub samples. Our restricted model is the same as in Question 3, given by  FORMULA . The F-stats obtained leads us to reject the null hypothesis, which means that there is at least one of the coefficients that are not constant across the sub samples. Intuitively this means that there is significant evidence that the year of study does have an impact on the exam performance, one possible reason might be the reform in 2002. <fnote>Test statistics are given in the appendix. </fnote><heading>Constancy of slope coefficients</heading>The restricted model is the unrestricted model from Question 3, where we allow the intercept to differ between the sub samples but not the slopes. The unrestricted model is the same as in Question 4 and together with the restricted model given in the appendix: H 0:  FORMULA  H 1: At least one of the restrictions does not hold. The F-stats as shown in the appendix leads us to reject the null hypothesis at the 5 % significance level, so that there is no significant evidence that the slope coefficients are constant in this model. In other words, at least one of the slopes of the regression coefficients for lecture attendance and number of A-grades at A-level are significantly different for the four sub samples in the unrestricted model compared to the restricted model. <heading>preferred model of exam performance</heading>Exam performance for students, both generally and with Quantitative Techniques, depends on a range of variables. This dataset includes 40 different variables, however, some of them are mutually exclusive, some are so highly correlated that multicollinearity might become a problem and some are not significantly affecting exam performance. First, when stating a model there is always a risk of omitting relevant variables. This might have severe implications, as it makes the regression biased, unless the omitted variable is unrelated to all the other included variables in the model. Consequently, with biased coefficients, the standard errors, t-ratios and therefore all hypothesis tests are deficient. Second, there is also a risk of including irrelevant variables in your preferred model. This has generally less severe consequences, however, if too many irrelevant variables are included this normally boosts the standard errors compared to the true model. This clearly makes the t-ratios smaller, hence some coefficients might be found insignificant even though they are truly significant. Bearing this in mind, I will start to investigate the impact of the variables on exam performance. My answers to questions 3, 4 and 5 jointly give the perception that the coefficients differ among the four sub samples of years. Since we have found significant differences in the coefficients for the four years, this suggests that we should include the dummy variables for the different years in the model of exam performance. Logical sense and empirical evidence supports the fact that class and lecture measures of attendance should affect exam performance positively. Since the correlation between the attendance measures is high, I will try to avoid the problem of multicollinearity by combining class and lecture attendance in a new variable called AttCL. I have omitted revision lecture attendance in this variable because I did not find it significantly important in determining exam performance. Moreover, it is convenient for the analysis to divide the AttCL variable into percentiles of attendance, with 0-20 % as the reference group. This allows us to investigate the relation between not attending classes and lectures with the different quintiles of attendance. <fnote>See for example: Romer D. Do students go to class? Should they? J Econ Perspect; 7: 167-74. </fnote><fnote>As shown in the appendix. </fnote><fnote>These dummy variables are: DAttCL20to40, DAttCL40to60, DAttCL60to80 and DAttCL80to100. </fnote>To get an overview of the determinants of exam performance, I screened selected variables in the survey to check whether they are significant in determining the exam performance. This is clearly not the only way to determine what is affecting exam performance, but it is a good start to see whether my intuition of what is important determinants are totally wrong or not. The regression outputs of some of the regressions are included in the appendix and the first variable I found to be highly significant and positively related to exam performance was AlevelsA. Only students with a single-honours degree in Economics (Econ) had a significant (and positive) relationship with exam performance. The other types of degrees seem to have a negative (although insignificant) relationship with exam performance, which may be grounded in the fact that single-honours Economics students often have a more quantitative background and/or interests compared to the other joint degrees. The only significant (and negative) expenditure coefficient is ExpAlc. Females seem to do worse in exams, and overall work effort seem to have a significantly positive effect on exam performance, however, when including it in the multivariate regression of my preferred model it is not significant. Regressing QTmark against number of siblings and number of times attending Top Banana or similar did rather surprisingly not return any significant coefficients. <fnote>Expenditure on alcohol in pounds sterling per week. </fnote>After screening the variables, I ran a series of multivariate regressions on the variables I found to be individually significant. The regression outputs for the different multivariate regression analysis are included in the appendix. Being a UK student does not seem to have a large negative effect on the exam results compared to non-UK students when running a simple regression analysis; however, when including it in the multivariate regression it has a negative and significant coefficient of over 4. My preferred model of exam performance is:  FORMULA . And the regression results are:  FORMULA . The justification for these variables to be included in my model is given throughout the assignment and is based on statistical evidence, empirical work done by others and my own experience. The variables included are both jointly and independently significant, except for ParUni, which has borderline t-stats of 1.958. The appendix includes tests of the joint significance of both the year dummies and the attendance dummies. The results above show that compared to between 0 and 20 % attendance, attendance of 80-100 % improves exam results by 9.73 percentage points. We can also see that having an A in Maths from A-level boosts your exam performance with 4.97 %-points. Furthermore, UK students receive on average 4.68 %-points lower exam marks than international students and people who are studying a single-honours Economics degree perform 4.31 %-points better than other degrees. If one or more parents attended university this enhances the exam result by 1.73 %-points. My preferred model of exam performance is accordingly determined by prior performance (AlevelsA and MathA), heritage (ParUni and UK), the course undertaken (Econ), class and lecture attendance (the DAttCL dummies) and the year of survey (the DYear dummies). 