<abstract></abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The analysis of recent banking crises is one of the most interesting fields in international financial macroeconomics due to their negative effects and recurrence, and the difficulties involved in their resolution. Diaz Alejandro (1985), when referring to the financial liberalisation processes started in the 1970s, anticipated many of these events with the catchy title "Good-bye financial repression, hello financial crash." Furthermore, during a new wave of financial liberalisation initiated in the 1990s, banking crises have shown more adverse effects when compared with the 1980s 1. In this context of endemic banking crises a number of interesting questions have been raised among policymakers and academics: What are the causes of such crises? Which policies should be pursued when a crisis arises? How can another collapse be prevented once the crisis vanishes? The Argentine 2001-2 financial turmoil revitalised these questions, exposing new issues due to the severity and extension of the distress, as the Argentine real GDP plummeted around 11% in 2002 while credit to the private sector suffered a 39.2% reduction in real terms (Dec-2002/Dec-2001). Now the GDP has recovered at an unexpectedly high rate of 8% in 2003 while the stock of credit to the private sector fell 18.3% (Dec-2003/Dec-2002) without clear signals of recovery in early 2004. The objective of this paper is to deal with the aforementioned questions to shed light to the analysis of modern banking crisis, focusing on the Argentine experience. With this purpose I will first summarise a number of stylised facts on the causes and resolutions of recent banking crises. With the ground set for the analysis of the Argentine case, I will address in detail the characteristics of the Argentine banking system (henceforth BS) before and after the threshold generated by the devaluation in January 2002, including a brief comparison with the experiences of Mexico and Indonesia. The final step is to outline a number of policy recommendations to improve the situation of the Argentine BS. There are two main conclusions in this paper. First, that in the Argentine case credit to the private sector has shown a negative trend even after a pronounced upward trend in the real GDP, yielding what I have called financial hysteresis. Second, that for Argentina and Mexico there is evidence that the GDP Granger causes credit to the private sector, albeit the relative importance of the latter does not return to the pre-crisis level. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section I addresses some stylized facts on the causes and resolution of recent banking crises. Section II introduces the Argentine experience. Section III compares the cases of Argentina, Indonesia and Mexico. Section IV briefly assesses policy recommendations for the Argentine case. Section V presents concluding remarks. <heading>I. Banking crises in the 1980s and 1990s: causes and resolution</heading><heading>A. Macroeconomic vulnerabilities</heading><heading>A-1. Real exchange rate appreciation</heading>There is evidence that countries affected by banking crises have shown an appreciated real exchange rate relative to its average level (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999, p. 485). This appreciation is often due to the upward trend in consumption and investment when agents face optimistic expectations about the economy, for instance after a process of economic liberalisation 2. In such a situation, the profits of the tradable sector decrease, negatively affecting the quality of banking assets since some borrowers may face strong difficulties in performing their loans (Goldstein and Turner 1996, p. 12). <heading>A-2. Boom in domestic credit</heading>In almost all the recent experiences a credit lending boom has precluded the banking crises (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999, pp. 483-4). There are different ways in which this mechanism affects BS vulnerability: (i) in the phase of expansion of the economic activity and the lending boom it may be difficult to differentiate between good and bad borrowers (Goldstein and Turner 1996, p. 14); (ii) banks may be more lax in measuring risk in a prosperous economic situation (op cit., p. 14) and (iii) there may exist a 'bubble' in the value of firms' collaterals. In this context when a shock arises (e.g., a sudden stop in external funding) negatively affecting the economy, the value of the collaterals in the BS may suffer a breakdown, thus affecting the system as a whole. <heading>B. Institutional vulnerabilities</heading>The absence of a solid political and institutional structure has also influenced the likelihood of a banking distress (Goldstein and Turner 1996, pp. 21-24). When agents perceive a fragile institutional environment or a weak government they tend to withdraw deposits in the domestic BS 3. The withdrawal of deposits usually affects the vulnerability of the BS while increasing pressure on the exchange rate. On the other hand, a weak institutional framework reduces the possibility of implementing adequate economic policies when the banking crisis appears. <heading>C. Banking System Vulnerabilities</heading><heading>C-1. Liberalisation without an adequate regulatory framework</heading>Such vulnerabilities have been extensively discussed in the literature as one of the main factors behind banking woes during the 1980s and 1990s 4,5. The liberalisation of the BS tends to generate an expansion in the number of banks and the overall availability of credit in the economy. When the process is not correctly monitored, banks may excessively accumulate risk assets thus increasing the system's overall vulnerability to negative shocks (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999, p. 480). <heading>C-2. Credits and deposits denominated in foreign currency</heading>As Mishkin (1996, p. 32) points out, the existence of foreign currency-denominated assets and liabilities in the BS may lead to a banking collapse. Under a currency depreciation borrowers may no longer be able to pay loans in foreign currency since most of their assets are denominated in domestic money. It is worth noting that longlasting macroeconomic instability in many developing countries has affected the credibility of the private sector in both, the domestic currency and the BS. In this context, and in order to speed up the development of the financial system in certain countries, monetary authorities allowed taking deposits and credits in foreign currency. Nevertheless, this fact increases overall vulnerability to a banking crisis, since the capacity of the Central Bank to function as a lender of last resort is limited in this context (Chang and Velasco 1998). As far as agents perceive this BS vulnerability and expect a currency depreciation, a bank run as stated in Diamond and Dybvig (1983) may arise 6. <heading>C-3. High share of public loans</heading>As Goldstein and Turner (1996, pp. 18-21) highlight, the excessive accumulation of public debt in banks' assets also affects BS vulnerability. When banks accumulate a high share of public debt, the solvency of the system depends indirectly on the solvency of the public sector. So, when confidence in the sustainability of the public debt decreases the price of public bonds diminishes, thus negatively affecting the BS balance-sheet. In an extreme case, when the government defaults on the public debt the value of the banking assets may collapse 7. <heading>C-4. Lack of transparency in the banking system</heading>The lack of transparent information in the BS has also been highlighted as an important element in explaining BS vulnerability (see Goldstein and Turner 1996, pp. 21-24). Many experiences have shown that prudential measures in terms of liquidity requirements were not in accordance with the best international standards. The lack of transparency in banks' information affects the capacity of customers and monetary authorities to accurately determine each particular bank's situation, thus enlarging the asymmetric information problems in the system and the likelihood of a crisis. <heading>D. Factors that triggered banking crises during the 1980s and 1990s</heading><heading>D-1. Terms of trade</heading>During the 1980s a typical external shock which ended in banking crises in developing countries was the sudden reduction in the terms of trade (see Kaminsky and Reinhart, p. 485). This shock negatively affects the profitability of the tradable sector thus diminishing its capability to perform its loans. The evidence also suggests reductions in the terms of trade have been more severe in those countries with a relative concentrated exports structure (Goldstein and Turner, p. 9). <heading>D-2. Contagion from other financial crises / capital outflows</heading>As the international financial markets have become more interconnected, especially during the 1990s, it has been relatively easy and cheap for international investors to mobilize financial resources among national States. This mechanism has had an important role in the genesis of banking crises, being more important in those countries with not well-developed capital markets 8. The contagion mechanism usually works as follows: when a large international investor suffers a direct loss in a particular country he tends to reduce overall exposure in countries with similar characteristics, thus precipitating the likelihood of a banking crisis. It has been also argued that crises may be driven by sudden changes in expectations, under what is known as the multiple-equilibria scenario, thus yielding a capital outflow and in turn triggering the crisis 9. <heading>E. Administration of the Crisis</heading><heading>E-1. Intervention / liquidation of banks</heading>Either the intervention or the liquidation of banks presents controversies in the economic literature. Scott (2002, p. 14) highlights that this policy helps in reducing the BS uncertainty, enhancing the natural adjustment process of the system. On the other hand, Hawkins and Turner (1996, p. 37) argued that this policy might have a negative effect since it may undermine the public's confidence in banks, provoking a generalised bank run. As a rule of thumb, and considering the Argentine case, I sustain that avoiding banks' liquidation during a crisis seems to be an adequate policy when the distress has systemic characteristics. <heading>E-2. Deposit Insurance</heading>In the economic literature exists an interesting discussion around the moral hazard problems involved with the deposit insurances (DI) (see Scott 2002). However, Hawkins and Turner (1996, p. 45) sustain that in most banking experiences, monetary authorities explicitly or implicitly implement a DI to avoid a negative perception of the BS by depositors. They also argue that the DIs have shown important differences in the sources of funding and the amounts covered. Furthermore, in this regard Hawkins and Turner (op cit.) sustain that it is possible to design a DI which tends to reduce the moral hazard problem by limiting the amount granted and government participation in their capitalisation. <heading>E-3. Bank capitalisation</heading>As Del Villaral. (1997) point out it is often necessary to provide fresh funds to banks during the crisis. It is worth highlighting that the capitalisation process might be broadly characterized as public- or market-biased, the latter being recommended since involves lower public intervention. <heading>E-4. Regulation Measures</heading>During and after banking crises monetary authorities tend to update their prudential regulations taking as a benchmark the norms of the Basel Committee (Del Villaral. 1997, p. 22). However, as will be addressed when discussing the Argentine case, a proper regulatory setup may not be a sufficient condition to avoid banking crises. <heading>E-5. Debtors of the Banking System</heading>Since banking distresses are often associated with financial problems by the borrowers of the system, monetary authorities often apply different measures to alleviate their situation (Huerta and Urriza González 2000, p. 25). Such measures often involve: (i) technical and financial support, (ii) reductions in interest rates, (iii) extension of loan maturities, (iv) differential exchange rate for those debtors with loans denominated in foreign currency or (v) a swap of debt denominated in foreign currency to domestic currency at a preferential exchange rate 10. However, worth noting is that such policies often involve important fiscal costs and distorting incentives (e.g., moral hazard problems), the general criteria being to avoid public intervention as much as possible (Huerta and Urriza González op cit.). <heading>II - The Argentine case</heading><heading>A. The Argentine banking system during the 1990s</heading>Following the classification of financial systems stated in Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1999) the Argentine BS could be characterized as bank-based, in line with the evidence of most mid-income countries. It is worth highlighting that the importance of the Argentine BS increased markedly after the implementation of the Currency Board (CB) regime in April 1991 11. This CB regime positively reverted agents' expectations about the future pattern of the economy, leading to a very fast growth of the BS (Heymann 2000, pp. 34-42). Argentine monetary authorities also promoted important transformations in terms of the infrastructure and regulatory frameworks of the system during the 1990s (Fanelli and Pradelli 2002, p. 22). From a regulatory viewpoint, the Central Bank of Argentina designed a strict regulatory framework to situate the BS near the best international standards. Furthermore, in order to improve confidence in the BS the Central Bank added a plus over the Basel Committee's recommendations from 8% to 11.5% with respect to the system's liquidity requirements (Fanelli and Pradelli 2002, p. 30). By the same token, to strengthen credibility in the banks, portfolio risk requisites were imposed far above the international standards. All these elements generated a steady upward trend in the credits and deposits of the private sector during the 1990s (see Figure 1). This process also increased the financial deepening of the economy which, in turn, enhanced GDP growth rates. Figure 2 shows the evolution of credit to the private sector as a percentage of GDP (i.e., an index of the financial deepening) which rose from 17.9% in 1993:1 to 26.3% in 1999:1. However, this positive trend was reverted in 1999 as a consequence of the economic recession initiated by 1998:4. <figure/><figure/>It is worth highlighting that the macroeconomic environment during the 1990s showed an important correlation with the dynamics of the BS. In fact, between 1990 and 1997 the Argentine economy grew at an average rate of 5.1%, positively affecting BS expansion (see figure 2). Nevertheless, when contrasted with international evidence, the Argentine BS never reached the levels of those countries with a similar GDP per capita (see Table 1), despite growing markedly during the 1990s. <table/>This point has been raised by Heymann (2000), explaining that the Argentine economy's instability before the 1990s encouraged the private sector to use informal sources of funding. The evidence discussed previously suggests that reverting this phenomenon (i.e., to swap from informal to formal financial sources) is a process which takes long periods even when the economy shows a stable macroeconomic environment. The 1990s were also characterised by the existence of important external shocks upon the Argentine economy (Calvoal. 2003). These shocks, even though significant in the short-run, founded a solid BS which helped in reducing the magnitude of their effects. For instance, the 1994-5 crisis in Mexico markedly affected the Argentine economy with a reduction of about 20% in total deposits in only a few months (Figure 1). Nevertheless, the strong regulatory framework of the BS and the adequate policies implemented by the Central Bank relaxing short-run liquidity requirements while reallocating banks in financial distress, helped in recovering the deposits much above the pre-crisis level (see Figure 1). The other important shocks faced by the economy, the 1997 and 1998 crises in Asia and Russia, respectively, and the devaluation of Brazil's currency in early 1999 did not have important negative short-run effects on the BS. However, they raised an adverse perception on the soundness of the BS mainly due to the existence of two vulnerabilities: (i) From 1993 on, the Argentine government allowed the dollarization 12 of credits and deposits in order to expand the size of the BS. The basic idea at that time was to show, on the one hand, the government's commitment to the exchange rate regime, perhaps 'doubling the bet' as Heymannal. (2002) highlighted 13. On the other hand, it was probably thought that an increase in the size of the BS would have been necessary to support additional expansions in the activity level. <figure/>Figure 3 shows the marked dollarization of credits and deposits in the economy during the 1990s. Worth noting is that this upward trend was more pronounced by the end of 2001, as economic agents perceived the inevitability of the currency devaluation. In such a situation, banks biased their portfolios towards those assets denominated in US$ dollars while the public swapped their deposits from Arg$ to US$ dollars to preserve the purchasing power of their respective assets under a devaluation scenario. (ii) The second vulnerability was the upward trend in the share of loans to the public sector in the total by the end of 1998. As a consequence of the economic recession initiated by the third quarter of 1998 government revenues plummeted, forcing the public sector to borrow from the domestic BS 14. This phenomenon was particularly important by late 2001 when the credit to the public sector rose to almost 50% of the total (see Figure 4). <figure/>Mainly due to the aforementioned vulnerabilities, the Argentine BS collapsed with the declaration of the public debt default in late December 2001 and the subsequent devaluation of the peso in January 2002. <heading>B. The Banking System in the aftermath of the Currency Board</heading>From early 2001, when economic agents realized the important constraints faced by the economy in defending the currency board regime, the BS suffered a constant withdrawal of deposits (Frenkel and Damill 2003). In this context the flows of new credits were contracted while agents indebted in US$ dollars cancelled their liabilities to protect themselves from a currency depreciation. Figure 5 shows the negative trend in credits and deposits to the private sector from the beginning of 2001 and the threshold generated by the currency depreciation in January 2002. <figure/>It is worth highlighting that the government decided in early 2002 to convert all the deposits denominated in US$ dollars to pesos at the exchange rate Arg$1.4 per one US$ dollar, whereas credits were converted one-to-one in what it is known as the asymmetric pesification, generating a different path in the evolution of credits and deposits (see Figure 5). This asymmetric pesification has been extensively criticised from an academic and a policy-making viewpoint as a consequence of the important distortions generated upon the banks' balance sheets 15. However, the dilemma faced by the government at that time was not simple. On the one hand, BS depositors highly intensified their criticism against the banks and government when it was officially decided to freeze deposits. Furthermore, this economic policy was fundamental in the resignation of the former President De La Rua in December 2001. In this critical situation the new transitory government headed by Mr Duhalde had to deal with the inevitability of the currency depreciation and the discontent of depositors. In such a context the new government decided to pesify deposits at the same exchange rate after the devaluation in January 2002 (i.e., Arg$ 1.4 per US$ dollar), not to worsen the relationship with the depositors. On the other hand, the high dollarization of credits raised another dilemma between the BS and the private sector, since currency devaluation could imply the collapse of foreign currency-indebted firms 16. In this context, and in order to avoid a further economic activity level deterioration, the government swapped US$ dollar loans to pesos at one US$ dollar equal to one Arg$17. The overall effects of the policies implemented in Argentina between 2001 and 2002 in a context of a massive capital outflows from the banking system, led to one of the most important credit crunches suffered by any modern economy and, certainly, the most painful banking crisis experienced in Argentina. Figure 6 shows the shrinking of the credit to the private sector / GDP from early 2001 to late 2003, with the ratio falling from 24.1% to 10.1%. Furthermore, the reduction in credit to the private sector when measured in real terms was about 50.4% (Dec-2003/Dec-2001). <figure/>Another important issue arises when considering the evolution of deposits and credits separately (see Figure 5). Noteworthy is that while deposits start growing after July 2002, credits show a negative trend only slightly reverted by the beginning of 2004. This fact adds an interesting insight to the banking crisis, as the economy started to recover by the second quarter of 2002. Furthermore, we can ask why the credits did not respond to the upward trend in the economic activity. To further illustrate this point in Figure 7 I show the evolution of credits to the private sector and GDP separately. Figure 7 clearly shows the important correlation until the first quarter of 2002 when this relation seems to no longer hold. <figure/>To explain, I suggest as a hypothesis that when the BS collapsed in 2001-2, the private sector swapped the way in which it funds current transactions from formal to informal sources. Such a swap seems to generate a financial hysteresis phenomenon 18 since the contraction in the credit to the private sector continues even though the economy recovers a steady growth path. Moreover, this fact suggest that the recovery of credit to the private sector is time-demanding, since agents must learn about the new economic environment, while regaining confidence in the banking system before credit channels return to a sound position. At this point, it seems interesting to ask if other recent financial crises showed the same pattern in the relationship between the evolution of GDP and credit to the private sector in the aftermath of economic distress, the objective of the next section being to compare the cases of Argentina, Indonesia and Mexico. <heading>III. The evolution of credit in the aftermath of a Crisis </heading><heading>A. The experiences of Argentina, Indonesia and Mexico</heading>Considering Table 2, it is worth highlighting the strong impact that these financial crises have had in each country. <table/>In all these cases credit to the private sector tends to diminish while credit to the public sector moves in opposite direction. Particularly notorious is the case of Indonesia, since credit to the public sector rose from less than 1% of GDP before the crisis up to well over 20% after 1998. A similar pattern was shown by the Mexican economy, although credit to the public sector never reached above 10% of GDP (see Table 2). This upward trend in the proportion of credit to the public sector / GDP seems to be associated with each government's active intervention to avoid a further collapse of the system. In fact, as Del Villaral. (1997, p. 74 and 1998, p. 33) point out, both the governments of Indonesia and Mexico pursued active public policies to bailout the private sector and the BS. In the case of Argentina, the government issued different bonds which now figure as assets in banks' balance sheets to compensate banks for the costs due to the asymmetric pesification. As mentioned previously, in all the cases credit to the private sector as a share of GDP shrunk markedly. In fact, in Mexico the ratio was almost 35% in 1994, and even after many years of economic recovery this ratio is located around 10%. The case of Indonesia shows the same pattern, since this ratio shrunk by more than half (from 53.6% to 24.9%) between 1998 and 2002. In Argentina this ratio was also cut by half when comparing the pre-and post-crisis situations. In all these cases credit to the private sector measured as a share of GDP does not show evidence of returning to the pre-crisis level even though the economy shows strong signs of recovery. To further address this issue I will develop an interesting insight to the problem, asking if GDP impulses the evolution of credit to the private sector, a question which, as far as I know, is not addressed in the literature about banking crises. <heading>B. Does the GDP Granger cause credit to the private sector?</heading><table/>Considering Table 3, a number of issues are worth emphasising. In the cases of Argentina and Mexico when the full sample is considered, the evidence suggests that the GDP Granger causes credit to the private sector. When sub-samples are considered the evidence also indicates causality in this direction but, since the number of observations is limited, the results are taken only as indicatives. The case of Indonesia shows a slightly different result. In fact, the causality seems to be in both ways, particularly after the financial crisis in late 1997. <heading>IV. A guideline of policy recommendations</heading>Up to now I have addressed the vulnerabilities and factors that triggered recent banking crises as well as the main characteristics of the Argentine bank distress. In the remainder of the paper I will stress a set of policy recommendations based on the previous sections' discussions and the analysis stated in Acosta Ormaechea and Todesca (2002) and Fanelli (2002) to address two main issues: (i) how to improve the current situation of the Argentine BS and (ii) how to avoid the vulnerabilities observed before the BS collapse. <heading>A. The macroeconomic and Institutional Environment</heading>The role of financial institutions is, essentially, of arbitrage between investors and savers which is carried efficiently only if economic agents find a stable economic framework. So, the consolidation of a stable macroeconomic and institutional setup seems to be the first step towards the consolidation of the Argentine BS. In this sense the efforts of the Argentine government should be concentrated on restoring the economic and institutional basis of the economy, markedly affected after the collapse in 2001-2. From a macroeconomic perspective the economic authorities should promote: (i) a stable exchange rate, (ii) a conservative monetary policy to avoid inflationary pressures, (iii) a controlled fiscal budget and (iv) the renegotiation of the defaulted public debt 19. One of the characteristics of the Argentine crisis is that it not only involved the collapse of the economy but also important political and institutional distress. In this area, the challenges seem to be: (i) improving the quality of Argentine institutions (ii) redesigning the bases for a new contractual arrangement in the banking system not based on foreign currency-denominated assets and liabilities. <heading>B. The Banking System</heading>One of the most important tasks for the Central Bank is to accommodate its role and the BS to the new economic environment generated after 2001. In particular, it seems necessary to deal with the following issues: (i) Determining the norms that regulate the role of the Central Bank as a lender of last resort, a function that it did not have under the currency board regime 20. (ii) Reviewing the regulatory and supervisory norms implemented during the CB regime to determine which modifications are needed. (iii) Following Hawkins and Turner (1996, p. 45), it seems interesting to consider a deposit insurance that is mutually funded by the public and private sector (i.e., to avoid moral hazard problems) up to a limit which should be defined to enhance the confidence of depositors in the Argentine banking system. (iv) Establishing the situation of each bank in order to identify those institutions with financial problems, with the aim of designing individual rather than general solutions. (v) In those cases where the banks are suffering liquidity problems the Central Bank should encourage shareholders to capitalise their institutions. (vi) In Argentina, public banks have played an important role in attending the financial requirements of small- and medium-sized firms often exposed to the credit rationing phenomena 21. In the future, the management of the public banks' portfolios should follow strict operational rules to avoid the negative results experienced by public banks during the 1990s 22. <heading>C. Enhancing Public Confidence</heading>Another key step in recovering the Argentine BS is strengthening the confidence of depositors and borrowers. Improving the transparency in the BS will permit reducing the system's information problems thus enhancing public confidence, which allows for a better diversification of risks. In particular, even though during the 1990s a number of improvements have been developed regarding transparency, the Argentine BS is still far away from the best international standards (Fanelli 2002). In the short run, the Central Bank may help in improving the situation by imposing the submission of a set of periodical information about the situation of each bank to their respective customers. <heading>D. Currency denomination of contracts in the banking system</heading>As discussed previously the problem of dollarization was, perhaps, the main factor in explaining the collapse of the Argentine BS after January 2002's devaluation. For this reason, it seems necessary to impose restrictions on foreign currency-denominated assets and liabilities. In this regard, Krugman (1999, p. 42) directly suggests discouraging firms from taking foreign currency-denominated debt 23. However, it seems to me that such a kind of 'radical' policy may not be optimal, considering that certain firms have a high proportion of assets denominated in foreign currency (e.g., those firms linked to foreign trade). A proper measure would be to impose restrictions mainly to firms with a high proportion of non-tradable activities. Furthermore, as a rule of thumb, the restrictions may be set when a particular firm shows a ratio of sales abroad (i.e., exports) to total sales below some threshold. The benefit of this mechanism is that the firms with a high share of tradable production will be able to find funding sources under better conditions (e.g., lower interest rates), reducing the costs of capital and positively affecting domestic production while the currency risk is properly hedged. <heading>V. Conclusions</heading>The last two decades have been characterised by more integrated financial markets but also by the recurrence of deep banking crises, particularly among developing countries. In such a context the existence of macroeconomic, institutional and banking vulnerabilities has enhanced the likelihood of a banking collapse, an external factor often being the element that triggered the crisis. Which policies must be implemented once the crisis arises? In this paper I addressed some insights as a rule of thumb to answering the question: (i) avoiding the liquidation of banks during the crisis since it may worsen public perception on the general health of the banking system, (ii) avoiding public intervention as much as possible and (iii) enhancing the regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Albeit painful, the Argentine experience raised new issues about the likelihood and effects of banking collapses. On the one hand, an adequate regulatory framework being a necessary condition for a sound banking system seems not to be sufficient for avoiding a crisis. On the other, a proper banking system depends greatly on the soundness of the economy as a whole. I also addressed an interesting insight to the problem of the Argentine banking crisis which, to my knowledge, has not been addressed in the literature on the topic. As a consequence of the BS collapse the private sector swapped its sources of funding from formal to informal, generating what I called financial hysteresis: once the economy recovers the GDP growth path, credit to the private sector still decreases. I argued that such a situation might be driven by a private sector lack of confidence towards the banking system. Interestingly, I also found evidence in Indonesia and Mexico of the reduction of the ratio of credit to the private sector / GDP even after many periods of sustained economic growth. However, considering the Granger causality test I found that the GDP Granger causes credit to the private sector in the cases of Argentina and Mexico, which may suggest further increments in this aggregate. A set of policies which may help in both restoring the current situation of the Argentine banking system and avoiding a future crisis was discussed, summarised thus: (i) encouraging the stability of the macroeconomic and institutional frameworks (ii) promoting an adequate regulatory and supervisory system according to the new economic environment, (iii) enhancing banking system transparency, providing all relevant information to their customers, (iii) avoiding the dollarization of the banking system and (iv) reducing loans to the public sector as much as possible. Valuable extensions of the paper are postponed for further research. It seems interesting to explore in detail the aforementioned hypothesis of financial hysteresis in the aftermath of a banking crisis. A first step in this direction should be to extend the international evidence as well as the samples considered for the analysis, attempting to shed light on the factors that would imply such behaviour. Another worthwhile extension would be to develop the analysis of the Granger causality test considering a larger data sample and including other international experiences. 1 See Huerta and Urriza González (2000, pp. 7-8) for a discussion. 2 This phenomenon has been particularly important in explaining the appreciation of the real exchange rate in the case of Argentina during the 1990s. After the economic liberalisation process initiated in early 1990s the economy showed a boom in domestic consumption and investment which, under a peg regime and a supply of non-tradable goods inelastic in the short-run, yielded an appreciation of the real exchange rate (See Heymann (2000) and Frenkel and Damill (2003) for a discussion). 3 In fact, there is evidence that the existence of political turmoil affects public confidence in the BS and mayprecipitate a bank-run phenomenon. For instance, in the case of Argentina the resignation of the former PresidentDe La Rua in late December 2001 precipitated the collapse of the BS (see Gutierrez and Montes-Negret 2004, pp.7-8) while in the case of Indonesia the resignation of the former President Suharto in May 1998 also deepened thebanking distress (See Lindgrenal. 1999, p. 20). 4 See Villaral. (1997), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) and Huerta and Gonzalez (2000) for further discussion. 5 For instance, Diaz Alejandro (1985) attributed the fast liberalisation process of Chile in early-1980s without anappropriate regulatory framework for the financial system as the main causes of the Chilean banking crisis in1982 6 See Chang and Velasco (1998) for a model of banking crisis in open economies a la Diamond and Dybvig(1983). 7 As will be discussed in the next section, this element has had a fundamental role in explaining the Argentine2001-2 banking woe. 8 In particular, this mechanism more adversely affected developing countries as a consequence of the reduced sizeof their financial markets. 9 See Calvo (2003) for a discussion. 10 As will be discussed in the next section this measure was applied in Argentina during 2002. 11 See Cavallo and Cottani (1996) for a discussion. 12 Dollarization refers to the process of denominating credits and deposits in foreign currency. However, as thecurrency of denomination of such contracts was principally the US dollar this process is usually indicated asdollarization. 13 In fact, the dollarization of the BS was also thought of as an incentive to sustaining the exchange rate parity,since a devaluation of the currency would have implied the collapse of the BS (as was clear after the devaluation inJanuary 2002). 14 In fact, as the economic situation becomes more difficult and the general perception of the private sector biased towards the inevitability of the currency devaluation, international financial markets were virtually closed to the Argentine Government (see Frenkel and Damill 2003). 15 For a critical discussion on the asymmetric pesification see Gutierrez and Montes-Negret (2004). 16 This phenomenon is known as the balance-sheet effect (see Krugman 2001). 17 In fact, the political decision also contemplated compensation to banks for the asymmetry in the pesification ofloans and deposits. 18 The concept of hysteresis is introduced into economics from physics. It refers to a situation where a particular variable continues moving even though the original impulse does not hold anymore. For instance, often characterized as hysterisis is the inflation generated in an economy once a stabilisation plan is applied which consist of pegging the exchange rate while reducing monetary expansion to zero. Such a kind of inflation is often driven by the contracts fixed in previous periods which do not incorporate from a forward-looking viewpoint the new economic arrangement (for further discussion see Heymann (1987) referring to the application of the Austral Plan in Argentina in 1985). 19 As was explained previously the banking system has accumulated an important number of public bonds in default which are nowadays priced at ¼ of their original face value, a fact that produced a markedly negative effect on the banking system's balance sheet. For this reason, an adequate renegotiation of the approximately US$ 100 billion in defaulted bonds seems to be a necessary condition for improving the financial position of the banks and thus the health of the BS. 20 In fact, during the Currency Board regime the role of the Central Bank was mainly as a regulator of the financialsystem, since in such a situation the evolution of the monetary aggregates is almost completely endogenous (SeeCavallo and Cottani 1996). 21 See Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) for a discussion. 22 See Fanelli (2002) and Gutierrez and Montes-Negret (2004) for a review on this issue. 23 Another suggestion much less 'extreme' by Krugman (1999a, p. 42) is to tax foreign-denominated debt as a consequence of the negative externalities upon the economy as a whole involved in the balance sheet effect. 