<abstract></abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The concept of Credit Rationing (CR) has a long-lasting tradition in economic theory 1. The importance of the CR phenomenon arises because it assumes that prices may not adjust in credit markets in the way assumed by the conventional auctioneer mechanism. When an excess demand for a good prevails in any market, prices will increase until such level as demand equals supply. On the other hand, if an excess demand for credit exists but the interest rate charged on loans does not increase to achieve equilibrium, a CR situation may occur. The negative effects of such a situation on the efficient allocation of resources can be interpreted from both a micro and a macro perspective. Projects with high social return could not be undertaken and agents may not be able to smooth intertemporal consumption properly when credit is rationed (Jaffee and Stiglitz 1990). On the other hand, fluctuations in the availability of credit could induce macroeconomic cycles as well as distortions in the monetary policy transmission affecting the real output of the economy (McCallum 1991). The existence of CR has created an active debate as well as the construction of different theoretical frameworks to explain it. In the early 1950s, Paul Samuelson affirmed that "(...) non-price credit rationing was entirely inconsistent with profit-maximization bank behaviour (...)" (Baltensperger 1978, p.171). Starting with Hodgman (1960), a number of interpretations have been addressed to demonstrate that CR is consistent with competitive markets and rational behaviour. In particular, Hodgman (op cit., p.259) indicated that the primary issue in his work was to address the question of CR avoiding non-competitive market structures or exogenous limits on interest rates 2. By the same token, Jaffee and Modigliani (1969) asked if it is rational for a bank to limit the credit below the level demanded by borrowers when the interest rates and the amount of loanable funds are chosen according to profit maximization rules. However, although these frameworks properly addressed credit markets' particular characteristics, they failed in constructing a consistent framework (Jaffee and Stiglitz 1990, p.853). Hodgman (1960) was unable to derive a non-monotonic loan supply function dependent on the interest rate, and CR was finally an ad hoc consideration. Jaffee and Modigliani (1969) "implicity" assumed the banks' capacity to differentiate among borrowers and a positive and monotonic relationship between banks' expected profits and the interest rate charged on loans 3. Furthermore, they finally associated CR with institutional restrictions (Jaffee and Modigliani op cit., p. 860). After Akerlof's (1970) seminal paper, the imperfect information assumption was incorporated as a key element to explain CR. The first paper to incorporate this assumption was Jaffee and Russell (1976) with Moral Hazard considerations. Furthermore, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) emphasized Adverse Selection problems. Nevertheless, there still remains an important debate about the empirical importance of CR as a consequence of Imperfect Information problems 4. In this paper I will critically address the principal features of the Jaffee and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) models to explain how the Imperfect Information assumption helps answer the question about CR. Following these frameworks, an empirical analysis will be provided to determine the CR's possible impact on the Argentine economy. The principal conclusion of this paper is that the Imperfect Information assumption helps explain CR via the presence of a non-monotonic relationship between bank's expected profits and the loan interest rate. The empirical evidence on the Argentine case suggests that CR is a feature on those less-collateralized borrowers between 1996 and 2001. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I introduces the definition of CR and Imperfect Information. In section II Jaffee and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) are developed and discussed. Section III addresses a framework proposed by Berger and Udell (1992) to test the empirical evidence on Argentina, and Section IV concludes. <heading>I. Definitions</heading><heading>A. Imperfect Information</heading>Following Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990) I will refer to Imperfect Information as opposed to Symmetric Information, to a situation in which "(...) borrowers and lenders do not have equal access to all available information (...)" (op cit., p.840). Asymmetric information is considered a particular case of Imperfect Information, with two different cases to be discussed in the paper: Moral Hazard (Hidden Actions) and Adverse Selection (Hidden Information). Moral Hazard refers to a situation whereby one part of an economic contract is unable to observe the actions carried out by the other part, and which may negatively affect the interest of one of the agents involved. Adverse Selection arises when trading decisions of one individual depend on privately-held information which adversely affects uniformed agents (Mas-Colellal. 1995). <heading>B. Credit Rationing</heading>The definition of CR includes a broad range of alternatives (See, Keeton 1979, Jaffee and Stiglitz 1990). Following Keeton (op cit., p.9), there are two types of Credit Rationing: Type (1) refers to a situation where an individual receives a smaller-than-desired loan at the market interest rate; Type (2) occurs when some firms or agents receive loans while others, identical from the lender's viewpoint, do not. Hereafter, CR will refer to the type (2) stated above, i.e. an equilibrium situation since both, lenders and borrowers, are maximizing profits (that is, there is no economic rational incentive to depart from this situation). <heading>II. Theoretical models</heading>The first theoretical model which includes the Imperfect Information assumption to explain CR was Jaffee and Russell (1976). The presence of Moral Hazard behaviour by a group of borrowers who are indistinguishable ex ante by banks, in the form of an incentive to default on the loan, explains why banks may decide not to increase the interest rate above a certain level. In this situation it is possible to get an interest rate maximising bank's profits below the level at which the loanable funds market clears. On the other hand, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) emphasised the Adverse Selection problem. In such a case, banks know that a positive relationship exists between the interest rate they charge on loans and the risk of each project. As the risk of the borrower's pool has a negative effect on the banks' expected profits, and banks are not able to distinguish among the risks of an individual project, they may decide not to increase the interest rate above certain level. Again, it is possible to get an interest rate which maximizes banks' expected profits below the clear-market level. In the following subsections I will address in depth both the Jaffee and Russell (op cit.) and the Stiglitz and Weiss (op cit.) models, finishing the section with a discussion on the criticism to the explanation of CR via the imperfect information assumption. <heading>A. Moral Hazard</heading>In Jaffee and Russell (1976) there are two types of agents: honest and dishonest. The assumption of how each of the two agent-types behaves is central to explain the Moral Hazard hypothesis. While the honest agents never default on their commitments 5, dishonest agents do this under certain conditions. If the costs of default (Z) are less than the principal plus interest of the loan contract (LR) dishonest agents default. Formally, they default if Z < LR6. These costs might be interpreted as "reputation" costs, which affect the capability of getting future loans and, indirectly, expected income (Jaffee and Russell op cit., p.654). It is also assumed that the lender can not distinguish ex ante if the borrower is either honest of dishonest. Each agent's characteristics are only revealed ex post. Furthermore, dishonest agents will attempt to act, ex ante, as do the honest. This fact eliminates the possibility that the lender select only those honest agents and summarises the Imperfect Information assumption behind this framework. The loan demand function, aggregating both types of agents, is obtained from a utility maximisation problem under conventional characteristics of the utility function. It is assumed that preferences among agents are identical, which summarised the impossibility of differentiating ex ante between honest and dishonest agents. In the interest rate (i.e. R) and loans (i.e. L) locus, the demand for loanable funds could be summarised as follows. <figure/>As can be seen in Figure 1, the demand for loans is negatively sloped in the R-L axis. If the interest rate increases, the quantity of loanable funds demanded decreases. On the supply side, it is assumed that lenders maximise expected profits in a competitive market. In this situation, arbitrage conditions determine a unique interest rate which banks pay depositors i (i.e. the cost of getting loanable funds by banks). So, the expected return for the lender can be represented as, (1)  FORMULA , where LR means the principal times interest of the loan, λ[Zi?]the probability of repayment and LI is the lender's funding cost 7. The probability of repayment λ[LR]is assumed to be negative related to LR (formally, λLR' [lr] < 0), as a consequence of the positive relationship between default risk and LR8. Competitive loan market conditions imply π = 0, from which it is possible to determine the supply loan function, (2)  FORMULA  In what follows I will depart slightly from Jaffee and Russell's (op cit.) explanation in order to achieve clarity in the exposition. Differentiating (2), the slope of the supply function in the locus R - L can be expressed as, (3)  FORMULA  This expression can be either positive or negative, depending on the term λ[lr] + λR' [LR]LR . As was previously explained, λ[LR] is the repayment probability, which adopts high values (i.e. close to one) for low absolute values of L and R9. As λLR'[LR]<0 the slope of the supply function will be positive for low values of L and R10. As the values of L and R increase the value of λ[Zi?]will decrease, which can be reflected in a supply curve with a negative slope. This possibility is related to the default incentive generated in dishonest agents as LR increases (i.e. the Moral Hazard problem). We can assume an arbitrary value of Z for which further increases in L and R leads to a supply curve with negative slope. Graphically, <figure/>As the interest rate charged to borrowers should be at least equal to the cost of funding by lenders (i.e. i), the supply curve never reaches values below I (See figure 2). In Figure 2 there is a point denoted by E at which supply and demand curves intercept, so that the loan market clears at this interest rate level. At this equilibrium the interest rate is above I, reflecting a premium charged on loanable funds to compensate for the default risk of dishonest agents. Immediately there emerges the question about under which condition it is possible to reach a CR situation. This means finding a situation in which lenders can decide rationally to lend an amount below the quantity of loanable funds demanded by borrowers. The answer is straightforward. As lenders' expected benefits are positively related to the probability of repayment (i.e.  FORMULA ) and the probability of repayment is negatively related to the amount and interest rate of the loan (i.e. d λ[ LR ] < 0), there is a non-monotonic relationship between n (i.e. banks' expected profits) and LR (i.e. principal plus interest on the loan contract). For low values of LR, banks' expected profits increase in LR until such point at which the repayment probability is low enough to decrease banks' profits (see Figure 3). <figure/>A CR situation may arise if at the level L*R* there still exists an excess demand for credit. The banks will not increase the interest rate, since the Moral Hazard effect, via the increases in the proportion of agents behaving dishonestly, decreases the bank's expected profits. This is an equilibrium situation, as competitive loan markets and profit maximisation behaviours were assumed. <heading>B. Adverse Selection</heading>In the case of Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) the Imperfect Information assumption is characterised by an Adverse Selection problem. It is assumed that the lender is unable to distinguish ex ante each individual project's characteristics. The principal features of the model are presented below. Each project is defined by a distribution F(R,£)where R represents the mean return while 0 indicates the project's associated risk. Although the mean return of the project R is directly observable by the bank, the associated risk 0 is not. However, it is assumed that for two projects where 01>02, (4)  FORMULA  The gross return of the riskier project is at least equal to the gross return of the relatively safer project for an arbitrary period of time y11. It is assumed that a firm defaults if C+R≤B(1+r), where C is the collateral, R the gross return of the project and B(1+r) is the principal plus interest of the loan. This inequality assumes that the entrepreneur defaults whenever the return of the project plus the collateral is less than or equal to the loan plus interests. The return to the firms can be summarised as follows, (5)  FORMULA  meaning that whenever R-(1+r)B>-C (i.e. R+C>(1+r)B) the firm will not default and the net return will be R-(1+r)B. On the other hand, in those cases where R-(1+r)B<-C (i.e. R+C<(1+r)B) the firm will default and the net return will be  - C (i.e. the loss of the collateral appropriated by the bank). This characterisation implicitly assumes that banks will also appropriate any residual outcome of the project. The existence of a limited liability framework allows firms to default in cases where R-(1+r)B<-C, because they do not have to respond with their own resources in this situation. In fact, the default incentive by some firms could be associated with the punishment or costs they may incur, compared with the benefits of this action. As the limited liability is present in the model, an incentive to default exists 12. <figure/>It is clear from Figure 4 that the firm's profits function is a non-monotonic convex function in the π(R,r)-R locus. This characteristic implies that higher-risk projects are associated with a higher expected net return profit 13. The bank's return can be defined as (6)  FORMULA  which indicates that when R+C>(1+r)B (i.e. a non-default situation), the bank receives the principal plus interest. Contrariwise, whenever R+C<(1+r)B (i.e. a default scenario) the bank receives the collateral plus any of the firm's possible return. Graphically, <figure/>It is clear that the bank return function is concave in the locus ρ(R,r)-R, implicitly reflecting the negative relationship between project risk and expected bank return. Riskier projects are associated with lower expected profits by the bank, as the short dashed lines indicate, moving from the north-west to the south-east region. In what follows I will depart slightly from Stiglitz and Weiss's (1981) model for the sake of clarity. From Figure 4, one can observe that there is an expected return to the firm which is equal to zero for a combination of R, B, r and, implicitly, of θ. It is interesting to represent the firm's net expected return and the corresponding values of r and θ as follows, (7)  FORMULA  Two main results can be derived from the expression above, representing the central part of the Stiglitz and Weiss (op cit.) analysis: (8)  FORMULA  (9)  FORMULA  Expression (8) formally describes the positive relationship between the expected return to the firm and the project risk addressed graphically in Figure 4. Expression (9) indicates that an interest rate increase has a negative effect on the firm's expected profits 14. Totally differentiating the firm's expect profits and equating to zero, it is possible to formally find the interest rate's effect on the project's risk 15. This is the key result in Stiglitz and Weiss (op cit.) for explaining how the Imperfect Information assumption explains CR. Formally, (10)  FORMULA  from which it is possible to define, (11)  FORMULA  And, using equations (8) and (9), expression (11) takes the form (12)  FORMULA  which is clearly positive. This expression indicates that a positive relationship between the interest rate and the project risk exists. Furthermore, as banks realise this, it is possible that they decide, in certain situations, not to increase the interest rate in order to avoid worsening the borrower pool quality. The positive relationship between the project risk and the interest rate and the negative relationship between the bank's expected profit and the project risk, have substantial implications in the expected return to the bank. In particular, such a relationship may generate a non-monotonic association between the expected return to the bank and the interest rate. <figure/>As it is shown in Figure 6, there is a positive effect of the interest rates on the expected return to the bank until the interest rate which maximises the expected return to the bank (r*) is reached. Further interest rate increases reduce the expected return to the bank as a consequence of: (i) the worsening of the borrower pool (Adverse Selection) and (ii) the negative effect of the riskier borrower pool on the bank's expected profits. The possible CR outcome will depend on the final position of both the supply and the demand curves. While the supply of loanable funds will depend on the mean return of loans ρ16, the aggregate demand is related to the market interest rate r. For this reason, in order to graphically plot the relationship between the aggregate supply and demand for credit in the L - R axis, it is necessary to take into account both r and ρ. <figure/>Following Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), a CR situation is observable from Figure 7. The interest rate at which aggregate demand equals aggregate supply, denoted by rm, is above the interest rate that maximises the bank's expected profits. As is clear from the discussion below, banks will not increase the interest rate above r*. Depending on the features of the aggregate demand for credit, this situation may be consistent with a CR scenario. As was plotted in Figure 7, a CR situation will exist at interest r* and excess demand will be equal to Z17. <heading>D. Criticism on the explanation of CR through Imperfect Information</heading>One of these models' central assumptions was that lenders are unable to distinguish ex ante the borrowers' characteristics. Nevertheless, in the credit markets the interest rate is not the only contract dimension under consideration (see Bester 1987b, p.888). In particular, banks intend to reduce information problems through collateral requirements as well as borrowers' credit histories or minimum income certificates. All these features may reduce the Asymmetric Information problems in such a way that lenders can properly distinguish among borrowers. In this situation, the explanation of CR via Asymmetric Information problems may not hold anymore 18. In particular, Bester (op cit., pp.887-888) argued that in the credit markets there is a self-selection process whereby only low-risk borrowers accept high collateralized loans, thus avoiding asymmetric information problems. The feasibility of eliminating all the information problems through these "screening devices" could be criticised because it rests on the assumption that borrowers differ only in a limited dimension of characteristics (e.g. risk)19. Following Stiglitz and Weiss (1992, pp.162-163), I sustain that some degree of residual uncertainty after collateral is a typical feature of debt contracts, which implies that collateral is not able to eliminate all the credit markets' information problems. It has also been addressed that in some developing countries the sources of CR may not be directly related to Imperfect Information problems since borrowers may have a "(...) great deal of information about relevant borrower characteristics (...)" (Gosh et al., 2000). Nevertheless, this feature is characteristic of certain informal markets in underdeveloped countries where personal relationships between lenders and borrowers are possible, but is difficult to interpret in larger, formal economies. Finally, some researchers have argued that the empirical evidence does not unequivocally suggest the existence of CR as a consequence of Asymmetric Information problems (See Berger and Udell 1992), this discussion's being the object of the next section. <heading>III. Empirical Evidence</heading>There is extensive literature on the empirical evidence on CR. On the one hand, Sofianosal. (1990) found evidence of CR in those loans not agreed under commitment in the US between 1973 and 1987, while Ghoshal. (2000) agreed with the CR hypothesis in less-developed countries. On the other hand, authors such as King (1986) or Riley (1987) found limited empirical support of CR phenomena. Furthermore, Berger and Udell (1992) concluded that there was no important evidence of CR as a consequence of Asymmetric Information problems in the US between 1977 and 1988. As these authors employed different techniques to test CR 20, the results suggest that the way in which the empirical tests are constructed, as well as the country's degree of development, might affect the conclusions in one or the other direction. In particular, as a consequence of the characteristics involved in the CR concept, the empirical measure relies on important difficulties. As ex post the aggregate supply and demand for credit will be equal, the problem is how to measure the ex ante demand and supply for credit 21. To test CR, some researchers focused on one of the Imperfect Information approach's corollaries (see Berger and Udell 1992). In a CR situation the interest rate charged on loans should reflect some degree of stickiness, which implies a low correlation between the loan and the market interest rate 22. The main purpose of this section is to introduce a simple empirical CR measure based on the hypothesis of Imperfect Information problems to analyse the importance of CR in Argentina. In what follows, two tests based on Berger and Udell (1992) will be introduced. <heading>A. The Argentine Case</heading>Berger and Udell (op cit.) proposed two empirical tests for measuring CR: (i) the Stickiness test and (ii) the Proportions test. In the case of (i) a low correlation between the loan interest rate and the market interest rate (i.e. stickiness in the loan interest rates), may indicate a CR situation. The proportions test implies that, if it is possible to segment the market into two groups, where one of these corresponds to the safest borrowers, the proportion of loans to this group should increase under CR conditions 23. Furthermore, as the safest group should have less information problems, the degree of stickiness of the interest rate charged to this group should be lower than for the other group. Although the primary objective of Berger and Udell (1992) was to construct an econometric model for testing the CR hypothesis, they enriched the analysis graphically using time series data. Furthermore, the graphical analysis was in the direction of the econometric outcomes and constituted a useful support of their main conclusions (Berger and Udell op cit., pp.1063-1071). Taking this into account, in what follows I will introduce a graphical analysis of both tests for the Argentine case. Economic considerations and data availability induced a special definition of the variables utilized in the Argentine case. In particular, the classification was segmented by the degree of collateral involved in each group of borrowers. In fact, the secured group (those having collateralised loans) are less likely to suffer CR since they are probably less exposed to information problems (Catao 1997, p.18). On the other hand, following Lliteras and Salloum (2002, p.6), less-collateralised loans such as Current Accounts Overdrafts or Discounted Documents are more likely to be rationed in the short-run. Taking into account these considerations, and expanding Catao (1997)'s credit classification 24, loans will be divided into high collateralised loans (HCL)25 and low collateralised loans (LCL)26. Homogeneous data with a breakdown among different loan types is only available since early 1996. After December 2001, as a direct consequence of the Argentine banking crisis, information on interest rates and loans has homogeneity problems 27. For these reasons, the sample data utilized is 1996:04-2001:12. As a consequence of the highly dollarised Argentine banking system, loans will be segmented into two categories: local currency (i.e. Arg$) and dollars (i.e. US$). The market interest rate was constructed as the Argentine country risk index in percentage points plus the short-term Treasury rate. Interest rates for both, HCL and LCL, have been built as weighted averages. <figure/><figure/>From Graphs 1 and 2, it is clear that the correlation with the market interest rate is greater in the case of the interest rate charged on LCL. This evidence, in principle, is not in the direction of the presence of CR resulting from Imperfect Information problems 28. Furthermore, the HCL group, where imperfect information problems might be less important, shows a stickier interest rate. Berger and Udell (1992) addressed this point, indicating that "(...) Collateral has been found to be associated with higher risk and therefore may be associated with more information problems and loan rate stickiness (...)" (Berger and Udell 1992, p.1055)29. However, although this evidence is in line with Berger and Udell's (1992) US empirical results, in the Argentine case it may not be conclusive. Institutional distortions in late 2001, where the correlation between low collateralised loans and market interest rates was more important, might explain this phenomenon 30. In fact, the marked rise in the LCL interest rate may reflect this abnormal situation as a consequence of the short maturity of this kind of loan. On the other hand, the HCL group has a longer maturity with an important proportion of fixed interest rate loans. This fact could explain a higher degree of stickiness of HCL in the short-run compared with that corresponding to the LCL. When the proportion test is analysed, the conclusions are more robust. The correlation between the market interest rate and the proportion of HCL over LCL is important, excluding the abnormal period in late 2001 (see Graphs 3 and 4). In fact, when the market conditions tightened (i.e. interest showed an upward trend) the proportion of HCL increased. <figure/><figure/>This fact may reflect an attitude by banks of allocating their assets (i.e. loans) relatively biased toward those with high collateral in order to protect themselves from those borrowers more subject to Asymmetric Information problems. From this point of view, the choice of a relatively more collateralised portfolio is in line with the CR hypothesis as a source of avoiding Asymmetric Information problems. In this case, those applicants for LCL might have suffered CR problems in Argentina during the period 1996:04-2001:12. This fact is clearer observing Graph 4, where LCL and HCL in US$ have been considered. In this case the correlation between the proportion of HCL over LCL and the market interest rate is stronger than in the previous case of loans in Arg$. This situation may more accurately reflect the Argentine banking system's characteristics as a consequence of the large proportion of US$-denominated loans (US$-denominated loans represented almost two-thirds of the total loans in the considered period)31. This fact confirms the assumption that those borrowers accounting for LCL in the analysed period may have suffered credit rationing as a consequence of Asymmetric Information Problems. <heading>IV. Summary and Conclusions</heading>In this paper I have critically addressed the two principal frameworks which incorporate the Imperfect Information assumption to explain CR. While Jaffee and Russell (1976), the first model to introduce this hypothesis, emphasised Moral Hazard problems, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) developed a model which relies on Adverse Selection considerations. Once these models were introduced, I answered the question as to how the imperfect information assumption explains CR in a way which synthesised both frameworks. As lenders are unable to distinguish from an ex ante basis between the risk and behaviour of an individual borrower, a non-monotonic relationship exists between expected lender profits and the interest rates charged on loans. In this situation, the interest rate which maximises the expected lender profits may differ from the market-clear rate. If there is an excess demand for loans at the former interest rate, a situation of CR may exist. Nevertheless, the CR hypothesis as a consequence of imperfect information was criticised by different researchers, particularly from an empirical point of view. It has also been emphasised that the existence of contractual mechanisms such as collateralised loans may help to differentiate borrower characteristics in a way which avoids asymmetric information problems. I have argued that differences among borrowers are not unidimensional, and a limited set of contracts may not generate a symmetric information scenario, since some degree of uncertainty after collaterals is a probable outcome in credit market contracts. I also indicated that empirical CR measurements rely on important difficulties, since they involve ex ante data, implying that supporting the hypothesis of CR or not might be sensitive to the way in which the data and the empirical tests are constructed. To conclude the analysis, two empirical tests on CR were introduced, adapting the Berger and Udell (1992) framework to the Argentine case. The evidence, although not conclusive, suggests the existence of CR among those less-collateralised borrowers in Argentina between 1996 and 2001. Further analysis on the evidence of CR in Argentina incorporating different data for testing CR via econometric techniques, the empirical study of the effects of collateral on Asymmetric Information problems, and the analysis of sticky prices (e.g. interest rate) as a consequence of imperfect information are interesting extensions of this paper. * I would like to thank ,  and  for helpful comments and suggestions. 1 See Baltensperger (1978) and Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990). 2 Such as ceilings on interest rates imposed by usury laws, Hodgman (op cit., p.258). 3 The importance of this assumption will be explained in section II. 4 For example, De Meza and Webb (1992) pointed out that CR is endemic to competitive markets where information issymmetrically distributed. 5 The plausibility of default by honest agents indeed exists in Jaffee and Russell (1976). This particular case occurs when incomeis associated with a stochastic variable, and the realized income is less than the capital plus interests agreed in the ex ante loancontract. This situation could occur to honest agents if they are "unlucky," since they did not ex ante expect to default on the loan(Jaffee and Russell 1976, p.657). Nevertheless, this consideration does not change the main results of the model. 6 Differences between honest and dishonest could also be associated with different levels of Z. While honest agents have a high Z, dishonest have a low level of Z (Jaffee and Stiglitz 1990, p.862). 7 In fact, as the term I is equal to (1+i), it is clear that L(1+i) represents the lender's cost of funding. It is also assumed thatlenders do not have any other costs. 8 As was explained previously, dishonest agents default only if the inequality condition Z<LR is satisfied. It is clear that as thevalue of the term LR increases for a given Z, there is a positive default effect on the agents which behave dishonestly. 9 When the absolute level of the interest rate and the amount of loanable funds is low enough, the necessary condition forachieving a default situation Z<LR is less attainable. Furthermore, it is possible to assume that there is no default at all for certainvalues of LR below an arbitrary minimum Zmin (Jaffee and Russell op cit., p.656). 10 In this situation the probability of repayment is high enough such as λ[LR]- λR'[LR]LR >0. 11 In particular, Stiglitz and Weiss (op cit.) assumed that greater θ corresponds to greater risk in the sense of mean preserving spreads. It means that two projects with different probabilities of success and different outcomes will have the same mean return. Formally, for two projects a (high risk) and b (low risk), the probability of success of project a will be lower while the payoff will be higher, compared with project b (i.e. Pa<Pb and Xa>Xb). Nevertheless, the mean expected value of both projects is assumed to be the same (i.e. PaXa=PbXb). For further discussion, see Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990, p.857). 12 See Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990, pp.866-8). 13 This condition is observable following Graph 4. As the firm's variance return increases (i.e. the project risk), an imaginary convex combination of points in the π(R,r) curve (from default to non-default values) is moving from the southeast to the north-west region. This situation is observable through the short dash lines in Figure 4. In this scenario, it is also worth noting that the firm's expected benefit is also increasing. 14 This expression considers only the non-default region (i.e. R >(1+r)B-C), since in a default situation the net return does notdepend on r (i.e. it is always -C). 15 In fact, the objective is to clarify the relationship between the interest rate and the project risk in a situation where firms aremaximising the expected profits. 16 It is clear that ρ is associated with the interest rate received by depositors. In a competitive market of loanable funds, ρ could beassumed as "given" from the bank's viewpoint. 17 Or, as Stiglitz and Weiss argued (op cit., p.393) "(...) When the price (interest rate) affects the nature of the transaction, it maynot also clear the market (...)". 18 See Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990, pp.866-8) and Freixas and Rochet (1997, pp.144-5). 19 In particular, Jaffee and Stiglitz (op cit.) stated that "(...) as the dimensionality of the space of borrower characteristics is largerthan the dimensionality of the space of contracts, it seems unlikely that perfect information can be obtained (...)" (op cit. p.866). 20 For a review, see Berger and Udell (1992). 21 Or, putting it another way, "(...) We generally observe the quantity of credit that is transacted ... not the amount that isdemanded or supplied (...)" (Jaffee and Stigltiz 1990, p.874). 22 If the credit market is under CR conditions, lenders may refuse to increase the interest rate charged on loans in order to avoidMoral Hazard or Adverse Selection problems. 23 Berger and Udell (1992) differentiated two borrower groups: commitment and non-commitment borrowers, in order to pursuethe tests. 24 Catao's (1997) classification segmented the credit into mortgage and non-mortgage loans. However, other credits such aspledge loans have important collateral and may also be less exposed to information problems. In order to address this issue Idecided to work with broader categories. 25 High collateralised loans include: mortgage, pledge and the category "others." 26 Low collateralised loans include: current accounts overdrafts, other overdrafts, personal loans and bills. 27 For an overview of the economic policies implemented in Argentina since 2001 see Frenkelal. (2003). 28 In fact, LCL should show a greater degree of stickiness because this group could be more affected by asymmetric informationproblems. 29 The hypothesis here is simple, but controversial. It means that, as this group is more subject to information problems lendersask them for collateral. However, the opposite could also be true. As they give collateral they are less likely to suffer AsymmetricInformation problems. Whether the first or the second argument is correct is a topic for further research. 30 In particular, in late 2001 most banking deposits were frozen by law (i.e. "the corralito") (see Frenkelal. 2003). 31 Almost all public and private banks attempted to protect themselves from the exchange rate risk by concentrating their assets in US$-denominated loans (see Frenkelal. 2003). 