Hillman's (2001) article is written to challenge the discipline of psychology, asking psychologists to re-address the way they view the world; to ask how it is best to measure human interaction within this world, and to either question whether the self should be viewed as separate from the other, or if the boundary between these is blurred to some degree. Hillman (2001) is correct to claim that addressing the boundary between the self and the world is a fundamental core issue for psychology, if it is agreed that there is a problem in psychology which requires this to be re-addressed. If the primary purpose of psychology is to further the discipline academically then Hillman (2001) is incorrect to claim this boundary is the core issue, it should be considered as one of many issues taken into account when conducting research. Any scientific discipline ultimately requires an objective measure of its subject, which in psychology can best be conducted in a laboratory. However, if the sole purpose of psychology is seen as drawing conclusions about people's behaviour from observing them in the environment in which they live, this boundary definitely is the one core issue psychologists need to address. If this boundary was properly addressed, as found in some psychological disciplines, a shift would be evident in both experimental methods and psychologist's approach to the human in general. From Galileo to Rene Descartes the discipline of science was formed to identify the objective and not the subjective, which has in turn influenced how psychologists view the self, (Abram, 1996). Galileo emphasised the objective as being measurable, this includes measurements of mass, velocity, temperature and volume. The subjective does not have the same properties, so should not be a concern for scientific study, as it is concerned with experiences such as colour, odour, pleasure and pain, (Goodwin, 1999). In a similar way Descartes separated the mind from the worldly body allowing humans to study the world at an objective distance, (Abram, 1996). Behavioural psychologists such as Ivan Petrovich Pavlov developed psychology into a science using the determined scientific techniques. The person was studied irrespective of what might be contained within the mind, tests were purely of the behaviour exhibited, (Fancher, 1996). Any claim like Hillman's would have been dismissed by Pavlov for being un-important as no focus was put on the idea of self, irrespective of any boundary it may or may not have with the world, (Jack et al, 2003). Despite the shift from behaviourism to cognitivism within psychology, it is only with the shift now to embodied cognitivism, that claims like Hillman's (2001) are being addressed. However, much research is still conducted with the view that the self is quite separable from the other, for example many laboratory experiments cut ties with the world assuming this will have no impact on any achieved results. It has been argued that the subjective should actually be what psychologists study, as psychology fundamentally deals with the explanation of mental as well as behavioural phenomena, (Rozin, 2001). Including the study of the subjective challenges the use of such a rigid scientific influence in psychology. Hillman's (2001) claim addresses this objective/ subjective divide by questioning psychologist's assumptions of what constitutes self. Defining the boundary between the self and the world in anything but a scientific way would mean shifting the view of a distinct self and other, to a self which necessarily incorporates some or all of this other, the human would be seen as embedded within the environment. An embedded view of the human would generate problems for research as more environmental influence should be included in studies, but in what form, and to what degree? Abram (1996) stresses that not only should you not cut out the subjective parts of the mind from psychological study, but to study the human without relating to the real life environment is misguided. Abram (1996) argues the self should not be seen as separate or removable from the environment, even the positioning of the senses demonstrates the difficulty in defining the boundary between the self and the world. The position of the eyes, ears and nostrils suggests the human body is like a circuit that completes itself with the interaction with the environment, and so humans are not passively positioned within the environment they actually need to interact with it too, (Abram 1996). The fact that sensory deprivation is so appalling for humans (Bexton et al, 1954), and that it can even be used as a form of torture also shows how the boundaries between the world and the self are perhaps not as clear cut as some psychologists would like. By expanding the scientific definition of the self to involve more of an interaction with the world, psychology would have to study more of the subjective because humans could not be separated from their own subjective environment. Researchers such as Kingstone et al (2003) and Lindsay et al (1998) are changing the way they conduct research in completely separate disciplines of psychology, which in turn demonstrates that Hillman (2001) is correct to make the claim he does. By expanding the boundaries of the traditional definitions of the self, and what is needed for people to consider themselves as whole, researchers have successfully contributed to existing research studies. Kingstone et al (2003) conducted an experiment into the effect of social context in attention research. They concluded that using arrows in attention studies results in participants performing poorly as they look in the direction that the arrow points, even if the arrows do not point to the target item. The same results were found for faces where eyes looked in a different direction to the target items. The results of Kingstone et al (2003) have challenged the researchers to re-evaluate their previous laboratory studies, as they claim that visual search studies using real world stimuli draw different conclusions from those studies which do not. Humans are unable ignore the symbols and signs which are embedded within their culture (Pickering, 1999), and so people are motivated to perform in certain ways because of the environment in which they live; you could not therefore claim that a human should not be separated so abruptly from their environment to be tested. Kingstone et al (2003) claims that in a real life situation involving attention, the environment of the person would undoubtedly have an effect on their actions. Lindsey et al (1998) addresses the problem that eye-witness studies are hard to generalise to real life events as the conditions in both are very different. This study demonstrated that by changing the laboratory setting and conditions of the experiment to reflect those experienced in everyday life, dramatically altered the results found for the effect of stress on memory whilst witnessing a crime. It had previously been hypothesised that stress negatively impacted the memory of the witness however, Lindsey et al's (1998) more realistic study found exactly the opposite to be true. This study again demonstrates that by defining the self in a way which includes influence from the environment limits the validity of some laboratory studies. Participants need environmental factors to facilitate an accurate response. Defining the human as Hillman (2001) describes and approaching the study of the self in what could be considered a more human way, could have dramatic implications for certain disciplines within psychology which are concerned with directly helping the person. R. D Laing (1959) was an advocate of treating those with schizophrenia through analysis of both the patient and the environment in which they lived. Laing (1959) claimed that schizophrenia results from a break down in attention which can be controlled by a practitioner who understands how their patient's world must appear to them. Laing (1959) realised that you cannot split a schizophrenic from their environment and expect to help them as this is an artificial division, the environment influences schizophrenia and in turn should be studied along with the patient. However, expanding the definition of the self to incorporate the environment creates the problem of objectivity within research, which is seen as fundamental to any scientific discipline. Maurice Merleau-Ponty's work placed the self firmly back within the body, as he asserted that deciding what constituted reality requires some sort of outside existence to the body, which he states is not possible, (Robbins, 1999). Merleau-Ponty's work compliments Hillman's (2001) quote because he also claims the self should not be seen as separable from the other, and to conduct psychological research with this view in mind is to draw a false and un-natural divide. If objectivity can not occur, this no longer makes the objective and subjective distinction as described by Descartes as clear cut, (Robbins, 1999). For example if people are not separate from the world, how can psychologists objectively study human behaviour when they are also confined within a subjective self? Researchers, according to Merleau-Ponty are unable to be objective because the definition of the self as embedded does not allow for this (Robbins, 1999). If the self is defined as inseparable from the other, and objectivity can never be achieved, it appears objective truths concerning the human can never be discovered. If researchers do not see their participants as a self who is embedded within the world, they cannot realise that this is also the case for them. Perhaps then psychology really is not a science in the traditional sense (Pickering, 1999) because objectivity of the subject cannot be achieved due to the embedded nature of the human, and, introspective methods which are discouraged by science as un-testable - are perhaps essential to psychological theories because they allow a personal insight into the self, (Jack et al 2003). Rosch (1997) was questioned by a Tibetan monk who claimed that to study the human without reflecting or meditating about the workings of the mind first was actually un-ethical, this introspective stance is seen by the monk to not only important but necessary. Accepting Hillman's (2001) quote as a core issue for psychology could well result with the acceptance that certain areas of psychology do not fit the criteria for a scientific discipline, as the self is seen as subjective, therefore not able to objectively carry out scientific research of the human. When psychology treats itself as a purely scientific discipline choosing not to study the subjective, and dismissing the studies of researchers such as Kingstone et al (2003) and Lindsey et al (1998) it is often accused of reducing human behaviour. Midgley (1995) claims that by reducing down the parts of a human in order to conduct a study, it is possible to miss the information which could be gathered from observing the whole person, who appears to operate as a single unit. Merleau-Ponty again demonstrates that the body as considered by science is not actually the body of life, and you cannot divide the person into separate systems to study independently, (Abram, 1996). So while reductionism is sometimes a genuine way to forward psychological scientific study, perhaps it should not be the only method used- especially when researchers have found that introducing 'real world' factors influences the obtained results. To reduce a human down in order to study behaviour defines the human as individual units which have no need for a concept of self in which to operate. If Hillman's (2001) claim is considered a core issue for psychology, reductionism will have no place within much of the study of the human. Defining a person as a number of smaller parts, leads to the feeling that the whole does not actually require a full self concept with which to operate. However, humans do feel as if they are a continuous identity which passes from one moment of time to the next, still remaining intact, (Pickering, 1999). If reductionism is not used within psychology, the question will now have to be addressed of where the boundary of the self and the world should be drawn. If the human should not be seen as smaller units, where does the whole unit end - how much of the other is involved in the self? Hillman (2001) does claim that the distinction is not the primary concern, it is more important to address the issue itself. However, it could be that coming from a reductionist scientific method where the individual is told they do not exist, to an over inclusive conception of the self - again could create a dilution of the self concept, which also results in the claim the individual does not exist. Psychologists who wish to expand the definition of the self include Macy (1991) who advocates that humans should dismiss the false view of the enduring self, and instead view the self as a process. Either viewing the self as a process, and so defining the boundary between the self and the world more towards the world, or seeing the human in reductionist terms creates lack of any self identity - something which must be present in some form to allow for psychological study of the self in the first place. If Hillman's (2001) statement were considered a core issue for psychology it would be crucial to avoid losing a concept of self, as has already been seen in reductionist methods, as this could again mean research conducted with this new version of the self losing meaning. The ancient Greek scholar Heraclites is often quoted as one of the first people to suggest the definition of the self should not be seen as a constant entity, instead he proposed that the world is in a permanent state of flux, and so in turn are humans, (Waterfield, 2000). However, recent interpretations of Heraclites' work suggest he actually viewed the world as having a meaning or true stability beneath the flux or appeared instability, (Hobbs, 2003). It could be that if Hillman's (2001) claim is considered the core issue for psychology it would be beneficial to view the self in this way too, with a surface instability but with a stable core or fundamental central unchanging centre. To view the self in this way would allow for an expansion of the current view - but still allow for psychological study to occur, as below the instability would be central stable identity suitable for testing. After all if humans do feel that they possess a stable continuous identity, (Pickering, 1999), yet can see themselves as changing overtime perhaps trusting the human view of the self may prove beneficial to research. As demonstrated by Laing (1959), Kingstone et al (2003) and Linsdey et al (2003), psychologists who want to contribute to the psychological discipline to aid human development, instead of for academic merit should perhaps absorb Hillman's (2001) claim into their research methods. The evidence suggests Hillman's (2001) claim could produce a more effective view of the self, (Jack et al, 2003), but as a result require a denouncing of scientific methods in certain areas of psychology. Traditional scientific methods which have a firm self-other distinction do forward the discipline and are legitimate ways to study the human. Yet this new approach to psychology as detailed by Hillman (2001), could take research into new levels of insight when this re-working of the self is considered. This definition of the self could also fundamentally change the way humans not only view psychological research, but their relationship with the world too. If humans in the West consider the self as including the world as well, regardless of where the boundary is created, there would be a greater necessity to preserve the earth and its resources. Macy (1999) has called this new world view a time of 'Great Turning', where people become aware through their senses of the deep ecology in which we have our being. 