Both 'marginal Costing' and 'full costing' information are methods of valuing and costing stock. They differ in one conceptual respect: whether fixed manufacturing costs are 'inventoriable' cost, i.e. if they are costs associated with the acquisition and conversion of manufacturing inputs into finished goods (Horngren p.191). <heading>Marginal vs. Full costing</heading>Marginal Costing or Variable Costing considers fixed manufacturing costs as period costs and thus assigns only manufacturing variable costs (direct labour, direct material and variable overheads) to individual products. Even though fixed overhead costs are part of manufacturing costs, the variable costing information considers them as fixed costs and adds them to the profit and Loss account directly as a lump sum, without assigning these costs to the individual finished goods. The full costing or absorption costing method on the other hand regards fixed manufacturing costs as product costs and allocates them to each individual product. Non-manufacturing costs are considered as fixed costs in both costing methods and added directly to the profit and loss account. Tables 1 and 2 graphically show the difference between the two costing methods. <figure/><heading>Profitability</heading>The effect on operating profits of the two costing methods will depend on the relation between production and number of sales, because the resulting change in inventory levels is valued differently. Three scenarios can be analysed. Production = Sales. If production levels coincide with the number of sales, the inventory will be unchanged as the closing stock will be the same as the opening stock. Hence profit levels under both methods will be identical. Production > Sales. This would imply that inventory levels increase and the closing stock will be positive. As the costs associated with the closing stock can be deferred by one period, the overall production costs in the current period will fall under both methods. As the Absorption costing method associates fixed costs to each individual product, the deductible variable costs (including fixed overheads), will be greater than the deductible variable costs incurred under the variable costing method (excluding fixed overheads); hence profits under full costing will be larger than under variable costing. Production < Sales. In this scenario the level of production is not sufficient to face the number of sales and inventories fall. In order to cover the "higher than production" number of sales a greater amount of fixed overheads will have to be brought forward in the opening inventory than is being deducted in the closing inventory. Under the absorption costing method a larger amount of costs (including fixed overheads) are added than under the absorption costing method, inflating costs and reducing profits. Hence operating profits under marginal costing will be larger than under full costing. <figure/><heading>Advantages and disadvantages</heading>Which method better to use is a question that can not clearly be answered and arguments for and against the different costing systems have to be considered. <heading>Variable Costing: </heading>Variable Costing information is easier to use as it highlights the individual impacts of fixed and variable costs. Consequently, it is easier to make cost effective decisions. When using the absorption costing method, sales fluctuations can have strange effects on profits. Profits can fall while sales rise, even though the cost structure and selling price remain constant. This is due to the consideration of over and under absorption, i.e. the difference between the budgeted fixed overhead rate and the actual incurred fixed overheads. By only taking a lump sum as fixed overhead costs, the marginal costing information avoids any contradictory impact of sales fluctuations. In addition, the marginal costing information avoids managerial behaviour that aims at inflating inventory levels to defer costs onto latter periods. <heading>Absorption costing:</heading>As a result of cost deferral up to the period where the goods are sold, full costing information allows for a steady profit level in industries that are highly seasonal, instead of large losses in the period where inventories are stocked up and high profits in the period where the produced goods are sold. The absorption costing method is regarded as the international measure of company performance. Top Management might prefer their internal costing information to match their external costing measure for financial markets to have a clear idea of company performance. 