<heading>Introduction :</heading>In a cross sectional data analysis for 40 low to middle income countries, I firstly underline Kwasi Fosus' findings concerning the impact of manufacturing exports on GDP growth. Secondly find what elements determine manufacturing exports and thus what implications these might have on policy making. In a first step I will analyse the effect of manufacturing exports in a production function type framework for 40 low to middle income countries over the period 1985-2000. With a new regression equation I will secondly investigate what factors determine manufacturing export growth from a supply side point of view, which will finally allow me to put forward policy implications that would lead to an improvement in the level of manufacturing exports and hence GDP growth. <heading>Literature Survey :</heading>Economic theory suggests that Exports contribute to economic growth. Export development allows the home country to concentrate investment on those sectors where it enjoys a comparative advantage. The larger global market will then firstly allow for economies of scale and thus higher levels of production. Secondly the world wide competition pressure put on home industries once entering the international market is likely to reduce inefficient capital utilization and promote technology diffusion, higher skilled labour and improved management skills. This will allow for an improvement in Total factor productivity and hence support economic growth. <fnote>Emery (1967), p. 471 </fnote>There have been several studies in the 1960's and 1970's that found a positive correlation between GDP growth and exports (Emery (1967), Maizels (1968) and Kravis (1970)). <fnote>Kwasi Fosu (1991) </fnote>M. Michaely (1977) however points out that by using absolute values for export-data as done by his predecessors, autocorrelation between exports and GDP growth will inevitably occur, since exports themselves are part of national output. To overcome this export bias, Michaely suggests that data representing the proportionate change of exports in GDP should be used. His results for 41 countries over the period 1950-1973 show positive correlation between GDP growth and proportionate export growth, albeit with a smaller Spearman rank coefficient (0.380) than earlier studies. <fnote>Michaely (1977), p.49-50 </fnote>Still today, the causality between exports and GDP growth to which Michaely refers to in his paper seems not to have found a clear cut answer. As exports are a major component of GDP, causality may run from exports to growth or vice versa. A number of sizeable recent empirical works, which studied several groups of less developed countries, have found no conclusive evidence on the causal relationship between exports and growth in these countries (Richards, D.G. (2001) and Begum and Shamsuddin (1998)). The importance of export composition was first analysed by Syron and Walsh (1968), dividing their data of developing countries in three different categories: (a) high food content in exports (66% or higher), (b) moderate food content (between 33 and 66%) and low food content in exports (less than 33%). Results of their findings showed that correlations between GDP and export growth were nil for the first category, positive in the second and positive and even larger in the third group. From this follows that countries exporting other than primary products will benefit more from exports than agricultural exporters. This leads the authors to conclude that "in order to benefit from exports an economy must have a minimum level of industrialisation"4. <fnote>Syron and Walsh (1967), p.343 </fnote>The use of bivariate correlation between exports and GDP growth however faces two fundamental criticisms. First, since exports are a component of GDP, there is strong bias in favour of a correlation between them. Second, such bivariate tests do not take into account the effects of other relevant factors on economic growth. Michalopouos and Jay (1973) are the first to estimate the effects of exports on economic growth in a production function type framework with cross sectional data. After constructing a regression equation incorporating average exports growth as a systematic non-zero error term to the traditional factor inputs capital (average capital growth) and Labour (average labour growth), the authors show how exports contribute directly to output, while raising the explanatory power (R²) of the estimated equation (1) to a considerable extent. <fnote>Michalopoulos and Jay (1973) </fnote>Based on this framework  Feder (1981) as well as Balassa (1984) go one step further in their cross sectional analysis of less developed countries, by outlining the implications of different trade policies. Feder (1981) suggests that non export sectors exhibit smaller marginal productivities than export sectors do. These differences are likely to arise from externalities (i.e. competition pressure, technological change, economies of scale, etc.) that are enabled when governments follow export oriented policies. Moreover, Balassa (1984) comes to the conclusion that by introducing the share of manufactured exports as a new independent variable explanatory power (R²) of the regression equation is increased. <fnote>Feder (1981), p. 71 </fnote><fnote>Balassa (1984), p.26 </fnote>Kwasi Fosu (1991) argues however that by entering manufacture share separately, Balassa (1984) assumes exports invariant of export composition. By including export composition into the economic growth equation interactively with the growth of exports (manX.ΔX), Kwasi Fosu vindicates the idea, that export composition is not extraneous². In other words, the impact of growth expansion itself depends on export composition. At the base of his analysis is an "export-augmented"- production function that, differentiated and slightly alternated, yields:  FORMULA  (1) Where ΔL is labour growth, ΔK capital growth and ΔX export growth. Kwasi Fosu raises the explanatory power (from 0.53 to 0.54) of the regression equation by adding the interactive variable ((manX)ΔX)), resulting in the following:  FORMULA  (2) Where (manX) ΔX is the share of manufactured exports multiplied by export growth. Given the authors' regression result for 64 middle income countries over the period 1960 to 1980, one can conclude that the manufacturing exports play a more decisive role in economic growth than any other type of exports do. There has only been few time series data analysis concerning the impact of export composition on economic growth. The importance of lagged dependent variables has been introduced in the production function type framework in the early 1990's. Most time series studies have focused their attention on the effect of business cycles on exports. It has been shown that exports of manufactured products are much less cyclically sensitive than exports of primary commodities. Greenawayal. (1999) constructed a panel of 69 countries and found that those developing countries that specialized in manufactured products were more likely to benefit from export-led growth than those which specialized in food or other primaries. <heading>Data description:</heading>I have decided to analyse the time period of 1985-2000. In line with most other papers relating GDP growth to exports, I used cross sectional data of average levels over the period 1985-2000. I opted to analyse the effect of exports on growth for 40 developing countries with low to middleincome levels, instead of upper middle income levels. The lack of infrastructure in these economies might lead one to prematurely conclude that a manufacturing export industry will not be able to develop. The data shows however that the share of manufacturing exports (ManX) measured in percent of overall exports is surprisingly high with a mean of 37.41 %. <fnote>as defined by World Bank </fnote><fnote>Manufactured goods comprise the following commodities: chemicals, basic manufactures, machinery and transport equipment, miscellaneous manufactured goods excluding division non-ferrous metals. (World Bank) </fnote>The mean average GDP growth per capita of (ΔY) 1.01% and high average Labour force growth (ΔL) of 21.37% furthermore underline the low development levels of the analysed economies. Gross capital formation (ΔK), measured in percentage change, shows a mean of 5.83, with data ranging from -12% to 33%. A very likely reason for the divergence in capital growth is the inclusion of war torn economies in the selection of my data (e.g. Albania, Benin, Papua New Guinea, etc...) that will most likely have experienced a fall in their capital stock during war-periods and thus negative capital growth. Since the data for gross formation of Capital has shown minor insignificancies in my regressions, I have opted to add another variable that codetermines the formation of capital, namely gross domestic savings (S) measured in percentage of GDP. The surprisingly low level of correlation (0.112, see appendix) between capital formation and savings might be explained by the fact that only domestic savings are considered instead of national savings. A severe lack of data for national savings of less developed countries forced me to use data of domestic savings. Over the period 1985-2000 exports (ΔX) grew by an average 6.25% in the 40 countries analysed. The data suggests that all countries (except for Kazakhstan) have benefited from an increase in exports over the last 15 years. Table 1 summarises the most important descriptive statistics for the data. More detailed descriptions can be found in the appendix. <table/>Three more variables are introduced in the second part of the main analysis. Foreign direct investment (fdi) is measured in percentage of GDP and exhibits a mean of 3.230. The variable lnW measures the percentage of overall expenditure spent on wages and salaries. The data shows a low standard deviation (0.6), resulting from similar wage expenditure patterns. Finally, electricity production measured in kWh per capita and denoted as elp has a very high standard deviation, since electricity producers as well as electricity importers are considered in my sample. (Table 2 shows basic features of data, see appendix for further information). <table/><heading>Estimation and Results:</heading><heading>A. The importance of export composition:</heading><heading>Regression :</heading>Similar to the original paper, I will base my analysis on the following equation:  FORMULA  (eq. 3) By taking the natural logarithm of exports (ΔlnX) I overcome minor insignificance issues, albeit with a cost of a reduced R². Table 3 shows the results for the different regression equations. Results of t-tests show that all coefficients are significant at the 5 % level. Moreover the F test result (0.000) shows overwhelming support for the legitimacy of all regressions. Including the average change of exports into the basic production function (eq.A), raises the explanatory value of the regression from 0.42 to 0.53. If now the share of manufacturing exports multiplied by the change of exports (ManX*lnΔX) is introduced in equation (C), the explanatory power is furthermore raised to 0.58. This indicates that by specifically adding manufactured exports, a larger share of the dependent variable is explained, suggesting that manufactured exports contribute to a larger extent to GDP growth than overall exports do. <table/>The positive slope coefficients for all independent variables imply their positive contribution to GDP growth. Intuitively, this result holds. An increase in savings will lead to higher levels of investment and thus higher capital formation, which will allow for more production and thus higher output. The growth of the labour force enables higher levels of specialisation and thus more efficiency in production. Positive correlation coefficient before the two export variables leads us to conclude that exports contribute positively to output growth. Given that lnΔX occurs twice in equation C, we can not precisely interpret the effect a percentage increase in exports has on GDP growth. I will underline the importance of manufacturing exports on growth by splitting my sample in two groups: (a) countries with a share of manufactured exports higher than 37% and (b) countries with a share of manufactured exports below 37%. Economies of group (a) show a higher correlation coefficient (0.538) between exports (lnx) and GDP growth (ΔY) than do countries of group (b) (0.100). (See appendix for scatter graphs) Correlation matrices: For countries with manx > 37 <table/>For countries with manx < 37 <table/>This leads one to conclude that countries with a larger share of manufacturing exports benefit more from exports, underlining once more that not only exports but much more their composition play a major role for economic growth. As can be seen below only manx*lnx and lnx exhibit high correlation which might indicate the existence of multicollinearity. But since the sample size is large (n=40) and the variance of the disturbance term is small (0.000) the risk of multicollinearity is overcome. <table/>To investigate the validity of the model, I will firstly test for Heteroscedasticity. Using Whites' test as the relevant framework, I regress the squared residuals against the independent variables and their squares to analyse whether the error term has a non constant variance.  FORMULA  In order for there to be homoscedasticity, all slope coefficients must be equal to zero, which would imply that e² = a 0 and thus that the error term would only depend on a constant factor. Hence the null hypothesis takes the form H 0: a 0 = a 1 = a 2 = ......= 0. The result of the Whites' test suggests a probability of 10%, which allows us to conclude that the error term is homoscedastic; albeit just. By further adding independent variables such as foreign direct investment or wage expenditure the heteroscedasticity test shows higher probability, proving that omitted variables are likely to be the cause of such a narrow result. (See Appendix for full test results) The next test to be undertaken is the Normality test, which tests for the distribution in the error term. Only once the error term follows a normal distribution, will its expected value be zero and thus in line with the Gauss Markov assumptions. By drawing the Histogram of residuals (see Appendix) and by comparing the Jarque Bera-test, which suggests a probability of 53% of Normality, one can safely conclude that the residuals follow a normal distribution. Conducting the Reset test yields a probability of 46%, proving the non existence of systematic information in the errors, mostly due to omitted variables or incorrect functional forms. <heading>Policy implications :</heading>The question whether export oriented or import oriented policies should be conducted finds a clear answer in my regression results. Since R² is raised by almost 10% in equation (B), it can be concluded that exports contribute substantially to GDP growth. Policies favouring exports will thus lead to a higher level of economic development  <fnote>Balassa, B (1984) </fnote>As outlined before however, manufacturing exports seem to be the driving force behind that positive effect. In conjuncture with export oriented policies it is crucial to promote manufacturing exports as well. What factors determine manufacturing exports and how policies can target these factors to boost exports and thus economic growth will be analysed in the following. <heading>B. Manufacturing exports: </heading><heading>Regression : </heading>The following equation describes the effect wage-expenditure (lnw), foreign direct investment (fdi), electricity production (elp) and exports (ΔX) have on the share of manufacturing exports:  FORMULA  (eq. 4)  FORMULA  The data remains the same as above: 40 low to middle income countries over the period 1985-2000 are included. T tests (at 10% level) and F tests (0.002) prove the significance of the equation. The data shows no sign of heteroscedasticity. Reset and Normality tests furthermore indicate that the error term is behaved in such a way that all other estimators are in their best unbiased linear form (BLUE). (See Appendix for results). All three variables have low correlations, which once more excludes the possibility of multicollinearity. <table/>With this very basic regression equation, I have explicitly focused my attention on supply side elements in order to deduce policy implications from it. <heading>Policy implications : </heading>An interesting conclusion that can be drawn from the regression results is that foreign direct investment does not lead to a higher level of manufactured exports. In contrast it seems to actually reduce the share of manufactured exports. The role of FDI in export promotion in developing countries remains controversial and depends crucially on the motive for such investment. If the motive behind FDI is to capture domestic markets it may not contribute to export growth. On the other hand, if the motive is to tap export markets, then FDI may contribute to export growth and especially manufactured exports. (Yale University, discussion paper no 816) This leads us to conclude that the majority of the analysed countries follow an inward-oriented policy regime which attracts FDI mainly to capture domestic rather than export markets. To fully benefit from foreign direct investment via manufactured exports, governments must follow a more outward oriented policy regime, which would attract export oriented foreign investment. Channelling these investments into the export manufacturing industries could be done by creating fiscal incentives for the potential investors in that industry. (World Bank, 1993) The main reason for the positive relation between exports and manufacturing exports is that one is the driving force of the other. Hence, once a policy is conducted in such a way as to promote exports, manufacturing exports will most likely profit from that policy as well, which in turn would increase exports. The problem of causation makes it thus very hard to develop a completely valid conclusion, since it is not clear whether exports drive manufactured exports or the other way around. The variable of wages, measured in percentage of overall expenditure, seems to have a negative effect on the share of manufactured exports. Two reasons might be at the core of this result. Firstly, high levels of wage expenditure imply less competitiveness on the global market, since higher wage pay will push mark up pricing up. Secondly, industries that are tied up by high wage expenditures will lack financial resources to invest in research and development projects. Their products might thus not be up to global demand standards. Hence policy makers are advised to conduct policies that would lower wage expenditure. These measures might include subsidisation of manufacturing export industries or more drastic measures such as lowering of minimal wage level (if existent) or reduction of union power. The positive impact electricity production has on manufactured exports falls in line with what would be expected. Since electricity is a major input for the production of manufactured goods and domestic production will often prove less costly than foreign production, domestic manufacturing industries will be able to produce cheaper. The resulting advantage over international competition in the global market seems to drive manufactured exports up. It creates moreover an incentive for manufacturing industries to emerge. Electricity producing countries are thus well advised to privatize and liberalise electricity markets, which would then lead to competition within these markets, in turn reducing energy prices from which large consumers would significantly benefit. (TIPS, 2001) <heading>Conclusion :</heading>The results of my analysis suggest in a first instance that exports and more importantly manufactured exports play a crucial role for economic growth in less developed economies. This suggestion finds its proof in the regression equation (C), where the inclusion of manufactured exports raised the explanatory power substantially. Moreover, by dividing my sample in high and low manufacturing exporters, one can see that their respective correlation coefficients of exports and GDP growth differ to a large extent. After regressing the share of manufactured exports on wage expenditure, electricity production, exports and foreign direct investment, I come to the conclusion that governments should pursue an outward oriented policy that channels investment into the manufacturing sector. Governments are furthermore well advised to privatize energy markets and keep wage expenditure at a low level to fully benefit from the effect manufacturing exports have on Output. 