Gee, Coventry and Birkenhead (2005) recently investigated the relationship between mood state and gambling. Some research indicated that depressed mood results in excessive gambling while other research showed excessive gambling leads to depression. Some findings indicate that excitement and arousal might be motivation to gamble. However, it is still unclear whether individual gamble for pleasure or for releasing anxiety. Therefore the authors wanted to measure arousal and anxiety before, during and after gambling. They also proposed it is convenient, instantaneous (it means higher reliability in memory), and practical (to be compared with laboratory gambling) to use mobile phone to track the participants' mood state. The researchers selected seventeen regular male gamblers. The whole experiment could be divided into three stages: initial briefing session, experiment, and debriefing. In initial briefing session, measures included questions concerning gambling and impaired control of gambling and Jacobs dissociation scale. Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory（STAI）and four-item STAI are tested for the baseline-one data. In the experiment phase, after going back to their daily lives, participants were asked to report their anxiety state when they were urged to gamble and after gambling. If the participants wanted to bet, some questions such as the form of gambling, the amount of money, reasons for wanting to gamble and four-item STAI were asked. If the participants just finished gambling, questions about type of gamble, length of gamble were asked. In addition, four-item STAI was done twice, once for the state 'now', once for the state 'during gambling'. In debriefing, questions about the total amount of money they won or lost and four-item STAI were asked for baseline-two data. Using ANOVA to compare these different phases of anxiety state (baseline-one, before gambling, during gambling, after gambling and baseline-two), the researchers suggested that anxiety level during gambling is significantly higher than the other four periods. Anxiety level after gambling was significantly higher than baselines. In short, they argued that gamblers might felt anxious before, during and even after gambling. Moreover, the possible reasons for wanting to gamble might be 'I think I will win money' and 'because it is enjoyable'. Combining the data with the motivation for gambling, the authors concluded that gambling might be a cause of increasing anxiety rather than a way for releasing anxiety. I believe their research partly suffered from confounded, methodological flaws, and lacked reliability and validity. I will discuss the lack of internal validity, external validity, structure validity, and reliability. Then, the advantages of the experiment and possible improvement will be discussed. <heading>Problems on internal validity</heading>It is quasi-experimentation because the authors did not directly manipulate variables in a typical laboratory. Although quasi- experimentation has the advantage of allowing researchers to examine variables (mood state before, after, during gambling) that would be unethical to manipulate directly in laboratory, the internal validity is threatened by natural environment and the psychological states of human being. For example, the phenomenon of higher anxiety is confounded. It is possible that the increase of anxiety degree came from calling, guilty feeling over gambling or the environment of gamble. For impaired control of gambling, people who met the criteria that they think their gambling is a problem, might try to cover their control loss and feel anxiety about calling to report their urge to gamble and feel anxiety about their gambling. Their gamble behaviour might be influenced by guilty feeling so that they tend to shorten the time of gamble or increase the gain of gamble. In addition, the arousal could be evoked by the familiar gambling environment rather than gamble itself because they were conditioned by the gambling environment. Furthermore, it is difficult to say that they felt 'more anxiety' is pure anxiety because they might have mixed emotion such as excitement, which may be confounded to anxiety. I will discuss further in 'construct validity'. This experiment involving naturally occurring treatments has a structure similar to ABA design. I consider it as 'similar' to ABA design because the research included baseline one, treatment and baseline two. However, the 'treatment' is natural and is not strictly controlled. The participants went back their normal lives so we could not know when they will be urge to gamble or really go gambling. Of course, the situations of gambling are different as well. What was controlled is the instruction of 'calling when you are urged to gamble and when after gambling as possible as you can'. In this case, we need to be more concerned about concluding something changed because of the natural treatment. <heading>Problems on external validity </heading>Turning to external validity, it is hard to say if the research results can be applied to all gamblers in the world. Its validity is limited due to the small amount and less variety of participants. There are only seventeen subjects participated in the experiment. They are all male, English, live near University of Plymouth. Researchers selected 'regular gambler' but did not exclude other mental illness, especially emotion disease. I wonder if the subjects can represent other gamblers. <heading>Problems on construct validity </heading>Construct validity in the experiment is vague. It is said they wanted to understand if the mood state was related to gamble; however, researchers only assessed the anxiety/arousal levels. I am not sure whether the construct validity of the four-item STAI is good or bad. It seems to be measuring the degree of calm, tense, at ease and over-excited. In this case, the four-item STAI possibly measures the degree of 'arousal'. I believe that the terms 'mood state', 'anxiety' and 'arousal' should be defined more clearly. <heading>Problems on reliability</heading>Moving to reliability, the treatment is inconsistent because different participants went on different types and spaces to gamble. It is possible to decrease the reliability of subjects' report just because they met friends or they had a drink while gambling. The reliability of measurement using mobile phone to report and assess depends on the quality of mobile phone and man-made mistakes. Sometimes the calling environment is so noisy or the quality of connection is so bad that the participants could not hear the questions exactly. Sometimes, the participants simply pressed the wrong number and led to wrong assessment result. <heading>Advantages of the experiment</heading>Generally speaking, it is an interesting experiment. Gamblers are rarely studied in such a close way that asks them to report their anxiety state before and after real gamble as soon as possible. Ecological validity in this study is better than a study done in a laboratory because the result can be applied to natural gambling phenomenon. Mobile phone plays an important role on tracking emotion change immediately. Mobile phone also offers a consistent assess procedure because all questions were recorded in advance (increasing reliability). They used a design that is similar to ABA so that it is not necessary to have a control group and it is suitable for small-n design. ABA design serves to rule out the possibility that some confounding factor influenced the behaviour observed in the B phase because it is clear to see after returning to A phase, the anxiety decreases again. Using ANOVA and Follow-up analyses provides a significant evidence that the anxiety degree changed before, during and after gambling. They paid attention to recruiting participants, for example, they posted flyers not only around the university but also posted in the betting office. Therefore the age and occupation of participants are various. The relatively small sample may be acceptable because it might be difficult to recruit problem gamblers-especially female. <heading>Possible improvement</heading>To improve the reliability of the experiment, we can do the experiment again or lasting the experiment longer to analyze the participants' response reliability. To improve the validity of the experiment, it is better to have a control group to examine the anxiety levels and gambling. Although not having a control group is allowed in ABA design, a control group can help us clarify the confounding variables in such a loosely controlled treatment. I am curious about the mood state of normal people who is gambling. I suppose the anxiety levels of before-gambling and after-gambling will not be as high as problem gamblers. Because normal people do not feel anxiety when they want to bet or when lose money after gambling. I think gambling is a type of compulsive behaviour. If people suffered from compulsive behaviour, they feel anxiety because they are urged to wash hands; but, after washing hands, the tension releases and anxiety of guilt feeling emerges. Investigating the relationship between gamble and mood state is an interesting and challenge issue. It is important to treat this issue with solid methodology, repeated tests and cautious conclusions. In my point of view, the research is valuable but nevertheless has some flaws in some aspects. 