<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Genetic recombination is a process that occurs in all organisms but has been studied in detail in bacteria due to the relative easy of genetic experiments that can be conducted. Genetic recombination can be either homologous, where the region of DNA combining are reality similar in sequence, or non-homologous where these regions are significantly different. This article aims to define and explain the method of homologous recombination in bacteria and explain a method of non-homologous recombination. These two topics will be covered in molecular detail and their methods compared in a final review. </abstract><heading>Homologous recombination</heading>Homologous recombination is signified by DNA crossovers in regions with the same or very similar deoxynucleotide sequences. This means that in most organisms recombination takes place between sites on the DNA molecules that have the same orientation with respect to the entire DNA molecule. For the two DNA molecules to recombine there mush be a significant proportion of complementary base pairing to allow for synapse formation, however for this to occur any double stranded DNA must unwind to reveal the bases. Specialised enzymes are required to promote this unwinding and to allow for the breaking and rejoining of the DNA molecule with its corresponding strand. A heteroduplex is formed in the regions of complementary base pairing in two DNA strands but this process often involves all the strands of the DNA molecules recombining. Numerous models have been proposed to explain the mechanisms of recombination at a molecular level which have been briefly outlined here. <heading>Holliday Double-Stranded Invasion Model </heading>The Holliday model was proposed by Robin Holliday in 1964, (see figure 1). Recombination begins with two single stranded breaks forming simultaneously at exactly the same place in the DNA (b). The two free ends from either strand cross over to pair with its complementary sequence on the opposite DNA molecule (c). They are then ligated to there opposite strand forming the holiday junction (d). The junction then undergoes several isomerisation reactions to form the cross like structure (e). This cross formation can now move along the DNA breaking and reforming hydrogen bonds increasing the length of the heteroduplex in a process called branch migration. Specific enzymes are required, such as ATP-hydrolysing enzyme, for this process to ensure that <figure/>The hydrogen bonds are broken quick enough to allow for efficient migration. From the point at which it is formed the Holliday junction can be broken (or resolved), the amount of recombination can be alter depending upon which axis of the junction is cleaved. As shown in figure 1 (e, f, g) resolution at H produces no recombination of flanking DNA sequences. If the resolution occurs along V flanking DNA sequences will be exchanged along with the heteroduplex. <heading>Meselson-Radding Invasion Model</heading><figure/>There are several problems presented with the Holliday Model, one such problem is the production of simultaneous DNA breaks in the same location, another is the lining up of the DNA molecules into complementary sequences prior to being cleaved. To overcome these oppositions the single stranded invasion model was proposed. This method differs from the Holliday Model by the cleavage of only one strand of DNA from the invading double stranded molecule. This free end is then able to invade any double stranded molecule of DNA until it locates a region with complementary base pairing. Once this sequence is found it displaces one strand of the DNA being invaded (see figure 2). This displaced strand is then degraded and the invading strand ligated in its place. DNA polymerase acts to fill the gap caused by the invading strand, this newly synthesised DNA is then free to be ligated to its opposite strand on the other DNA molecule to form the Holliday junction (Meselson et al 1975). The process of branch migration and resolving of the junction are the same as in the Holliday model. <heading>Double Stranded Break Repair Model </heading><figure/>Double stranded breaks in DNA can occur due to damage but it was thought not to initiate recombination because the DNA molecule should just fall apart. It now appears to be certain that double stranded beaks can initiate a recombination event. The model shown in figure 3 was suggested by Szostak et al in 1983. In step 1 a double stranded break occurs in one of the DNA strands, one of the newly formed 3' ends then invades the second DNA molecule displacing a DNA molecule. As shown in figure 3 this 3' end now acts as a primer for DNA polymerase extending the DNA until it joins back up with the 5'end. The displaced strand now acts as a template for DNA synthesis on the none-invading strand to fill in the gap. Two Holliday junctions are formed allowing for recombination. <heading>Molecular Mechanisms of Recombination</heading>Escherichia coli is one of the most intensively studied organisms by man, for this reason a great deal is known about its mechanisms of genetic recombination. The following molecular mechanism will be describing these processes found in E.coli. In E.coli it is thought that over 25 different proteins are involved in the recombination process and of these several have already been assigned specific roles (see table 1). <table/><heading>Rec BCD </heading><figure/>RecBCD is a three subunit protein encoded for by the genes recB, recC and recD and has its major role in preparing single-stranded ends of DNA for the initial recombination step of invasion. This however is not the only application of the protein as it is also involved in replication restarts and DNA repair. The complex has both helicase and nuclease activity and in its initial step of activity the protein moves down the DNA unwinding the DNA to form two single-stranded loops (see figure 4) The protein complex loads onto the end of a DNA molecule, as it travels along it produced two 3' to 5' loops of single-stranded DNA which reform their double-stranded conformation once the molecule has passed. This helicase activity can progressively unwind large tracts of DNA at speeds up to 1000 bp/sec in a reaction requiring the hydrolysis of ATP. This process can continue for up to 30,000 base pairs until a chi site has been reached. The sequence of the chi site in E.coli is 5' G C T G G T G G 3' and appears approximately every 64kb. The abbreviation chi stands for crossover hotspot instigators and was originally found in phage λ where they initiated recombination events. When the RecBCD protein encounters a chi site the D subunit dissociates and the DNA is cleaved 4 - 6 nucleotides off the 3' side of the chi sit, forming a single strand with a 3' end (Dixon et al 1993). The chi site sequence does not show two fold rotational symmetry allowing for only one strand for DNA to be cleaved. Once this step has occurred the RecBC protein directs and aids the binding of the protein RecA to the 3' end. <heading>RecA</heading><figure/>RecA is a 352 residue protein consisting of three domains, a major central domain and two smaller sub domains at the N and C terminal of the protein. The major domains structure is formed from several 8-stranded β sheets, the sub domains show a different structure formed form α helices (Story et al 1992). It is these sub domains that protrude from the protein giving it a stable structure. RecA's role in homologous recombination is to catalyse the pairing of single-stranded DNA with homologous double-stranded DNA. To achieve this six RecA monomers (see figure 5) combine around the single-strand of DNA to stabilise it and protect it from degradation. RecA protein is a crucial enzyme in the recombination process as it catalyses the pairing of single-stranded DNA with complementary double-stranded DNA. The loading of RecA protein in the DNA is facilitated by the RecBCD enzyme (Arnold et al 2000) and during the helical polymerisation of the RecA monomers the single-stranded DNA is extended in length by 1.6 angstroms pre axial base pair. The enzyme contains 3 separate binding domains two for DNA and one for an ATP molecule. The DNA binding domains are located in the central domain of the RecA polymer and allow for the binding of a single-stranded DNA molecule and a double - stranded molecule. Both DNA binding domains include disordered loops (L1 and L2), containing residues with low electron density. In a study by Kumar et al 1993 it was shown that the binding of the DNA to RecA caused the disordered loops to assume α helix formation. During this study a surprising discovery was made when the quantity of α helix induced by DNA binding correlated to the percentage of A T residues found in that stretch of DNA. The higher the proportions of A T rich sequences, more α helical structures are produced. The ATP binding domain is also located in the central region of the RecA polymer at a phosphate binding loop (P-loop). Within this loop lysine72 and theronine73 are know to interact directly with the phosphate group on ATP (Konola et al 1994). <figure/>Once the single-stranded DNA has been coated in RecA the protein then binds to double-stranded DNA. Through a helicase action it has been partially unwound to facilitate the base pairing allowing the formation of a D loop structure (see figure 6). The exact mechanisms to how the single-stranded DNA, RecA complex finds a complementary sequence of DNA is still largely unknown but it is believed that through the binding RecA to double-stranded DNA the double-stranded DNA is "activated" even if the strands are none-complementary. <heading>Holliday Junction and Branch Migration</heading>In E.coli branch migration and resolution of the Holliday junction can be preformed by three Ruv proteins A, B, and C which are encoded for on adjacent genes. The RuvA subunit consists of three domains (I, II, and III) which forms a fourfold symmetric tetramer (Rafferty et al 1996). Detailed analysis showed that domains I and II were responsibly for Holliday junction binding where as domain III plays a regulatory role in ATP dependant branch migration through the contact of RuvB (Nishino et al 1998). Within the RuvA tetramer each DNA arm is recognised on the minor grove side by two helix-hairpin motifs inside domain II. At the binding site interface hydrogen bonds between phosphate oxygens of DNA domains and atoms from the major protein chains along with water mediated hydrogen bonds from the interactions that hold the DNA in place. The central acidic pin of the RuvA tetramer is formed from Glu55 and Asp56 residues from each subunit and repels the DNA backbone away from the junction centre by electrostatic repulsion (Yamada et al 2004). <figure/>The function of RuvA is to force the Holliday junction into certain structures which are suitable for branch migration and resolution. The RuvA-DNA interactions are thought to be suited to rotation arms sliding of the DNA arms over the RuvA protein. The Holliday junction lies in a planar conformation and within the middle of the RuvA tetramer there is a region of DNA that is not base paired, forming a square of single-stranded DNA (figure 7). <figure/>The RuvB proteins than form a hexameric ring structure encircling one arm of the DNA (figure 8). The two oppositely orientated RuvB structures using ATP driven motors pull both DNA duplex arms causing the Holliday junction to migrate. The ATP is not required directly for migration because the number of bonds broken and reformed is always equal so no input of energy is required. However spontaneous migration is slow, so the ATP is required to quicken the reaction and give it directionality. Once the Holliday junction has migrated it can be resolved (cut) by the protein RuvC. This is a specialised endonuclease from a family of proteins called X-philes and will cut the DNA at two consecutive thymine residues. The RuvC protein can only cleave the DNA then it is bound to RuvA and B, so is specific to the process of homologous recombination (Yamada et al 2004). The protein is made from two identical polypeptides encoded for by ruvC, this formation produces two active sites each of which can cut a single strand of DNA, and so in the homodimer conformation it will cause a double-stranded break in the DNA. Two sets of double-stranded DNA have now been formed which now possess recombinant sections of DNA. <heading>Non-Homologous recombination</heading>Not all genetic recombination occurs between homologous sequences of DNA, integration of bacteriophage λ into the E.coli genome is a highly studied example of non-homologous recombination. Phage λ is an example of a bacteria virus that can enter into both lytic and lysogenic cycles during infection of E.coli. Entering into the lysogenic cycle is a rare event occurring in only 1% of infections, integration is promoted when the bacteria is growing in a rich medium and is under no biological or physical stresses. The decision of whether the phage enters the lysogenic or lytic cycle depends upon the outcome of competition between the cII gene, favouring lysogeny, and the phage replication genes, favouring a lytic cycle. <figure/>The CII protein is a transcriptional activator because it stimulates RNA polymerase to begin transcribing at two promoters pRE and pI and is responsible for promoting lysogeny (figure 9). The pRE promoter causes transcription of cI gene resulting in the production of the CI repressor. This repressor will bind to the DNA and prevent all transcription of the genes oR and oL. These promoters service many of remaining genes in the phage and will induce a lytic cycle. The CII protein has an effect on another promoter, pI which stimulates the transcription of the intergrase gene (int). It is this enzyme that causes the integration of the phage DNA into the bacterial chromosome. The CIII protein is a cellular protease inhibitor that prevents the degradation of the CII repressor increasing the probability a lysogen will be formed. <figure/>The integration of the λ genome is a reciprocal recombination. The phage chromosome is circularised upon entering the bacterial cell and contains a short 15 base pair region of homology with the E.coli genome. This region in the phage is the attP site and in the bacteria attB (figure 10). Due to such a small region of homology a recombination cannot take place without the enzyme intergrase (Int) being present. All Int reactions are chiral, producing one of two possibilities enantiomers of each product. Crisona et al 1999 proposed that this chirality reflects a right handed DNA crossing within or between recombination sites in the synaptic complex that favours formation of right handed Holliday junction intermediates. Within the reaction there is no net loss or gain of DNA so the reaction is said to be conservative. The attB site is simple and only 25 base pairs long, the attP site however is more complex and much larger at 240 Base pairs long. This complex interaction site within the intergrase requires superhelicity of the DNA substrate. It is argued in Sadwski Mini-review that the complex site is a reflection of the need to organise the DNA and protein into a supermolecule structure analogous to a nucleosome. This structure is called an intosome and that the negative super helicity facilitates the DNA wrapping around the intergrase enzyme. The carboxy-terminal domain of of Int binds to the core sequence of the attachments sites at the point where breakage and reunion occur. The amino terminal of the Int enzyme binds with high affinity to the sequences either side of the core region, and it is thought that this high affinity binding guides the Int protein to the core of the recombination site when enzyme affinity is low (Crisona et al 1999). During recombination a phosphodiester bond is broken in the DNA and it is to this that the intergrase enzyme attaches at the 3' - phosphoryl terminus. The model for strand exchange was proposed by Nash et al 1975 for intergrase promoted recombination. The intergrase enzyme induces a four stranded intermediate composed of two synapse duplex recombination sites. This structure is formed by a sequential series of breakages and reunions of the four DNA strands. This intermediate is analogous to the Holliday junction seen in homologous recombination and it is the intergrase that is able to resolve the junction but in a site specific manner. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The two methods of genetic recombination covered in this article both occur using a similar physical technique of a four stranded Holliday type junction forming and of two synapse duplex recombination sites. Both processes are enzyme dependant; the phage λ reaction will not take place without the intergrase enzyme being present and the homologous recombination reaction requires RecBCD, RecA and various other protein molecules. Both recombination events show some branch migration of the DNA, in homologous recombination this branch migration can be of infinite distance but in the phage λ integration this migration only continues for 7 base pairs of DNA. Homologous recombination can physically occur in any part of the bacterial DNA strand, the only requirement is the presence of DNA with a significant region of homology to it. The phage λ integration however is site specific and can only occur between the gene coding for biotin production and galactose metabolism because it is between theses two sites that the attachment sires attB is found. A further difference between the two is the ability of the phage λ DNA integration reaction to be reversed, allowing the phage DNA to be excised again specifically which allows the virus to move from a lysogenic state into a lytic phase. The reversal of the genetic recombination reaction doesn't occur during homologous recombination. There are several other methods of genetic recombination n bacteria including transposon integration along with several other bacteriophage integration method, for it is often the case that different lysogenic bacteriophage have varying methods of chromosome integration. 