<heading>Introduction: </heading>Few concepts in medical education in the 20 th century have ignited such controversy, nor resulted in such polarised opinion as the concept of 'Problem Based Learning' (PBL). The creators of PBL intended change of a hitherto unprecedented level- from how students perceived their role in the educative process, how their teachers or 'facilitators' provided education and guidance, even to the extent of how the individual reflected on the society they were training to serve, and indeed how society judged the practice of medicine and medical education. The purpose of this report is fourfold: <list>To understand the reasons behind the development of PBL.Defining PBL.Perspectives on PBL.Reflection on PBL.</list><heading>1) The development of PBL: The McMaster model</heading><quote>"Intelligence is what you do when you don't know what to do." Jean Piaget, Swiss Psychologist.</quote>To fully understand the evolution of PBL in Ontario in the mid 1960's, it is essential to understand the situation and circumstances from which it developed. For centuries, medical education had been strictly delineated into pre-clinical and clinical blocks. The pre-clinical phase over 2.5 years taught what is generically referred to as the 'basic medical sciences' to include anatomy, physiology, biochemistry, pharmacology and behavioural sciences. The syllabus was extremely prescriptive, and involved sitting several important examinations before admittance to the clinical phase. Admittance into the clinical phase brought medical students into contact with patients, frequently for the first time, and left certain medical graduates of the 'Baby boomer' generation with the feeling that "We knew a great deal of medicine, but were [initially] terrible doctors [1]". The educational theory behind this traditional model of medical education is referred to as 'logical positivism' [2]. Logical positivism expected that once students were told the "truth" about what is known about science and medicine, as is frequently done in a lecture setting, then all students present would have at least a similar level of knowledge and understanding of the content. Logical positivism also has to be considered in the cultural context of the time; many of the doctors who developed PBL under Harold Barrows at McMaster in the 1960's had recently emigrated form the British system of medical education that although had exceptionally high academic standards, resulted in young doctors who had merely memorised an amount of factual information for a very limited time, failed to apply or integrate the knowledge they had, and ultimately resisted further learning [3]. This contrasted starkly with a limited pool of students whose medical education had been interrupted or postponed by World War II. When these older students returned to their studies, the skills they developed either in battle or ingrained during military training, such as task delegation, man management, and a capacity for independent thought and reasoning, were transferred to their medical education with remarkable success. Their teachers found they interacted more with their academic environment, engaged in a cognitive conflict that further simulated their learning, understood that knowledge evolved through social negotiation, and that individuals given a certain piece of information may perceive it in very different ways [4]. It may colloquially be referred to as 'life experience'. In many ways, these war veterans in the 1950's were the first 'mature students' admitted to undergraduate medical degrees, and are comparable with the  University medical students admitted from diverse social and academic backgrounds today [5]. The influence and impact of these remarkable graduates was not lost on educationalists. ME Knowles, considered one of the pioneers of 'adult learning' theory considered carefully the experiences of these doctors, and proposed that appropriate conditions for adults to learn included the following: a learning environment characterised by physical comfort, mutual trust and respect, mutual helpfulness, freedom of expression, accepting that people may very different viewpoints, a shared and common perception of both teacher and student of the same educational goals, and finally that the student accepted some degree of responsibility and 'ownership' of their learning experience[2]. Knowles added, "Adults need to feel a need to learn where the learning process relates to, and uses, their own experiences." These experiences and caveats to learning were very much at odds with the educational theory of logical positivism. Indeed, this philosophical view, and its logical consequences were rapidly losing any currency it held with both scientists and educators, and the Knowles's new educational theory of 'constructivism' was born [6]. Constructivism was heavily influenced by the previous findings of the post-war medical students, and formally proposed that: Knowledge comes from interactions with our environment. Conflict stimulates learning. Knowledge evolves through social negotiation. Variability occurs in levels of individual understanding. It assumes that knowledge is not an 'absolute' construct, but is formed by the learner based on previous knowledge and overall views of the world. This resulted in the idea that the opportunity to find knowledge for oneself, to contrast one's own understanding of a particular concept with others' understanding, and then redefine or restructure knowledge as more relevant experience is gained seems to harness a 'reality' of learning that was so absent in traditional medical education and logical constructivism. Furthermore, Knowles argued, constructivism could be applied to any level of education, form pre-school to post-graduate training, and broadens its application far beyond medical training. Taking all this into account, the Faculty of Health Sciences at McMaster Medical School was established in 1965, and admitted its first undergraduates for the MD programme in 1969, with the first students graduating in May 1972. Even the concept of a Faculty of Health Sciences, now common, was a unique concept at the time. It was based upon the view that health is a broad subject encompassing not only the problems of ill health, but also the impact of biology, environment, and the way of life on health. Each health professional has specific educational requirements, but by learning together in shared facilities it is believed that it promotes an environment where effective interprofessional working relationships may be established [7]. Currently 138 students are admitted to the undergraduate MD programme every year at McMaster. The academic programme operates on an 11 month a year basis, and students qualify for the MD degree at the end of their third academic year. This qualification gives the student eligibility to sit the Medical Council of Canada Qualifying Exam (MCCQE)- a national examination that all Canadian medical graduates must sit and pass. <heading>2) Defining PBL. </heading><quote>"Life is short, the art long, opportunity fleeting, experiment treacherous, judgment difficult." Hippocrates, Greek Physician (translation).</quote>In PBL students use a "trigger" from the problem case or scenario to define his or her own learning objectives. They then engage in independent, self-directed study before returning to the group to discuss and refine their acquired knowledge. PBL is not explicitly about problem solving; rather it uses appropriate problems to increase a student's level of knowledge and understanding. The process is clearly defined, and the several variations that exist all follow a similar series of steps [8]. Several generic skills are used during a PBL session, these include: <list>1) Teamwork.2) Chairing a group discussion.3) Recording information.4) Listening to the views of others.5) Cooperation.6) Respect for colleagues' views.7) Evaluation of literature.8) Self directed study.9) Presentation skills.</list>Group learning facilitates not only the acquisition of knowledge but also several other desirable attributes. These include communication skills, teamwork, problem solving, independent responsibility for learning, sharing information, and respect for others. It may be thought of as a small group teaching method that combines acquisition of knowledge with the development of generic skills and attitudes. Presentation of clinical material as the stimulus for learning further enables students to understand the relevance of underlying scientific knowledge and principles in clinical practice [9]. However, introduction of PBL into a curriculum requires several other issues for curriculum design and implementation to be addressed [9]. It is usually introduced in the context of a defined core curriculum and integration of basic and clinical sciences. The Introduction of PBL also has implications for staffing and learning resources and demands a different approach to timetabling, workload, and assessment [10]. Paper based PBL scenarios usually form the basis of the core curriculum and ensure that all students are exposed to the same problems. These scenarios may involve laboratory data, photographs, video clips, or even newspaper cuttings relevant to the clinical issue. Recently, modified PBL techniques have been introduced into clinical education, with "real" patients being used as the stimulus for learning. Despite the essentially unpredictable nature of learning clinical medicine, a "key cases" approach can enable PBL to be used to deliver the core clinical curriculum, and this has been a core ethos of PBL. Once these curriculum issues have been addressed, how the session is conducted must be addressed. The model described below is closely related to the 'Maastricht seven-jump process' [11]. A typical PBL tutorial consists of a group of 8-10 students and a facilitator, who may occasionally 'steer' the session. The length of number of sessions a group stays together with each other and with individual tutors varies between institutions, at McMaster this was usually between 6-8 weeks. The group should to be together long enough to allow a good group dynamic to develop but may need to be changed if personality clashes or other dysfunctional behaviour emerges. A chair for each PBL scenario is then elected by the group, and a scribe to record the subsequent discussion. The roles are usually rotated for each scenario. Suitable flip charts or a whiteboard are then used to record the flow of discussion. At the start of the session, depending on the trigger material, either the student chair reads out the scenario or all students study the material. If the trigger is a real patient in a ward, clinic, or surgery then a student may be asked to take a clinical history or identify an abnormal physical sign before the group moves to a tutorial room. For each module, students are usually given a handbook containing the problem scenarios, and suggested learning resources or learning materials may be handed out at appropriate times as the tutorials progress. The process below is then followed, although this varies with institution [9,11]. Step 1 Identify and clarify unfamiliar terms presented in the scenario;scribe lists those that remain unexplained after discussion. Step 2 Define the problem or problems to be discussed; students mayhave different views on the issues, but all views should be considered; the scribe then records a list of agreed problems. Step 3 "Brainstorming" session to discuss the problem, suggestingpossible explanations on basis of prior knowledge; the students draw on each other's knowledge and identify areas of incomplete knowledge; the scribe records all relevant discussion. Step 4 Review steps 2 and 3 and arrange explanations into tentativesolutions; scribe organises the explanations and restructures if necessary. Step 5 Formulate learning objectives; group reaches consensus onthe learning objectives; tutor ensures learning objectives are focused, achievable, comprehensive, and appropriate. Step 6 Private study (all students gather information related to eachlearning objective). Step 7 Group shares results of private study (students identify theirlearning resources and share their results); tutor checks learning and may assess the group. Introducing PBL into an undergraduate medical curriculum makes new demands on tutors, requiring them to function as facilitators for small group learning rather than acting as providers of information. Staff development is therefore essential and should focus on enabling the PBL tutors to acquire skills in facilitation and in management of group dynamics, including how to manage dysfunctional groups. It has been argued that this process takes time, and that not all tutors automatically make good facilitators. However, it may also be said that facilitator training also provides a useful opportunity for facilitators to reflect on their own knowledge, skill and learning. The tutors of a PBL course should also be aware of the institution's educational strategy and curriculum so they are able to help students to better understand the learning objectives of each individual module in the context of the wider curriculum. The methods of assessment should also be fully understood by both student and facilitator, and time should be available for the student to discuss any concerns he or she may have about the program with the facilitator. Finally, Staff may feel uncertain about facilitating a PBL tutorial for a subject in which they themselves are not specialists. Subject specialists may, however, be poor PBL facilitators as they are more likely to interrupt the process and revert to lecturing. However, students do value expertise, and the best tutors are subject specialists who understand the curriculum and have excellent facilitation skills. However, enthusiastic non-specialist tutors who are trained in facilitation, know the curriculum, and have adequate tutor notes, are usually very good PBL tutors [11]. <heading>Perspectives on PBL</heading><quote>"Education is the transmission of civilization." Will Durant, 20 th Century philosopher and historian.</quote><heading>Advantages</heading>There are several advantages to having a curriculum based upon the tenets of PBL. The teaching is student centred. This means it fosters active learning, improves understanding, aids retention of information, and also promotes the development of lifelong learning skills. The generic competencies necessary for successful PBL are desirable in future practice. It is believed that PBL students integrate well into multidisciplinary teams, have to foster effective communication skills in order to complete the learning objectives, and are generally perceived to be good 'team players' [12]. Thirdly, PBL facilitates an integrated core curriculum. If the PBL is done well, it should all 'come together' when the core blocks have been completed. This avoids the student 'pigeon-holing' pieces of information into a systems-based format. PBL students are deemed to be more motivated than their peers following a more traditional medical education. Done well, PBL is also more fun for the facilitators, and allows a rapport to develop that would be difficult to achieve in a lecture theatre setting. PBL promotes more informal, more frequent communication between student and facilitator, which can only aid each other's understanding. The constructivist approach also ensures that students activate their prior knowledge and build on their existing conceptual knowledge frameworks. Finally, the proponents of PBL say if encourages 'deep learning', whereby students interact with learning materials, relate concepts to everyday activities, and therefore improve their understanding of the subject matter [12]. <heading>Disadvantages</heading>Unsurprisingly, PBL is not without its critics. The first argument is that it requires a facilitator who actually facilitates, rather than teaches. Tutors who enjoy passing their own knowledge on may find PBL facilitation both difficult and frustrating. As with any new concept, it also takes time for the facilitator to find their own balance in each group. PBL is also resource-hungry, and requires a suitable facilitator for every 8-10 people. In the LWMS pre-clincal programme, that would mean at least 18 SHO/equivalents, and eighteen small group rooms. Adequate library facilities are also essential, as large numbers of students need access to the same library and computer resources simultaneously. PBL students may be deprived of a particular inspirational teacher who in a traditional curriculum would deliver lectures to the whole group. Finally, there is the very real danger of information overload. Students may be unsure of the depth and level of study required for a particular assignment, and also what is actually relevant and useful. <heading>Reflection on PBL</heading><quote>"We wander for distraction, but we travel for fulfillment." Hilaire Belloc, Oxford Historian.</quote>PBL is an evidently an effective way of delivering medical education in a coherent, integrated program and offers several advantages over traditional teaching methods. It is based on principles of adult learning theory, including motivating the students, encouraging them to set their own learning goals, and gives them a role in decisions that significantly affect their own learning. Rather predictably, PBL does not offer a universal panacea for teaching and learning in medicine, and it has several well-recognised disadvantages. Traditional knowledge based assessments of curriculum outcomes have shown little or no difference in students graduating from PBL or traditional curriculums [12]. Research over the last three decades has shown students from PBL curriculums seem to have better knowledge retention [9, 12]. PBL also generates a more stimulating and challenging educational environment, and the beneficial effects from the generic attributes acquired through PBL should not be underestimated. Finally, I must ask myself the question what has exposure to McMaster and its novel educational methods had on my education and progression though medical school. I have always had a very strong feeling that students at any stage in their education never 'learn how to learn'. PBL is certainly suitable for only certain types of student, who are prepared to fully engage with the material offered, to contribute to class discussion in a pro-active yet non-dominating way, and have a strong interest in the education of others. I believe McMaster achieves this by being very open in its applications process; it welcomes applications from anyone with an undergraduate honours degree, yet only selects 'Mac people'- who will contribute to its PBL classes, and by being the most selective medical school in Canada. Any reflection on medical education is time well spent, and my elective period in Canada has further strengthened my interest in pursuing a career in medical education after I qualify. 