<heading>Introduction</heading>The definition of being literate has changed with literacy technology and resources. In the time when tortoise shells, bamboo slips, stone tablets, animal skins, and papyrus were used for writing materials to store information, being literate could mean being able to recognize the written form of language. It was also a time that literacy belonged to the minority, the privileged elite. With the rapid development of technology, more and more convenient mark making methods have been invented and become prevalent, which has inevitably brought about a myriad of new uses for writing languages. Consequently, what the students learn about literacy at school today may be obsolete when they leave school and enter the workforce or continue with higher education. Take myself for example, I learned to write with pencils and read with books when I was a primary school student. Now I write with computer far more than with paper and pencil and read a large amount of electronic materials that did not exist at all in my childhood. It is highly possible that the young generation will read and write in a fashion we can never imagine in the coming future. This radical change of information technology has further complicated the issue of literacy teaching. As teachers, we need to know what the essentials of literacy learning and teaching are. These essentials should be expected to endure in the future contexts. In this paper, I am going to discuss the crucial elements of literacy development and explore the potential of drama as a means of enhancing students' literacy learning. <heading>What is Literacy? </heading>Definitions of literacy range widely. For some, literacy is simply the ability to read and write to meet the basic need for communication. For others, being literate involves thinking and the capacity for manipulating language and utilizing modes of discourse for language for a specific purpose and audience. As Corden puts it, "literacy is a problematic concept, dependent on a number of factors and what a particular culture of society deems to be important and relevant" (2000, p. 28). How literacy is defined leads to how literacy is taught. Hence, before exploring how drama can facilitate the development of literacy skills, we need to untangle some of the meanings underlying the term, literacy. When being literate means being able to read and write, literacy teaching entails the mastery of a set of discrete linguistic skills which enable students to decode meanings from texts as well as produce texts. In such a scenario, literacy teaching features the impartation of knowledge of three cueing systems-- graphophonic (letter/sound relationships), syntactic (grammar and structure of sentences), and semantic (meaning of the text). This may appear to be a common practice of literacy teaching like the one in the teaching framework of the UK's National Literacy Strategy--the word level work, sentence level work and text level work, yet it is too narrowly defined. Regarding language merely as a body of skills to be mastered and deployed, claims Winston, results in a divorce of language exercises from context, "as it is the skill rather than the experience that is seen as important" (2004, p. 20). Though skill-based literacy is important, it should not be considered the one and only aspect in the teaching of literacy. Literacy is about language and the cueing systems are only part of language. Halliday has proposed an influential theoretical framework in which language is analyzed in terms of four strata: Context, Semantics, Lexico-Grammar and Phonology-Graphology. What lacks in the traditional literacy teaching is Context. Viewing language in a social semiotic way, Halliday suggests that it is essential to bring the context of the situation into focus in order to understand the functions of specific linguistic structures and examine meaning potential. According to Halliday, language performs three metafunctions: <list>Ideational function: used for the expression of content; Interpersonal function: used to maintain and establish social relations; Textual function: used to provide cohesive relations within spoken or written texts (1970, p. 143).</list>He also argues that social context, a decisive factor in one's choice of register, includes three situational variables: <list>Field: an ongoing social activity or a subject matter of a text;Tenor: the relations among the participants; Mode: physical medium adopted for communication including the channel and the rhetorical mode (Halliday and Hasan, 1985, p. 12).</list>These three variables which realize context are correspondingly related to the three metafunctions of language. That is to say, the ideational function is effectuated by means of the field, the interpersonal by means of the tenor and the textual by means of the mode. Halliday's theoretical framework has shown that language is a socially constructed system. According to this view, being literate is a more complex concept which goes far beyond the acquisition of a set of decontextualized coding and decoding skills. Furthermore, it involves the ability to produce and interpret texts in a given context where the realization of meaning potential deeply depends on one's social and cultural identity. As a result, the context of situation should not be separated from literacy teaching. <heading>Oracy and Literacy</heading>Oracy, a term coined by Wilkinson in 1965, is used to represent oral language ability parallel to literacy. It has later been superseded by the term, orality, referring to using speech to construct knowledge and make meaning. Oracy and literacy are like two sides of a coin. To know how to develop literacy skills, we should not neglect oracy, whose importance has been emphasized by Meek's statement, "Our understanding of literacy must begin with recognition of that orality and its continuing presence in our lives" (1990, p. 15). In his book about literacy and talk, Corden also argues that there is a close relationship between talk, learning, and literacy with the support of Vygotsky's and Bruner's theoretical models as well as a substantial review of empirical research. As Vygostsky points out, "children solve practical tasks with the help of their speech as well as their eyes and hands" (1978, p. 26). The same belief is shared by Bruner, who proposes that children process information and understand new concepts by talking through ideas and recognizes the crucial roles of social interaction, negotiation and shared learning in children's cognitive development (Corden, 2000, p. 9). Consequently, Corden urges quality interactive discourse to be ensured in the classroom so that literacy learning can happen in a stimulated and vibrant way. It is now widely believed that talking can help clarify thought. As Kempe has observed, "it is through the act of articulating ideas that those ideas become crystallized" (2004, p. 5). In spite of the belief that speech can contribute to children's literacy development, not all types of talk can catalyze learning. We can easily find teacher-dominated discourse in many classrooms, a prevalent type of talk which is more of a hindrance than a help to children's learning. Corden describes this type of talk as an I-R-E exchange pattern in which "the teacher initiates the discourse with a question, the student responds with an answer and the teacher provides feedback in the form of an evaluation" (2000, p. 109). In such a classroom, teaching is based on one-way instruction and pupils are seen as empty vessels for the teacher to pour the essence of knowledge. Though they are seemingly invited to take part in the exchange of talk with the teacher, they are, in fact, expected to come up with a 'correct' answer which the teacher has already kept in mind. Corden's I-R-E exchange pattern echoes Barnes's 'presentational talk', which focuses more on the expectations of the pupils rather than their ideas. As Barnes suggests, presentational talk persuades "the speaker to focus on 'getting it right', that is, on appropriate speech and the expected information ('right answer')" (1992b, p. 126). For real learning to happen, children should be provided with chances of 'working on understanding'. They need genuine interaction where they can actively engage in discussion by activating their existing knowledge to make sense of new ideas. It is 'exploratory talk', advocated by Barnes, that offers room for learners to actively interrelate, reinterpret and understand new ideas and experiences. Exploratory talk is characterized by frequent hesitations, repetitions, rephrasings, false starts, change of direction, backtracking, pauses, overlaps and interruptions (Barnes, 1992a; Corden 2002). Its exercises the 'heuristic function' of spoken language identified by Halliday (1969). It is a reflective and hypothetical dialogue aiming at joint construction of knowledge. For exploratory talk to thrive in the classroom, learners should "feel relatively at ease, free from the danger of being aggressively contradicted or made fun of" (Barnes, 1992b, p. 126). Furthermore, teachers, Corden argues, should create open contextual contexts which can be subsequently perceived as such by learners (2002, p. 136). <heading>Learning to Become Literate</heading>People approach learning situations in different ways. Everyone has his/her personal preferences in processing information and solving problems. These personal preferences can be regarded as different learning styles. Some theorists categorize learning styles in terms of polar opposites such as wholist/analyst and verbaliser-imager (Adey, 1999). Wholists tend to get an understanding of the general structure and reach a conclusion based on the 'big picture', while analysts prefers to look at the detail of what is to be learned. Verbalisers are inclined to learn from words, either spoken or written; imagers feel more comfortable with information presented in pictorial or diagrammatic fashion. Some classify learning styles in terms of sensory channels. Fielding, for instance, describes learning styles as follows: <quote>Auditory students prefer to learn mainly through talking or hearing... Visual learners are helped most when they can see a visual equivalent or encounter the thing or process itself in a visual way... Kinesthetic learners have a need to touch and get physically involved in the work. (cited in Nicholson, 2000, p. 179)</quote>Gardner (1983) has identified at least seven distinct learning preferences and referred them as multiple intelligences. They are logical/mathematical, visual/spatial, body/kinesthetic, musical/rhythmic, interpersonal, intrapersonal, and verbal/linguistic. It is likely that every individual possess these seven intelligences; nevertheless they do not develop at the same rate in each one person. Ideally, teachers should cater for students' diverse learning needs to assist them reach their full potential with their multiple intelligences. What actually happens in the classroom is only certain intelligences, e.g. verbal/linguistic and logical/mathematical, are most prized. Too often children spend most of the time sitting and vaguely listening to their teachers. There is no wonder that only a small amount of students whose preferred learning styles match the dominant way of teaching can benefit from the educational system. To turn learning to everyone's advantage, it is important to give consideration to include a wider range of learning styles into the school curriculum. There is no exception for learning to become literate. Teachers should incorporate as many multi-sensory activities as possible into their literacy teaching. <heading>Drama and Literacy Learning</heading>From the discussion above, some conclusions about literacy learning can be drawn. First of all, as language is socially constructed, how to create related contexts of situation deserves considerable emphasis in the teaching of literacy. Secondly, oracy contributes greatly to children's literacy development; more exploratory talk, therefore, should be encouraged in the classroom. Lastly, teachers ought to accommodate their students' various learning styles and intelligences to ensure the effectiveness of literacy teaching. In the following part of my paper, I am going to link up drama with literacy learning on the basis of the conclusions drawn here. Drama as a Medium for Oracy Development Drama is a language-based art form. It includes a variety of characters and settings in which diversity of registers are interwoven. In the traditional classroom, students normally engage in limited types of discourse, which favors the middle-class students who likely have access to both the elaborated and the restricted code and put those working-class children with only the restricted code into a disadvantaged learning condition (Bernstein, 1971). This gap of educational inequality can be bridged within a dramatic framework, in which students are provided with myriads of make-believe scenarios to try out their language use. Take role-play and hot-seating for example, these activities create genuine contexts and real purposes for communication. Baldwin and Fleming believe that "children are required by the drama to use language, which is appropriate to both role and situation, including different models of speech and registers" (2003, pp. 18-19). In a workshop conducted by Jonothan Neelands, he was in role of King Creon and had all the participants take different roles, e.g. senior official, Haemon, and Antigone, to persuade him to agree to bury Polyneices. Under such a context, the participants need to operate in assigned roles and accordingly adapt their ways of talking to suit their roles. In Joe Winston's workshop of The Sea Woman, the attendants were asked to be in role as classmates of two sea children, narrating their journey of coming to warn the sea children and informed the fisherman of the danger his children are facing. Again we can see from this example how drama helps learners actively engage themselves in pushing their ideas out of their heads and trying out various models of speech, be it persuasive or narrative. Spoken language exchanged in the dramatic framework can not only help learners 'crystallize' their ideas but also turn into a rich resource for writing in the following phase of literacy teaching. Drama is a collectively constructed imagined world that demands a positive and supportive working atmosphere. Students need to take part in plenty of group discussions; as a result, they can learn and gain support from their peers. Moreover, the playful nature of drama is also conducive to preparing learners to take risks and share their thoughts. That is to say, the dramatic world lends itself well to a risk-free environment for learners to employ exploratory talk "to try out new ideas, to hear how they sound, to see what others make of them, to arrange information and ideas into different patterns" (Barnes, 1992b, p. 126). Corden has pointed out that certain types of teacher talk can generate "more extensive and educationally productive responses from children" (2000, p. 136). He suggests that teachers should initiate through challenging, directing, enquiring, inviting, stating, suggesting, modeling, and listening/encouraging. In addition, they should provide feedback by appraising/praising, encouraging exploration, focusing/orienting, helping children to reflect, offering hypotheses, providing information, relating to own experience, relating to the child's experience, seeking clarification and urging amplification. For those teachers who have applied drama into their teaching, all these strategies for encouraging exploratory talk should sound familiar because they are commonly used skills for sustaining a make-believe world. Morgan and Saxon (1987, p. 71) have analyzed the characteristics of drama questions and some of them are summarized as follows: It is the expressive demonstration of a genuine curiosity. It occurs in context and relates to the experience. The words are ordered in such a way as to support the role and clarify the thinking. Non-verbal signals and intonation should be used to support the intent of the question on the part of the questioner. The pace of the question must relate to the situation. The question should have reason, focus and curiosity. There is no right answer in drama. Comparing Corden's suggestions for encouraging exploratory talk with the characteristics of drama questions, we can easily find a lot of resemblance between them. If we hope to make room for more literacy learning success in the classroom, we should bring in more drama activities through which children can make maximal use of their speaking and listening so that their literacy learning can flourish. Drama as a Context for Reading Reading is traditionally believed as a passive or receptive skill. In fact, it is an active process in which readers relate information in the text to what they already know. For more competent readers, they can even look beyond the text and create their own meaning. Children are not good at grasping abstract concepts and need scaffolding to connect the unknown with the known. It is drama that can provide children with the chance to turn the abstract into concrete images and construct meaning from the text based on collective experience. Baldwin and Fleming claim that drama can be used "as a context for exploring, making meaning and investigate subtext and inference" (2003, p. 19). Drama makes the literary world more accessible for children. Through drama, children enter a fictional world created by the writer's descriptions, taking on roles to be in the character's shoe. This emotional engagement can motivate children to keep on reading and open up their imagination. Moreover, the drama activities breathe life into the written text, which is no longer boring and dull print on paper. According to Neelands, "drama provides pupils with an immediate and physical means of getting to grips with texts and textual representation" (2004, p. 34). These arguments can be substantiated by Sarah Yazdi's literacy class. She made use of drama conventions such as hotseating, still image, teacher in role, to lead her pupils to enter Kensuke's Kingdom, a desert island where a boy was rescued by Kensuke, an old Japanese army doctor. The teacher took on role as Kensuke, speaking English with very limited vocabulary and incomplete sentences. She invited her pupils to interview Kensuke and suggested they should speak English slowly and clearly when asking him questions or it would be difficult for him to understand. During the process, the pupils tried every possible way to rephrase, repeat, or explain their questions to Kensuke. They were highly interested in knowing how he could survive all alone on the small island for so many years and why he had no desire to go back to Japan to be with his family. After hotseating, the pupils read the story and found out what happened to Kensuke before he floated to the island. It was during the Second World War and his vessel was attacked by American Navy. The teacher then divided the class into several groups and had them create a tableau of the fighting on board. Through the drama activities, the pupils felt empathy with the characters and had a clearer picture of the story setting, which existed beyond their life experience. At my second visit, I was surprised to know some of the pupils had already finished this 176-page novel when there were still a couple of classes to go on with it. Skillful writers leave gaps in the text for the readers to fill in. The teacher can therefore enrich both the drama and the writing by choosing moments of ambiguity, challenge or misunderstanding, identifying the gaps in the text, and using unrecorded conversation, unmentioned thoughts or off the page scenarios to fill meaning in the context of the text (Grainger, 2004, p. 96). In one of Winston's workshops, he used The Boat, a picture book, as an example to demonstrate how working on gaps in the text can draw the readers closer to the character's inner life. On a hill lived an old man who only had a lot of hurt or abandoned animals to keep him company. All the villagers living on another hill were scared of him and his animals. The writer did not specify the reason why the old man lived alone and on what grounds the villagers were afraid of him, which left a gap for drama to maneuver. Winston created a village scene where villagers of different walks of life could meet the old man. The students worked in groups to speculate on what made the villagers feel frightened of him. Afterwards, Winston, in role as the old man, visited all the places - grocery store, his wife's graveyard, landlord's home, etc, and the students interacted with him by playing villagers. What the students have gained from this dramatic experience is described by Baldwin and Fleming as "a sense of co-authorship of the text and collaboration with the author" (2003, p. 19). This experience also helps to build up a context for learners to actively construct meaning from the text. Drama as a Context for Writing Writing requires a sense of purpose and audience, without which writing can become only a tedious task of skill building. Within the dramatic framework, students take on roles, interact with other characters and enact the situation in the story. They can experience the character's dilemma of choice, feel the confusion, and share his/her happiness. This emotional engagement and identification with the character lend an impetus to communicate and give the children an audience to write to. In addition, they can practice writing in various registers in accordance with the situation of context created in the imaginary world. Winston once ran a workshop, using the story of Mr Fox to develop a situation of context for the participants to write in role. The participants worked in role as Lady Mary's friends and interviewed the villagers to find out what Mr Fox was really like. They then tried to write a formal letter as a group to warn Lady Mary and her brother of Mr Fox's concealment and alleged murders. They needed to work out the format of a formal letter including appropriate greetings, complimentary close, polite wording, and long complex sentence structure, but in the meantime they also had to express their worry and anxiety by words. In this writing activity the participants not only felt the tension of the situation but also learned cooperatively to write a persuasive letter. Grainger gives a description of the benefit of writing in role as follows: <quote>Genuine writing in role, during or after some dramatic engagement, can provide a clearer than usual stance or sense of perspective. Through alignment with a particular character in a text ..., the voice and views of the author are shaped and formed. (Grainger, 2004, p. 92)</quote>After examining five interpretive studies, Crumpler and Schneider (2002) also found that participating in process-drama scenes helps the students to integrate their own understanding of the stories with the additional interpretations and transactions of other classmates and the teacher. Their research suggests that writing in response to drama can effectively support the students' writing development and provide insights into the complexities of children's literacy processes. Similar findings can be seen in Steele's article about writing and role as well. She emphasizes the value of working in role as a unique way for learners to think, talk, respond and interact for a change of perspective to occur. Providing many examples of pupils' writing, she claims that slowing down action by using drama activities such as thought tracking, hot-seating, and freeze-framing, can help children "delve deeper and more reflectively" (2003, p. 184). Through drama, children link together the "there and then" in stories and the world of "here and now", building up their understanding upon their experience in drama, which "can bring vividness and an authentic voice to children's writing" (2003, p. 185). To become a good writer, one should also be able to make use of various forms of writing. Grainger indicates that particular drama conventions tend to bring about certain kinds of writing (2004, p. 96). Thought tracking, for instance, can support writing in the reflective mode and freeze frames lead easily to narrative writing. Teachers should therefore employ suitable drama activities to suit the chosen form of writing in class. By so doing, they will find the contribution drama can make to their students' writing. Drama as a Venue to Cater for Diverse Learning Styles The greater the variety of multisensory learning tasks, the more likely it is the pupils will learn efficiently. Drama is a unique learning medium that allows children to comprehend the text more fully by using diverse multisensory strategies and multiple intelligences. Nicholson cogently argues that drama, as a multitextual art form, combining visual, aural, verbal and kinesthetic languages, offers students with different points of entry into the work and different ways of engaging with the text (Nicholson, p. 179). Miles Tandy's workshop serves as a good example of demonstrating how drama can engage students in active learning. In his workshop, the participants not only acted out an excerpt from Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream but used mini camcorder to videotape and edit their performance. To contextualize and generate meaning from the excerpt, the participants needed to make good use of the language of movement, visual images, sound, music, voice and intonation. Since working in drama inevitably demands a wide range of intelligences, every member in the group can bring their talents into full play. The whole process of producing a short film based on a short script helped the participants gain a deeper comprehension of the written text; it provided a venue for everyone to shine, to contribute, and to gain confidence, as well. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Learning to become literate is not a static process but a dynamic progression of meaning negotiation. If children can fully participate in it as a whole being - with the whole body as well as the brain, they will learn to the maximum degree. Literacy skills should not be viewed narrowly as linguistic abilities. It is the context of situation that should be placed at the heart of literacy curricula. Oracy provides the basis for children's growth in reading and writing. Through the dramatic framework, we are able to embrace all these important factors in literacy learning. Drama embodies the words and ideas, brings the written texts off the page, and makes them happen here and now. It encourages children to listen to each other, have their own say, and try out a range of registers to communicate in the context. In drama, children imagine together, fully engaging with the text. Drama is no elixir, but so long as the teachers are willing to apply drama in their literacy teaching, they will see the difference and payoff in their pupils' development of literacy. 