<heading>Introduction</heading>As audiences, we all have this experience. When the theatre light dims, our senses turn keen and ready to capture every sound and image under the spotlight, and then our mood swings up and down with every emotional fluctuation on stage. Even after walking out of the playhouse, some scenes still lingered in our minds. We felt completely entertained at this moment. But at times, we are just in confusion after watching certain plays. Why is there such a distinction? How are we to be "dramatically literate", to be able to appreciate all or most of the theatre forms? There must be some methods to help us achieve that goal. <heading>From Literacy to Dramatic Literacy </heading>Before giving the possible answers to the question of being "dramatically literate", I'd like to tackle the issue of being literate first so as to lay a logic foundation for the real question of this essay because being literate and being dramatically literate do have a lot of things in common. Once the first question can be answered, then the second or the real one is, in principles, supposed to be solved in a similar way. To begin with, there are two fundamental questions that need to be answered: what is the meaning of being literate and how can one achieve such a goal? Regarding the first question, any English dictionaries that we consult would provide roughly the same definition that a literate person is someone who is able to read and write. (Here, reading can be seen as behaviour of input, while writing behaviour of output.) To put it more specific, the term "literate", according to Collins Cobuild English Dictionary, can also refer to those who are "intelligent and well-educated, especially about literature and the arts". In a narrower sense, a person who is knowledgeable about a particular subject would also be viewed as literate in that specific field according to the same dictionary. For example, we can call someone who has a good understanding of computer as a computer-literate person. All of these definitions reveal one single truth that literacy is based on knowledge, and only by receiving proper education, be it formal or informal, can one become literate. This happens to be the exact answer to the second question. By the same token, someone who is knowledgeable about drama and is able to appreciate (input) and participate (output) in drama can be considered dramatically literate. To achieve dramatic literacy, one should receive drama education first. He or she is expected to possess enough aptitude for and expertise in theatre and drama; otherwise, he or she will not be able to understand drama or theater properly, let alone take part in them actively. In a nutshell, it is crystal clear that drama education is the prerequisite for being a dramatic literate person. But concerning the contents of the drama education, experts and scholars in the dramatic arena, especially in the UK, seemed to have divided opinions. This divergent phenomenon was closely related to the heated debate as to whether drama should be taught as a subject or a learning medium. Among those who favour drama as a learning medium, Dorothy Heathcote is undoubtedly a leading figure. In 1971, she called for more attention to drama as a system and declared: <quote>I define educational drama as being anything which involves people in active role-taking situations in which attitudes, not characters, are the chief concern, lived at life-rate (that is discovery at this moment, not memory based) and obeying the natural laws of the medium. I regard these laws as being: a willing suspension of disbelief; agreement to pretence; employing all past experiences available to the group at the present moment and any conjecture of imagination they are capable of, in an attempt to create a living, moving picture of life, which aims at surprise and discovery for the participants rather than for any onlookers. (p. 61)</quote>In other words, Heathcote believes what truly matters more should be the process of drama education. That is also why she always advocates, "don't lobby for dramatics, lobby for better learning"(1982, p. 28). Drama has a great instrumental value here. By contrast, David Hornbrook holds different views on drama education. He points out the chaos in the existing drama education as a result of treating drama as a learning tool, criticizing: <quote>By the 1990s, concerns in Britain were growing that the extreme open-endedness of many drama classes was not giving students a systematic education in the subject, and although it was accepted that teaching methods in drama had been developed to a high degree refinement, what was going on in classes too often seemed random and directionless. In proposing that the subject of drama must embrace concepts dramatic literacy and cultural induction if it is to counter accusations of aimlessness. (1998, p. 4)</quote>For people who have the same belief that drama should be instructed as a subject as David Hornbrook, they would place greater emphasis on the classic style of drama in drama education so as to avoid being "directionless" and "aimless." More or less, this conviction reflects elite viewpoints. On the contrary, the opposite camp is convinced that drama can be a powerful tool to help students develop their potentials in all possible respects that are not necessarily confined to the boundaries of drama. Personally, I would call this perspective a more democratic one. I would also like to add that if democracy should and can be accepted as a universal standard in the twenty-first century, there is no doubt that the latter school, drama as a learning medium, would deserve more attention and applause. Nevertheless, we have to always bear it in mind that the essence or the true spirit of a democratic system ought to be on the basis of pluralism; that is, it is not contradictory to have elites' and grassroots' point of views at the same time in a democratic society. It does not have to be an either-or dichotomy. Instead, it would be healthier and more balanced if we could find the common ground for both groups and adopt an integrated approach by incorporating their advantages all together in order that the whole society can make progress and keep moving on. This idea can also apply when referring to the drama education. Fortunately, the latest development of the drama education in the UK coincides with this middle ground idea. Once the consensus is reached, the substance of the drama education can have a clearer picture. Ideally, this drama education should be able to give all students adequate knowledge and skills for being dramatic literate; furthermore, for those eager and talented ones who might enter the dramatic and theatrical profession later on, they must be assured to have the ability to pursue further in this drama field. In practice, it is by no means an easy task for drama teachers to meet these two criteria. This task becomes even more appalling as these criteria are not static or constant all the time. Take the evolution of computer education in school for example, a college graduate in 1980s would be considered highly competitive if he or she knew how to type and had some basic knowledge about computer. But as time went to 1990s, supposed that a student graduated from university and did not have a good command of Microsoft's Office software and the Internet, that student might be seen as a modern primitive. After the millennium, college graduates, besides the basic computer skills mentioned above, are expected to be capable of designing a homepage or making use of computer in a commercial way. Stunning as this progress may seem to be, we can still presume that a college graduate, no matter when he or she may graduate, can always cope with new changes and take various challenges so long as he or she won't stop his or her learning on the previous basis. And it is teachers who should shoulder the most responsibility for giving students such a basis so that students can continue to learn all through their life. Similarly, when teaching drama, we should focus on the kernel basis mainly. It would be impossible as well as impractical if we wish to give our students everything. However, speaking of the basis of drama education, there should be two prerequisites to be installed in order to facilitate students to be dramatically literate. They are: to comprehend the relationship between drama and theatre and to treat drama and theatre as sign systems. <heading>Drama/Theatre as the Siamese Twins</heading>As I have mentioned above, cultivating students' drama literacy skills is no easy job. Drama, per se, is a complex issue. As Hornbrook has pointed out, "drama, like many other categories of experience, has suffered from attempts at crude and limiting definitions" (1998, p. 6). The interwoven relationship between drama and theatre makes the attempts a more arduous job. Historically speaking, the word "drama" is regarded as literature written in dialog form and intended for performance. Drama is the equivalent of dramatic literature. As to "theatre", it refers to the act of performing dramatic literature. But this historical distinction, criticized by Neelands, only "drives an unnecessary wedge between two living traditions, or genres of performance which ought to be studied and practiced in harmony" (2004, p. 2). Besides, it has also been challenged by the increasingly interrelated relationship between the play text and performance text. It seems that drama and theatre cannot be separated from each other. In fact, the line between drama and theatre has become blurred. What's more, with the development of technology, the definition of drama and theatre has been taken to another dimension. To name a few, the invention of TV and film has been infusing new dramatic forms into the field of drama and make drama, as described by Neelands & Dobson, "a generic, or umbrella, term to cover all that is associated with the making, performing and responding to performance, whether it is live or recorded on film or TV" (2000a, p. 10). Under this huge umbrella, theatre only shares a subsection of the live performance of a drama, shared with an audience. Owing to the constraints of space and time, it would be a mission impossible for me to discuss dramatic literacy in such a broad sense. Even in school, drama teachers would encounter the same difficulties, limited time and space, as I have at this moment. Therefore, I would like to explore the most effective way to help students become dramatically literate by mainly focusing on theatre as the live performance of drama. I believe that, both in theory and practice, students can understand and appreciate TV or film to a large extent if they receive proper drama education inasmuch as these metamorphic forms of drama indeed intersect with one another. Just as Esslin (in Neelands & Dobson, 2000b) suggests, no matter how various drama forms can be, all of them construct a fictional universe by means of real human beings and real objects as well to represent "reality". All in all, any attempts to bisect this Siamese twins, drama and theatre, would be unrewarding and futile. Instead, we should regard them as two sides of the same coin, which is that to be dramatically literate is to be able to interpret theatre! <heading>Drama/Theatre as Sign Systems</heading>Now that being dramatically literate equals being theatrically literate, how can one understand theatre? Or if a dramatic-literate person is someone who has sufficient knowledge of all aspects of theatre, then what theatre is all about? Dorothy Heathcote gives these questions an answer like this: "the theatre is the art form which is totally based in SIGN (1982, p. 19). In other words, providing that one is able to figure out the meanings of signs in theatre first, then he or she can claim that they understand theatre. It is obvious that theatre is a space full of signs, physical, visual and aural, which are intentionally designed to be decoded by the audience. For example, actors on stage send signals to audience by using gestures, languages, voices, and costumes to communicate with their audience in real time. In addition, the use of effects system, stage design, and props all contribute to get meaning across to the audience. Above all, as Counsell has clearly indicated, "theatre uses signs which function together systematically" (1996, p. 12), audience should be aware that these signs work in a systematic manner. In order to know how signs can be used to construct meaning in theatre, we need to refer to some key concepts in semiotics. Saussure argues that signs can only operate in a systematical way and be comprehended in relation to other signs used in the same text or communication act. Counsell stands on the shoulder of the giant, developing a lucid account of Saussure's notion: <quote>Similarly each sign in a system ultimately relies on all other signs, both for the segment of reality it represents and for the concept attached to it. As a consequence the sign never functions in isolation, for it keys into, and brings with it, a whole systematic view of reality. (1996, p. 12)</quote>To illustrate this wholeness of signs, I happen to have a personal example. One of my American friends, who was not so familiar with Chinese culture then, felt confused and even offended when one day my local friend told him, "you are one of those pigs because you were also born in the same year as Sabina was". On hearing this, my American friend could not figure it out so he frowned and then replied, "I beg your pardon?" to show his total ignorance of the situation. All of a sudden, the atmosphere turned to be so awkward that the conversation almost died there. In retrospect, it was facile to comprehend why my American friend had felt annoyed since the word pig in many cultures could have derogatory connotations. It can be very insulting when one is called a pig. Had I not clarified later, my friend from America would still feel irritated. In contrast, if the same dialog happened between two Chinese or Taiwanese people, both parties undoubtedly understand what that "pig" refers to. It simply means that you were born in the year of pig, so you naturally fall into the category of pig. For Chinese or Taiwanese, there are twelve animals to respectively represent each year in a circular way. On this account, every Chinese or Taiwanese must belong to a certain category of these twelve creatures. In terms of semiotics, these twelve animals are syntagms individually but consist of a paradigm collectively. Therefore, for Chinese or Taiwanese, when one kind of animal related to the year of birth is brought up in the dialog, all the twelve animals would flash across their minds. To sum up, without knowing signs as a whole or paradigmatically, one is prone to misinterpret and is also not able to grasp the entire meaning. This idea is applicable to theatre, too. <heading>Developing Dramatic Literacy Through Signs and Conventions</heading>To be dramatically or theatrically literate means to have the ability to decode performance text sytagmatically and paradigmatically - "all the signs of 'actions' that place during the performance" (Neelands & Dobson, 2000a, p. 206,). Trying to provide a framework for deconstructing and understanding performance, Kowzan proposes a detailed analysis of the sign systems in performance. He classifies theatre signs into thirteen groups in which the actor takes centre stage by being directly linked to eight of them: word, tone, mime, gesture, movement, make-up, hairstyle and costume. The other five groups, "outside the actor" as referred to by Kowzan, include properties, settings, lighting, music and sound effects (Aston & Savona, 1991, pp. 105-106). Kowzan's taxonomy, at a level, is a workable framework when used to understand productions of realist plays, which, according to Neelands & Dobson, "are intended to be a faithful interpretation of a playwright's story" (2000a, p. 208). However, his centralising the actor as a primary mechanism of auditive and visual signs has made his framework an inadequate or obsolete one in terms of analysing modern performances. Pointing out the insufficiency of Kowzan's sign systems, Neelands and Dobson (2000a) has made a list of factors which should also be taken into consideration if one attempts to understand contemporary theatre - the status change of directors, actors and designers, interaction between actors and audiences, the use and division of space, the mix of styles and genres and the use of new media. All of them are crucial in decoding the meanings sent by the cybernetic machine, another name for theatre which Roland Barthes has called. On the top of that, following by the swift changes in theatre during the twentieth century, drama has become multifaceted. As a result, to be dramatically literate has turned to be a more complex task. For instance, the directors and actors nowadays have more power in interpreting the original play text, compared with their predecessors. In some modern performance, the audience is anticipated not only to analyse the performer as a signifier but also understand theatre signs which communicate both the original play texts and the director's sub-text. Moreover, the interaction between actors and audiences, which was ignored in traditional representational theatre, has now become prominent by and large. This two-way signing can also create an impact on how theatre is read by audience. As well, the hybrid of styles and genres in theatre contribute to the difficulty of understanding the performance. Thanks to Craig's inspiring question: "How much is it essential to put on stage to convey a forest?" more and more symbolic signs are used, which inevitably demands more involvement and thought from the viewer. With increasing emphasis on movement, non-human sound, visual images and non-linear structure in the performance, it is so easy for the audience to get lost in a labyrinth of signs. So what should a drama teacher do to help students find a way out of that labyrinth? As Neelands & Dobson claims, "for a performance to communicate to its audience there has to be some logic or key that helps and guides the audience to understand everything that is seen and heard" (2000a, p. 220). It is conventions that make communication in theatre possible, regardless of whether it is orthodox theatre or avant-garde theatre. Conventions can be the thread to lead the students out of the maze constructed by the complex use of theatre signs. Like other art forms, drama can convey messages by means of certain conventions. Based on a tacit agreement between the audience and the performers, an artistic representation of an everyday reality is accepted and everyone who gets involved is willing to use their imagination to complete the illusion. Indeed, as Neelands puts it, "in theatre, meanings, social codes and interactions are represented, shaped and crafted through the conventions of dramatic activity" (1993, p. 3). With regard to the idea to teach conventions in drama education, Heathcote embraces it and states, "so we come to the fascinating area of conventions which can be used to enable children to become involved in drama experiences of many types" (1982, p. 24). Metaphorically speaking, conventions in dramatic performance are like a generator of meanings. The more the audience knows what this machine is composed of and how it functions, the more messages they can receive from it. For those gifted ones, they can even create a new meaning generator once they have mastered every nook and cranny of this machine. We cannot overemphasize the importance of conventions. They are the foundation stones of dramatic literacy. Then, what are conventions? In substance, conventions consist of characterisation and speech, staging, design, actor-audience interactions, structuring the play text or dramatic narrative, and acting style (Neelands & Dobson, 2000a, p. 16). Down below are some possible applications of conventions in drama education: Characterisation and speech Some means in theatre are used in a similar way across cultures. For example, physically defined characters use the same way to build their theatrical images in different kinds of theatre. In melodrama, a hero always walks with his open chest and head held high. In Peking opera, we can see the similar gait used by male warriors, the heroic ones. The same basic styles of movement indicating the same types of characters can be easily found in Japanese Kabuki. That is to say, the universal language of movement is a kind of convention that can help students interpret the characterisation to a certain level. Besides, the peculiar speech pattern used by the characters is worth observing. Dialects and accents are always used with a specific purpose for characterisation. In class, teachers can give students opportunities to create different characters with distinguishing features of physical appearances and speech patterns. Staging Varied organisations of performance space can lead to different meanings for the audience. Besides, the staging arrangement can also influence the interactions between the performers and the audience. If the students can get a better grip on the use of theatre space, they understand the playwright's or the director's intentions more. Design Like staging, stage design is another helpful clue. In a realistic theatre, the performance on stage is the epitome of real life, so the setting, lighting, and props, mostly with iconic value, should be true to life as well. On the other hand, in a theatre where more symbolic signs are used, the audience should be more aware with the association between the signifier and the signified. The ability of making such connections can be taught and learned in class. For example, the teacher can encourage students to use some common items, such as a blooming rose or a withered twig, to convey meanings in the dramatic activities and then discuss their symbolic meanings. Actor-audience interactions In a representational theatre, the performers are blocked up on stage with an invisible fourth wall, which keeps a certain distance between the viewers and the viewed. In a presentational theatre, contrarily, the distance is often broken by the actors' attempts to directly address the audience. The intentionally created distance, near or far, has a strong impact on the audience's interpretation of the dramatic performance. Since both presentational and representational styles are often used as a mixture in theatre now, it is important to help students grasp the intentions and meanings hidden behind these two kinds of actor-audience interactions. Structuring the play text or dramatic narrative In his article on Reading Plays for Performance, Kempe argues that play script should be read as instruction manuals because play texts contain two kinds of instructions. One is "extra-dialogic" instructions, which, like stage directions, are written down but not spoken on stage; the other one is "intra-dialogic" instructions, which are implicit in the dialogue itself" (1998, p. 97). By understanding extra-dialogic instructions, students can visualise how these stage directions may be realised on stage. By carefully reading intra-dialog, students can find out more details about characters. Moreover, Kempe also suggests students be encouraged "to experiment with ways of speaking the words of a script aloud". By so doing, "a play's potential meanings will become clearer than would ever be possible through silent reading" (1998, p. 100). Play texts are written for performance; therefore, it is also teacher's responsibility to introduce play texts to the students as a means of developing their dramatic literacy. Acting style Drama teachers should teach their students to tell realistic styles of acting from non-realistic styles of acting first and then pay attention to a hybrid of different acting styles in modern theatre. It rings true that action is louder than words. Teachers in the drama classroom should never forget to leave some time for students to experience and to observe so that students can reinforce and internalize what they have learned from their teachers. <heading>Conclusion</heading>People need to be educated to be a connoisseur of fine art. A masterpiece like Leonardo DaVinci's Mona Lisa can mean nothing but an insipid painting in the eyes of mediocrities because of the lack of aesthetic training. Like fine art, drama is also an artistic form. Needless to say, it definitely requires learning to have a better understanding of drama, and this learning should mainly focus on the sign systems and the conventions of theatre in a sense that theatre is an inseparable core of drama. Students after drama class are supposed to be able to appreciate or understand a possibly wide variety of theatre forms only if they have already learned and practiced how the signs and conventions operate in theatre. If possible, they have to keep on absorbing new information about drama and theatre by themselves even after leaving school. Then, they can surely read drama beyond the lines more than those who make little or no efforts to understand what drama is. After all, people reap what they sow! 