The modern definition of a skyscraper as a tall building was entering common parlance towards the end of the nineteenth-century; previous meanings ranged between 'high-standing horses... a hat or bonnet... a very tall man... [and] fly balls in baseball and cricket." The current description refers to 'a building of great height constructed on a steel skeleton and provided with high speed electric elevators." The provision of lighting, ventilation, heating, communication systems, fire and alarm systems, and other utilities necessary for worker productivity, can be added to this contemporary definition. <fnote>Sarah Bradford Landau and Carl W. Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, 1865-1913 (New Haven, 1996), p.ix </fnote><fnote>Francis Mujica, History of the Skyscraper (New York, 1977), p.21 </fnote>In the historiography of the skyscraper, a number of reasons have been postulated as to why Americans built them, integrating commercial, financial, and architectural motivations. There have also been numerous debates concerning the origin of skyscrapers. Although 'the question of primacy in skyscraper design - Chicago verses New York - was set aside long ago as unresolvable', the common consensus is that, contrary to popular belief, the skyscraper was born in Chicago. Following Chicago's famous fire, in 1871, which decimated many buildings, the restoration plan focused upon taller buildings; 'skyscraper design offered...speed, efficiency, and economy in rebuilding." Chicago was held up as a model for New York, as it became a focal point for American commerce in the late nineteenth-century. However, the skyscraper became an integral part of both states' topography, and 'leadership after the turn of the century passed to New York.' <fnote>Landau and Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, p.x </fnote><fnote>Donald Martin Reynolds, The Architecture of New York City: Histories and Views of Important Structures, Sites and Symbols (Revised Edition) (New York, 1994), p.147 </fnote><fnote>Paul Goldberger, The Skyscraper (New York, 1981), p.37 </fnote>The late nineteenth-century witnessed a period when the American economy recovered from the downturn it experienced in the 1880s and had embarked upon a course of upward economic mobility. During this period major cities, particularly New York, flourished as a result of rapidly expanding foreign trade that dramatically impacted the urban economy. Increased shipping and improved railroad transportation led New York to emerge as America's pre-eminent city and economic capital during this era. Spiralling growth in key sectors, such as finance, transformed New York from a port city into a leading industrial and commercial metropolis. Coupled with escalating real estate values, this transformation was decisive in enabling ideas of taller buildings to become a feasible reality. Sophisticated technological advances of the era prompted the rapid and bewildering development of skyscrapers in America. The history of the skyscraper is frequently equated with the development of the elevator, which made tall buildings practical. There exist two contradictory arguments regarding the connection of skyscrapers and elevators; 'on one hand, that the invention...of the elevator followed from the high-rise building, on the other, that the skyscraper was entirely a consequence of the elevator." Although many factors contributed to the rise of the skyscraper, the elevator was unquestionably essential in their evolution and thus skyscraper history must pay homage to the pioneers of this technological masterpiece. <fnote>Landau and Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, p.352 </fnote>In 1850 Henry Waterman invented the first platform freight elevator. His idea developed radically as within a decade the first passenger elevator, designed by Elisha Graves Otis, and was being utilised in hotels and residences. In the era of the staircase 'five stories had been found to be the maximum beyond which no tenant would pay rent, and...no "paying guest" would ascend without grumblings." Hence, the installation of the passenger elevator in private buildings made upper stories as desirable to inhabit as lower ones. <fnote>Montgomery Schuyler, 'The Evolution of the Skyscraper', in Scribner's Magazine, Vol.XLVI, No. 3, (September 1909), p.264 </fnote>In 1871, the first commercial passenger elevator was installed in the Equitable Building on Broadway, to the honour of its architect Geo. B. Post. Its success garnered immense publicity for elevators, and led to their increasing inauguration in commercial buildings, with electric elevators being used by 1887. The elevator generated commercial success, because of improved light and air conditions of higher stories, and it became 'the great emancipator of all horizontal surfaces above the ground floor." Previously, anything above three stories was considered unfit for work purposes, due to fatigue triggered by walking up numerous flights of stairs. <fnote>Rem Koolhaas, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifest for Manhattan (New York, 1994), p.82 </fnote>Prior to the advent of the skyscraper, pre- or proto-skyscrapers existed in America. These can be defined as tall masonry buildings with a maximum height of twelve stories, appearing as a direct consequence of elevators, and were often dubbed 'elevator buildings'. Also, by making tall buildings practical, the elevator 'revealed the need of replacing masonry by other less voluminous material, thus it gave birth to the idea of skeleton construction.'  <fnote>Mujica, History of the Skyscraper, p.21 </fnote>Steel skeleton construction developed as a consequence of the elevator, and was not the initial reason why Americans built skyscrapers. As Francis Mujica asserts, 'it would not have occurred to anyone to devise these building systems if the elevator had not caused the pre-skyscraper to appear and made it a financial success." The combination of these two technological breakthroughs made skyscrapers achievable. <fnote>Ibid. </fnote>The use of structural steel in bridges, such as Chicago's Eads Bridge (1870s), inspired skyscraper architects who saw potential in using steel construction instead of conventional stone and bricks. There is confusion about who invented steel skeleton construction, although a tablet on the Tower Building in Manhattan claims that it was the first built using this method in 1888. The engineering feat of steel skeleton construction was ubiquitous by 1895, as the new 1892 Building Zone Resolution made greater provision for this method, whereas high buildings had been impeded by former regulations. There were also financial advantages of using structural steel as, not only was it relatively cheap, it also <quote>meant an immediate saving of fifteen percent of the normal building cost.... The parts arrive on the building ground ready for assembling. This greatly accelerates the framework erection and saves much time.... The work can continue all year round.</quote><fnote>Ibid, p.23 </fnote>Steel skeleton construction enabled Americans to build higher buildings with thinner walls, thus maximising interior work-floor space. Although there is disagreement, the general consensus is that William LeBaron Jenney's Home Insurance Building, built in Chicago in 1884, was the first skyscraper. Yet, this title has also been bestowed on the Equitable Building where realisations of the possibilities of the elevator were formulated. Sarah Bradford Landau and Carl W. Condit consider these the key skyscrapers built in America by 1910; the Singer Tower, Metropolitan Life Tower, Municipal Building, Bankers Trust Building, Woolworth Building, and the Equitable Building. Also deserving of recognition is the Flatiron Building of 1920, because of its audacious construction on a narrow lot at the intersection of two main Manhattan streets. <fnote>Cited in Landau and Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, p.354 </fnote>An insatiable desire for prestige among affluent businessmen, who wished to exhibit their business acumen and prosperity using an icon of real estate, escalated during this epoch. Beyond technological advances, 'the social ascendancy of...businessmen', urged Americans to build skyscrapers. For example, the Woolworth Building (1913), dubbed the 'Cathedral of Commerce', was intended as a giant billboard to advertise to the world the achievement of Woolworth's five-and-ten-cent stores. Designed by Cass Gilbert it was the tallest building in the world until 1930, when it was exceeded by the Bank of Manhattan Company and Chrysler Buildings. However, 'the title of "tallest building in the world" continued to change rapidly among the towering masses in Manhattan.' <fnote>David Nye, American Technological Sublime (Cambridge Massachusetts, 1994), p.97 </fnote><fnote>Mujica, History of the Skyscraper, p.29 </fnote>The heads of insurance companies ''knew the value of height, splendour...in establishing their image or increasing their sales'', in a society where grandeur was highly influential. They were 'eager to convey the impression of established wealth and security...promoting the image of prosperity' and stability, to maximise their profits. Americans built skyscrapers to advertise companies' corporate images, inviting public recognition of the sheer audacity of America's commercial centres. <fnote>Mark Girouard, Cities and People: A Social and Architectural History (London, 1985), p.322, cited in Nye, American Technological Sublime, p.89 </fnote><fnote>Landau and Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, p.66 </fnote>In the sense of business competition, skyscrapers emerged due to rivalries between leading New York newspapers: the Tribune, the Observer and the Herald. In the mid-1870s, when the Tribune built the tallest building in the city, it was almost immediately copied by its competitors. A parallel sense of competition is highlighted by the 1920s race between architects of the Chrysler and Bank of Manhattan Company Buildings to build the world's tallest skyscraper. The Chrysler Building triumphed as its architect, William Van Alen, cleverly constructed a vertex (high spire) within the top of the building, not raising it until its rival building was completed in 1930. Alongside desires to out-do opponents existed an imperious functional need for buildings devoted entirely to office space. This evolved as 'industries multiplied and expanded...and administrative functions, paper flow, and personnel increased correspondingly', as well as the necessity for a greater level of record keeping, all requiring a large fixed working space. There also arose an 'emphasis on providing as many urban functions and services as possible in a single building', in order to utilise space effectively and satisfy the imperious demands of commerce. <fnote>Ibid, p.5 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.35 </fnote>Together with this overwhelming necessity for offices, it became imperative to concentrate business in a specific district, with the aim of increasing the frequency of contact between establishments, which was considered financially- and time-effective. As Rem Koolhaas asserts, 'only the skyscraper offers business wide-open spaces' in the heart of the city. The opening of Grand Central Station stimulated economic growth and greater demand for offices close to this centralised transportation system, which would bring larger numbers of workers into the city. With a population of over one-million by 1875 and 543 people per acre of land by 1880, New York was in dire need of additional space for its dense mass of workforce. The Empire State Building was created to provide more offices in midtown New York. Its architect, John Jacob Raskob, employed former New York Governor Albert Smith to open the building in 1931. The Empire State Building became identifiable with Smith's superior image and popularity, thus attracting vast press exposure. Constructed during the Great Depression, it became the tallest building in the world as well as an enduring symbol of the metropolis. <fnote>Koolhaas, Delirious New York, p.87 </fnote><fnote>Statistics cited in Landau and Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, p.2 </fnote>It has been suggested that Americans built skyscrapers in order to obtain greater revenue from their lots. However, that raising revenue, by renting out office space, was the sole reason for building skyscrapers has been disputed by David Nye who claims that 'the high costs of building higher were not justified by rents." Yet Paul Goldberger contends that skyscrapers were economically viable, because 'if they had not been able to make money, these vast buildings would not have been built.' <fnote>Nye, American Technological Sublime, p.88 </fnote><fnote>Goldberger, The Skyscraper, p.87 </fnote>Americans built skyscrapers to satisfy the 'fast-growing need for more commercial space in areas where available land was limited', and where the viable alternative to lateral expansion was to build vertically. Moreover, it had become financially prohibitive to build outwards as, following the 1860s Civil War, 'land costs [had] soared astronomically as the competition for centralised institutions in the business districts increased." Nye disputes the fact that Americans needed to build vertically because 'many areas of Manhattan and Chicago were comparatively undeveloped when the first skyscrapers went up. There was still abundant space for more modest structures', implying that skyscrapers were not built for economic and spatial reasons. <fnote>Reynolds, The Architecture of New York City, p.147 </fnote><fnote>Merrill Schleier, The Skyscraper in American Art, 1830-1931 (New York, c1986), p.5 </fnote><fnote>Nye, American Technological Sublime, p.88 </fnote>Nye writes of a 'developing popular taste for the geometrical sublime' among Americans in the late nineteenth-century, which he asserts was as important as economic and technological motives in building skyscrapers. He draws attention to the hypothesis that Americans 'built skyscrapers to compensate for a lack of...advantages', such as the panoramic views appreciated in many European states. Most of the population found the man-made commercial skyline aesthetically breathtaking, as they could observe the cityscape from new vantage points at the top of skyscrapers. The skyscraper successfully penetrated popular consciousness and positive responses to it encouraged Americans to build even higher. <fnote>Ibid, p.89 </fnote><fnote>Ibid  Sublime, p.87 </fnote>The rise of the skyscraper 'attracted attention that ran the gamut from enthusiasm to hostility." Those who opposed skyscrapers, wishing to preserve the horizontal city, denounced them as monstrous anathema. A prime concern was atmospheric pollution caused by the increased volume of traffic instigated by skyscrapers, emphasised by opponents Major Henry Curran and Robert Kerr (a British architect). Skyscrapers apparently trapped the noxious air produced by cars, producing unsanitary and unsafe conditions on the streets. However, 'to put the entire responsibility on the skyscraper is just as fundamentally erroneous as the idea that the automobile be solely at fault.' <fnote>Landau and Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, p.111 </fnote><fnote>Mujica, History of the Skyscraper, p.51 </fnote>Skyscrapers were also deemed capitalist and elitist values incarnate, reflecting 'growing popular antagonism toward the buccaneering methods of finance and business competition." Commercial interests undermined culture and tradition, weakening the sense of community that was the very fabric of American life. Merrill Schleier highlights that the 'increasing proliferation of titanic buildings seemed to render human life inconsequential...the gargantuan scale of the buildings literally dwarfed the people in their midst.'  <fnote>Landau and Condit, Rise of the New York Skyscraper, p.127 </fnote><fnote>Schleier, The Skyscraper in American Art, p.11 </fnote>Nevertheless, the majority considered skyscrapers to be a symbol of nationalism and a quintessential expression of the American spirit, embodying the ingenuity and progress of the country, with many marvelling at the eclectic fusion of new buildings. In conclusion, a confluence of social, commercial, and technological factors inspired Americans to build skyscrapers, with debates continuing over the most important motive. Nye surmises that 'technological innovations did not call the skyscraper into being, even if they did facilitate upward expansion', nor were economic factors foremost in the building of skyscrapers; 'London...was much larger than any American city throughout the nineteenth-century, but no skyscrapers appeared there." It was an amalgamation of equally significant factors, underlined by an overwhelming desire for international superiority, which encouraged American's to build skyscrapers. <fnote>Nye, American Technological Sublime, p.89 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.88 </fnote>