A diverse variety of Reformation groups are enveloped under the collective term 'Anabaptist' in modern historiography and, because there has been no definitive history compiled on this theme, it has proved difficult to reach a common judgement about what constituted real Anabaptism. Yet these reformists have been described both as the 'left-wing of the Reformation', as asserted by Roland Bainton, and as 'the Bolsheviks of the Reformation', as postulated by Preserved Smith, representing the variations in historical opinion.  <fnote>Roland Bainton, 'The Left Wing of the Reformation', The Journal of Religion XXI (1941), pp.124-134, quoted in Harold Bender, 'The Significance of Sixteenth-Century Anabaptism: The Anabaptist Vision', in James Stayer and Werner Packull, (eds.), The Anabaptists and Thomas Müntzer (Iowa, c1980), p.14 </fnote>However, in the 1940s Harold Bender observed that there were two strands of Anabaptism present in the early sixteenth-century across Germany, Switzerland, Holland and Austria; on one hand there existed 'original evangelical and constructive Anabaptism...and the various mystical, spiritualistic, revolutionary...groups on the other." In this analysis the former description highlights the most accurate form of Anabaptism, in which the most important groups were the Swiss Brethren, the Hutterites, the Thuringian Anabaptists, and various factions shaped under the leaderships of Pilgram Marpeck, Hans Hut and George Schnabel. <fnote>Bender, 'The Significance of Sixteenth-Century Anabaptism', p.14 </fnote>The Anabaptists were comprised of those who were considered 'people with ideals, good intentions, commitment and a readiness for martyrdom, but also powerless people, temporisers, failures, cantankerous and obstinate people." This conflict in the interpretation of who Anabaptists were highlights how the movement is surveyed in differing ways according to the theological perspective of the historian. For example, Protestants considered the sect to be composed of fanatic rebels, and contemporary Catholic sympathisers regarded the birth of Anabaptism to be the radical consequence of Luther's Reformation. Such denominational bias has shaped and dominated the history of Anabaptism. Yet recent research has shown that Anabaptism can be seen as a culmination of the Reformation that developed from a number of roots in the sixteenth-century. It did not derive from Lutheran Reformation alone, but also from Huldrych Zwingli's Reformation in Switzerland, Thomas Müntzer's notorious Radical Reformation in Germany and the influential ideas of Melchior Hoffman in Strasbourg. These existing reform movements whetted the appetites for further transformations as radicals became disillusioned with the compromises of existing authorities and hence created their own complex and diverse movement, bent upon restitution. <fnote>Hans Jürgen-Goertz, The Anabaptists (London, 1996), p.5 </fnote>In terms of the threat presented by Anabaptism to established authority in the sixteenth-century, that of both the State and the Church must be taken into consideration, as must the severity of any threat they posed. It is significant that the threat of Anabaptism was not initially realised by the established powers. Consequently 'at the outset it was tolerated by the authorities and its early progress was therefore rapid', especially as it garnered support among peasants who were equally disgruntled with established authorities. <fnote>George Huntson Williams, The Radical Reformation (Philadelphia, c1962), p.127 </fnote>Anabaptists' prime rejection of what they saw as the wickedness of the world, deemed to be embodied by the Church and government, presented a serious threat to these authorities. However, it was principally with the rupture of Anabaptists from mainstream reformist ideology that such a threat became recognisable, specifically with regard to the Church. As the leaders of the movement realised that any hope of steering the Reformation in the direction they desired had vanished, they went on to envisage a complete separation and rigorously marked themselves off from the Church, rather than attempting to purify and reform the existing Christianity. This schism represented how the Anabaptist vision went to further extremes, compared to the moderate ideology of Luther, because it gave the existing Reformation movement 'body and form, and set out to achieve it in actual experience." Anabaptists did not accept the Church system that was being fashioned under the existing reformers and sought to create their own renewed religion; 'what emerged piecemeal during the 1520s was a coherent theological vision which underpinned an ambitious, and unique, plan for the reform of the church." This vision presented a serious threat to established authority in the religious sphere, as it was to rise against many existing principles endorsed by such authorities, and was to provoke a widespread climate of anti-clericalism throughout the population. <fnote>Bender, 'The Significance of Sixteenth-Century Anabaptism', p.16 </fnote><fnote>Bruce Gordon, The Swiss Reformation (Manchester, 2002), p.79 </fnote>Harold Bender importantly characterises the three points of emphasis of the new Anabaptist vision of spiritual renewal, which included <quote>a new conception of the essence of Christianity as a discipleship...a new conception of the Church as a brotherhood...and...a new ethic of love and non-resistance. </quote><fnote>Bender, 'The Significance of Sixteenth-Century Anabaptism', p.16 </fnote>As a result of this vision, Anabaptism presented a threat to the established religious authorities. For instance, their focus on the Church related neither to the Catholic institution, nor the Lutheran belief in the divine word, but to a brotherhood in which the true Christian ideal was satisfied, thus going against established authorities. In contrast to the traditional optimism of Catholics and their hope for redemption, Anabaptists were pessimistic and saw the suffering of the existing Church as irreparable and attacked its iconoclasm and presentation of a false religion. Anabaptists followed the path of Zwingli, who had 'hammered away at the contrast between the harsh and sordid reality of daily life and the promises of Scripture', in their renunciation of the traditional religion. The established Church authorities saw this as tantamount to a rejection of the faith, which was furthered by the Anabaptist rejection of the importance of the Mass and the Bible. In contrast to these established beliefs, the Anabaptists felt that inner experience and the Holy Spirit was direct to everything. <fnote>Gordon, The Swiss Reformation, p.343 </fnote>Specifically in their spiritual attitude towards baptism the Anabaptists presented a serious threat to the established authority of the Church. The word 'Anabaptist' actually meant somebody who believed in baptism again, and their focus on 'believers baptism' went against the practices of established religious authorities. This belief stemmed from the Anabaptist ideal that baptism was a regeneration of faith and necessary for the admission into God's Church. By practicing infant baptism the established Church were considered, by the Anabaptists, to have destroyed their unity with New Testament teachings. The threat to religious authority can be considered serious because the Anabaptists 'were never weary of denouncing infant baptism as 'the Pope's first and highest abomination', and as a device of Satan for the corruption of Christ', and in this sustained attack on the existing method of baptism they threatened the religious foundations on which this practice was based. <fnote>R. J. Smithson, The Anabaptists: Their Contribution to Our Protestant Heritage (London, 1935), p.137 </fnote>The Seven Articles in the Schleitheim Confession of February 1527, formulated by Michael Sattler of the Swiss Brethren, were the first systematic statement of Anabaptism and was thus considered an apocalyptic document. Arnold Snyder identified this Confession with the 'crystallisation point for the Swiss movement', as it was one of the first known attempts to unite the disagreeing factions of Anabaptism. The articles underscored the main principles of the Anabaptists, in contestation with established authorities, thus presenting a threat to the policies and practices of both State and Church authorities. In the Schleitheim Confession, Anabaptists presented a united front, openly criticised the cooperation between the Reformed Churches and secular authorities, and disputed the character of government Yet 'Anabaptist ideas on the question of government were too varied to be neatly summed up by the formulaic 'separation of Church and government'' as a result of the diversity of opinions across the sects. Nevertheless, the Schleitheim Confession projected Anabaptists into the limelight in showing they were prepared to take an uncompromising stand in political matters. In this they went much further than previous reformers who had 'proved reluctant to cut the close bonds which existed between the Church and Government." Anabaptists presented a serious threat to government authority as they scrupulously denied that Christians should dispense justice or plead cases before secular courts because 'it was not the place of the magistrates to judge in matters of faith; that was for God alone." Neither would Anabaptists partake in military service or carry arms; 'they suffered imprisonment and death rather than bear arms." They also refused to swear oaths, as they would be swearing their 'loyalty and obedience to a government which persecuted and executed Christians." Furthermore, they refused to hold a government office because it 'often required the infliction of capital punishment, and to kill was, under no circumstances, permissible to a Christian', and went against their fundamental principles. Anabaptism therefore threatened disharmony within the established government authorities as it pointed out its chief limitation: that it was not able to live up to the divine perfection of God. Moreover, Anabaptists held that God had ordained the government, and although they 'did not dispute the legitimacy of temporal authority, they merely limited it to the temporal sphere." This was because they claimed that the State should not interfere with the Church or their beliefs, <fnote>Arnold Snyder, Anabaptist History and Theology: An Introduction (PA, 1995), p.61, quoted in Gordon, The Swiss Reformation, p.201 </fnote><fnote>Jürgen-Goertz, The Anabaptists, p.107 </fnote><fnote>Jürgen-Goertz, The Anabaptists, p.6 </fnote><fnote>Gordon, The Swiss Reformation, p.59 </fnote><fnote>Smithson, The Anabaptists, p.126 </fnote><fnote>Jürgen-Goertz, The Anabaptists, p.99 </fnote><fnote>Smithson, The Anabaptists, p.124 </fnote><fnote>Jürgen-Goertz, The Anabaptists, p.98 </fnote><quote>since it was a secular institution it could have no right to legislate in things spiritual. The State was obeyed in all things lawful, but it had no right to interfere in matters of conscience. The State and the Church functioned in different realms. </quote><fnote>Smithson, The Anabaptists, p.123 </fnote>On the other hand, it must be recognised that 'the attitude of the Anabaptists to the State has frequently been misinterpreted, even by those who have been definitely in sympathy with the movement." Anabaptists have often been considered anarchists, however they did not necessarily display outright resistance the State. Anabaptists were not a serious threat as they did not reject the government or State absolutely, but only disagreed with its illegitimate involvement in religious matters. For instance, they were happy to pay tithes, taxes and tolls, 'along the line of Christ's demand to 'give to Caesar that which is Caesar's and to God that which is God's' (Matthew 2, 21)', even if they were not willing to abide by it in religious matters. In the latter they failed to recognise any authority expect that of God, and thus proved unwilling to support the usurpation of power by civil authorities; God's authority exceeded the governments. <fnote>Ibid, p.124 </fnote><fnote>Jürgen-Goertz, The Anabaptists, p.99 </fnote>Although Anabaptists did not actively seek clashes with established authorities, their refutation of government power threatened riot and discord. Consequently, established authorities tended to view Anabaptism as a serious plague that had to be eliminated. The threat posed is appreciated by observing the government's reaction to Anabaptists and punishments imposed on them. Despite the fact that authorities did not always immediately respond to the threat, as they may not have considered it serious enough, 'in the end the government could not calmly observe from a distance, but was forced to settle or terminate." Anabaptism, as a whole, proved threatening to established authorities as it 'challenged sixteenth-century society to reconsider and alter its fundamental principles and their martyrdom pierced its heart." The established authorities portrayed them as anarchists and the fact that Sattler was tried and executed in May 1527 highlights the threat posed after the Schleitheim Confession established a degree of Anabaptist unity and common principles. <fnote>Ibid, p.97 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.131 </fnote>The threat of Anabaptists to established authorities can be noted in the legislation enacted against them, for example the Zurich Council issued a mandate in March 1525 threatening punishment for those who were rebaptised. The threat posed by Anabaptists can be seen to have grown over the proceeding year as in 1526 a law was passed attaching the 'death penalty not only to acts of rebaptism...but also to attendance upon Anabaptist preaching." Religious authorities appeared specifically threatened and believed Anabaptists 'had to be driven out before they could destroy the faith of true Christians." This implies that the threat must have been substantial if there were fears that Anabaptists could have enough influence to significantly alter the course of religion and faith of existing Christians. <fnote>Williams, The Radical Reformation, p.144 </fnote><fnote>Heinrich Bullinger, quoted in Gordon, The Swiss Reformation, p.210 </fnote>The reaction and severity of measures against Anabaptists varied according to region and religious bias, and to begin with the authorities were hesitant about what to do, hence Anabaptism was often tolerated. However, as the threat posed became more prominent, Catholic territories adopted extreme courses of punishment, such as persecution. On the other hand, authorities in Lutheran territories did not tend to carry persecution to the same lengths as the Catholics, although the 'hesitancy and partial tolerance that marked their attitude in the earlier stages of the movement soon gave way to imprisonment and executions.' <fnote>Ernest Belfort Bax, Rise and Fall of the Anabaptists (London, 1903), p.72 </fnote>In conclusion, the Anabaptists did present a threat to established authorities in the sixteenth-century, although the extent of its seriousness is debateable. The lack of coherence and unity in Anabaptism meant that it was unable to present a serious threat to authority, denoting Anabaptists as merely insignificant extremists. Moreover, Anabaptism cannot have presented an extremely serious threat as it <quote>had no discernible impact on the political, economic or social institutions of their age...the Anabaptist doctrine that government must not interfere in religious affairs was not adopted by any government of the period.</quote><fnote>Claus-Peter Clasen, 'Anabaptism: a Social History', in Stayer and Packull (eds.), The Anabaptists and Thomas Müntzer (Iowa, c1980), p.39 </fnote>Despite their genuine piety and powerful moral vigour, Claus-Peter Clasen surmises that, 'however fascinating the Anabaptist movement was, it cannot be called more that a minor episode in the history of sixteenth-century German society." Thus, although Anabaptism clearly presented a threat at the time this was not serious, as it was not sustained over a long-term period, but was minimal as it faded over time. <fnote>Ibid. </fnote>