The epoch of the Romantic Movement has been a topic of notable discussion, however it is generally postulated that it spanned the period between the mid-eighteenth and mid-nineteenth century, triumphing particularly in its later years. The Romantic Movement symbolised a momentous reaction against the degrading material and environmental changes stimulated by the centuries' industrial and agricultural revolutions, alongside a rejection of the rational dogmas of the Enlightenment. The principal characteristics of the Romantic Movement included an overpowering yet troubled love of nature, sympathy and nostalgia for a golden past, and enthusiasm for a simple rural life. A combination of these elements provided the impetus in paving the way for modern environmentalism, because of their connection to the supreme force of Mother Nature and endeavours to protect her dominion. Although it is 'difficult to place the commencement of modern concerns about the environment to any specific date', modern environmentalism evolved as a mass movement since Earth Day, in 1970. Although an understanding of environmental issues had been accumulating throughout the century, this national celebration underlined the fact that modern society was growing increasingly conscious of the threat posed by the profound environmental problems that stemmed from adverse developments in the economy. Such extensive awareness harped back to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, where 'an impending global shortage of timber resources' had given rise to schemes for forest protection, and preservation reserves were established owing to wildlife depletion at the hands of hunters. Modern environmentalism could be deemed part of a 'romantic resurgence', as it similarly endorsed the ideal that humans 'should behave with more peaceful and harmonious intentions towards nature', as opposed to the degrading and exploiting it. <fnote>David Pepper, Roots of Modern Environmentalism, (London, 1989), p.14 </fnote><fnote>Richard Grove, Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens and the Origins of Environmentalism, 1600-1860, (Cambridge, 1995), p.309 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.87 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.13 </fnote>David Pepper declared that 'modern ecological environmentalism... has particular affinities with 19 th-century romanticism." An early illustration of the extent to which the Romantic Movement paved the way for modern environmentalism can be seen in the studies of Gilbert White. His emphasis on the natural harmony of Selbourne eulogised the ideals of simplicity, the sublime landscape, unity with a palpable nature, and Pantheism, all of which were key concepts in the philosophy of the Romantic Movement. The latter was particularly central, as 'it seemed that to find God one must find 'unspoiled' nature, his creation', thus, because of the manifestation of God in nature, they saw it as a deity. White omitted citing the agricultural revolution in his book, The Natural History of Selbourne (1789), despite the fact that it had irrevocably distorted the rustic simplicity of his life into an anachronism. <fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.68 </fnote><fnote>David Pepper, Modern Environmentalism: An Introduction, (London, 1996), p.200 </fnote>In nineteenth-century Massachusetts, the transcendentalist Henry David Thoreau expressed the ideals of the Romantic Movement and veneration of nature in an American context. He exercised remarkable austerity in his immersion into nature and in his response to intensive farming and the rapid depletion of forests; he 'saw trees as God's temples." Thoreau's condemnation of extensive deforestation can be compared to forest protection schemes, implying that the modern environmentalism embodied much of the ethos of the Romantic Movement. <fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.72 </fnote>Modern environmental theories were rooted in desires to return to the Golden Age of the pre-industrial era and capitulating oneself to nature, following the path laid down by the Romantic Movement. In their struggle to preserve the dynamics of nature, 'the ecocentric very much restates the ideas of the transcendentalists. They, in turn, took on the European romantic's ideas', identifying that modern environmentalism inherited ideas of Romantics. <fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.81 </fnote>Romantics expressed their deep disillusionment with the rise of deplorable industry and agricultural innovations, which vandalised nature. This was due to the adverse impact they had upon the landscape and wider environment; 'Romantics hated how industrialisation made previously beautiful places ugly." Those involved in modern environmental movements similarly articulated their concerns about the destruction and gross exploitation of the landscape owing to modern industry and progressive agricultural technology. 'Over the last 10,000 years human activities have brought about major changes in the ecosystems of the world." Such activities led modern environmentalists to advocate the balance of humanity and nature, emulating the romantic inspiration to transcend notions of human superiority, signifying the extent to which the Romantic Movement impacted modern environmentalism. <fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, pp.189-90 </fnote><fnote>Clive Ponting, A Green History of the World. The Environment and the Collapse of Great Civilisations, (London, 1993), p.161 </fnote>A prime characteristic of modern environmentalism was an endeavour to conserve exhaustible sources of energy by conducting searches for safe, renewable sources. Such initiatives stemmed from Romantic reactions to widespread beliefs of the era in the inexhaustibility of natural resources. Modern environmentalists were 'romantic followers', as they shared the same lack of empathy towards industrialisation which 'created areas of concentrated pollution', regarding it as a profanity corrupting society. Industrial centres were viewed as transforming a natural man into a sullied man encumbered by possessions and estranged from the dynamics of nature. This clearly represents how modern environmentalism adapted qualities from the path set down by the Romantic Movement as both encouraged the return of man to nature. <fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.169 </fnote><fnote>Ponting, A Green History, p.361 </fnote>It was the amalgamation of a myriad of environmental concerns that broadened the constituency of the modern environmental movement in the 1970s, underscoring a new phase in environmentalism. The plethora of modern environmental problems could be deemed cataclysmic, as they included the acute growth of modern metropolises, pollution, acid rain, extinction of various species of wildlife and entire natural ecosystems, global warming and ozone depletion, mineral depletion, deforestation, and the exhaustion of natural resources. The 'pioneers of modern environmentalism' sought to limit, if not rectify, these problems by establishing numerous protective schemes, for example to conserve forests by placing strict controls upon the cutting of trees. <fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.169 </fnote>However, some initial government policies to combat deforestation were autocratic and had detrimental effects, particularly for Native American Indians who were displaced from their forest dwellings. This was also a consequence of the revolutionary establishment of wildlife sanctuaries, which required the indigenous forest communities to relocate. The first of these special reserves, Yellowstone National Park in America, was founded for recreational purposes in 1872. It predominantly promoted 'escapism, as well as the more positive romantic desire for spiritual regeneration' for the urban middle-class. The Romantic Movement had paved the way for this sense of a retreat back to the solace of nature, as it presented an opportunity for those who had become estranged from nature to withdraw back into it, away from the distortions and corruptions of heavy industry, consumerism, and city life. However, the dislocation of the Natives, in order to establish National Parks, went against ideals of the Romantic Movement, which exalted the 'noble savage' and the way they lived in harmony with nature. This indicates an area of environmentalism that did not wholly follow the path set down by the Romantic Movement. <fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.88 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.192 </fnote>The modern environmental movement was rooted in these early attempts to recapture the romantic essence and vital force of nature and regenerate aspects that had descended into a state of melancholy and introspection. David Pepper proposes that 'within the environmental movement there is a host of ideologies and cross-currents', and furthermore, that some factions altered the path of their campaigning in synonymy with contemporary environmental concerns. For instance, in 1972, the Club of Rome sponsored  The Limits of Growth, which instigated the debate over the potential consequences of the continued exhaustion of energy supplies, even though their own predictions proved to be unsubstantiated. Consequently, following the oil crisis of 1973, there arose a search for alternative energy sources. However, by the early 1980s emphasis had turned to the issue of pollution caused by those alternative mineral resources. Although these sectors in isolation were originally concerned with energy resources, the ideology of the latter can be see to alter to a concern for an associated environmental problem. <fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.13 </fnote>Tendencies to echo the ideals of the Romantic Movement are visible in Fritz Schumacher's 'deeply influential' concepts in Small in Beautiful, in which he underlines the preference for small-scale appropriate industry, which was judged more beneficial to society and the environment. By advocating this theory, Third World environmentalists achieved substantial successes, such as the construction of dams. In the 1970 the passing of the Environmental Protection Agency and Clean Air and Clean Water Acts similarly represented successes of modern environmentalists, which sought to safeguard nature as the Romantics had stressed. <fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.22 </fnote>Arcadian sensibilities, accentuating the idea of an ordered nature, had emerged prior to the Romantic Movement, yet were imbued with many of the same sentiments For example, both celebrated the primitive and pastoral harmony with nature that had been experienced in the unspoiled period of the Golden Age, notably expressed by French Enlightenment philosophe, and first of the Romantics, Jean-Jacques Rousseau. However, Arcadianism did not share the same revolutionary and turbulent spirit as the Romantic Movement, which rejoiced in the disordered wilderness and irrational side of nature. Nevertheless, Arcadian critiques also played a role in paving the way for modern environmentalism to a certain extent, highlighted by Donald Worster in Nature's Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas (1985), because of its emphasis on co-existence with nature as opposed to the self-appointed, egotistical superiority and domination by humans. The work of Charles Darwin, from the 1830s, did not elaborate upon this aspect of co-existence. Conversely, Darwin deployed a pessimistic and darker view of nature, which revolved around the process of natural selection and the survival of the fittest, to a much greater extent. It was not until the later nineteenth century that he reverted his ideals back to the concept of harmony and oneness with nature, reminiscing about Arcadian and Romantic notions of respect for Mother Nature. However, Darwin's theories had already been used in a perverse manner to justify the violence of science and the exploitation of nature for the common good of superior humanity. Romantics were highly critical of such superficial forms of modern science and the violence it often entailed, for example in animal and plant research where it was employed in order to construct, to some degree superfluous, systems of classification. Thus the framework of modern environmentalism can be seen as originating in the doctrines that renounced the rigorous manipulation of nature by modern science, which burgeoned in the Romantic Movement. However, as well as the Romantic Movement, other 'scientific' roots, which stemmed from 'empiricism and rational thinking in biology and ecology', had paved the way for modern environmentalism, for example the ideas of Charles Darwin and Thomas Malthus. The latter, and his 'modern limits to growth argument', can be seen as pre-empting debates about the extent of progression in modern society, and the extent to which the environment could cater for the surging population of humanity. The motivation of some actions of modern environmentalists was simply 'the need, as human numbers have steadily increased, to feed, clothe and house them', by utilising nature. <fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.68 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.169 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.173 </fnote><fnote>Ponting, A Green History, p.141 </fnote>Darwin, as previously discussed, had affiliations with the Romantic Movement in his later years, yet he was a 'towering nineteenth-century figure whose ideas form... the scientific strand in modern ecocentrism." This was because he opened up areas of observations that paved the way for modern environmentalism and its regard for diversity, although to how great an extent he did so remains 'ambiguous.'  <fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.180 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.183 </fnote>On the other hand, it is considered by Anna Bramwell that it was essentially Ernst Haeckel whom 'created the scientific root of ecologism, giving credence and scientific legitimacy to romantics who were alienated by the effects and values of industrial capitalism', which further implies that the Romantic Movement was not singularly responsible for paving the way for modern environmentalism. <fnote>Anna Bramwell, Ecology in the Twentieth Century: a History, (London, 1989) </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.185 </fnote>There existed chasms between the Romantics and the scientific study of nature, as the former maintained that 'science was inadequate to explain all the phenomena with which humans are confronted." Conversely, Romanticism was 'attacked by champions of scientific rationalism." However, it is important to bear in mind that 'the scientist and the Romantic pursue their different paths in the same spirit toward to same goal' - the preservation of the environment via modern environmentalism. Nonetheless, 'the dividing line between scientific and artistic tastes was a shadowy one." Consequently, it is difficult to determine which paved the way to the greater extent as both scientific 'rationalism and romanticism intertwine in... environmental history.'  <fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.191 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.190 </fnote><fnote>Ernest Berbaum, Guide Through the Romantic Movement, (New York, 1949), p.309 </fnote><fnote>Grove, Green Imperialism, p.355 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.219 </fnote>In conclusion, I would surmise that the Romantic Movement had the most superior influence because it embodied numerous factions and ideals, which ultimately paved the path for modern environmentalism. Although science and environmental theories played a role in the path to modern environmentalism, it was more limited, and could possibly be seen as having been influenced by the Romantic Movement to some extent. As Pepper has asserted: 'the Romantic Movement has strong and direct historical links into modern ecocentrism'. Furthermore, Erisman 'concludes that modern... environmentalists are 'not the avant-garde of a new, but only the most recent manifestations of an old, romantic tradition'', clearly demonstrating the belief that modern environmentalism can be seen as a continuation of the Romantic Movement. I strongly agree with this view and maintain that the Romantic Movement undoubtedly paved the way to modern environmentalism to a significant extent, primarily due to its emphasis upon the preservation of nature in all her forms. <fnote>Pepper, Modern Environmentalism, p.189 </fnote><fnote>F. Erisman, 'The environmental crisis and present-day romanticism: the persistence of an idea', Rocky Mountain Social Science Journal, Vol. 10, (1973), pp.7-14 </fnote><fnote>Pepper, Roots, p.90 </fnote>