Following the importation of the game by the English in the 1840s and the inauguration of an official league in 1891,  football has come to feature as a hugely prominent activity within contemporary Argentinian life. The 'national game' commands the devoted attention of an overwhelming proportion of the country's population, receiving substantial and wide coverage across a plethora of media outlets. At the forefront of this devotion within Buenos Aires and the country nationwide is the fierce rivalry between 'Boca Juniors' and 'River Plate', famous internationally both as the most successful club sides and for the intense competition between them. Owing to the two clubs traditional association with opposite ends of the country's social and economic hierarchy, an Argentinian's choice of team, particularly that of 'Porteños' within Buenos Aires, entails an affiliation with a specific societal segment. Accordingly, Boca Juniors fans are fundamentally regarded as supporting a team of the people, with those of their River Plate counterparts theoretically tied to the country's upper echelons. As an internal societal phenomenon, the rivalry functioned throughout the twentieth century to reinforce people's notions of class and discrepancies in wealth. Though through an examination of the respective fan bases the accuracy of such associations can be challenged, such assumptions remain firmly entrenched in the city's psyche. Moreover, the emergence of the rivalry and the general escalation of football's popularity have had a rich historical involvement in the development of a national consciousness, precipitating a cultural identity and dictating profoundly the national mood. The creation of a world-class national team has figured saliently in uniting the country, principally through acquiring a support base across the matrix of social, economic, political and religious demographics, in contrast to the socially-divisive property intrinsic to the domestic Boca/River rivalry. At times, this breadth of appeal and the distractive mass euphoria of national success have facilitated political manipulation, creating an exploitable entity such as that harnessed by the military junta hosting the 1978 World Cup. Football's interaction with Argentina's social development can thus be characterised as dual in its effects. Though historically the dominance and competition of Boca and River served to sharpen awareness of class disparities and incite social disunity internally, the popularity of the game and the Argentine team advanced a national consciousness and unification, serving in the extreme as an instrument of social control. <fnote>John Carlin, 'England v Argentina - A History', 19th May 2002. < URL > (17th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>W.H.Koebel, Argentina, Past and Present. (London, 1910) P.64 </fnote><fnote>Tamir Bar-On, 'The Ambiguities of Football, Politics, Culture, and Social Transformation in Latin America'. Sociological Research Online, vol. 2, no. 4 (1997). Paragraph 3.9. Consulted at < URL > (21st November 2004) </fnote>The basis for the rivalry between Boca Juniors and River Plate rests fundamentally on a pervasive notion of class difference. Such is the grandeur of any league encounter between the two clubs that they merit the appellation 'superclásico', a linguistic advance on the 'clásico' apportioned to standard league outings. Both teams were established in the Buenos Aires neighbourhood of 'La Boca' at the beginning of the twentieth century, from which a spirit of competition ensued based on local rivalry in the incipient years of the country's professional league, 'La Primera Division'. The reciprocal antagonism developed in earnest however following River's departure from the area in 1938 to the northern Buenos Aires neighbourhood of 'Nuñez', where its 'Antonio Vespucio Liberti' stadium (known colloquially as 'El Monumental') remains today. In passing the centrally positioned 'Avenida Rivadavia' road, the traditional geographic and social divider of wealth in the city, the team relocated to a famously more affluent locality. Moreover, River's exodus mimicked that of financial elites in the 1870s, who escaped to the safer northern 'barrios' following the outbreak of a yellow fever epidemic in the city's south in 1871. Advancing from the originally more localised rivalry, River acquired the stigma of being a team of the wealthier strata from the perspective of Boca's fans, the contrast in turn spawning the perception of Boca as an earthier footballing outfit. Equally, this label of wealth was further bolstered by awareness of River's founding by culturally-empowered members of the English aristocracy in the late nineteenth century, accounting for the anglicised club name, originally derived from 'Río de la Plata'. <fnote>Sean Ingle, 'Why Do River Plate Hate Boca?', 18th October 2000. < URL > (17th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Tony Mason, Passion of the People? (London, 1995) Consulted at: Roland Soong, 'Brazilian Football Fans', 27th February 2003. < URL > (20th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Cathy Runciman (ed.), Time Out, Buenos Aires. (London, 2004) P.9 </fnote><fnote>Sean Ingle, 'Why Do River Plate Hate Boca?', 18th October 2000. < URL > (17th November 2004) </fnote>The 'Camilo Cichero' stadium ('La Bombonera') and the Boca team however, though also bearing an apparently partially anglicised title of 'Juniors', emerged as a prominent force of local culture within its barrio. The club's historical association with the poor Italian, specifically Genoese, immigrant population of 'La Boca', and the unique history of a traditionally underprivileged region within the Argentine Republic, has immortalised its affiliation with those occupying the nadir of the social hierarchy. The Genoese link is detectable even today in the use of a popular nickname applied to the fans, the 'Xeneize'. Historically, 'La Boca's' defense of neighbourhood autonomy against higher metropolitan authorities bread a palpable regional identity in the late nineteenth century, something with which its football club is inextricably linked. Equally, the club's success also aided the assimilation of the group in projecting the barrio on a national scale. Today the 'Bombonera', alongside the multi-coloured 'Caminito' street, continues to generate pride in the working-class community, with the near ubiquity of the team's blue and yellow emphasising its role as a cultural focal point of tradition and local identity. Compared with the city's numerous other poor areas deviod of any internationally renowned theatre of sporting excellence, the team's presence is unequivocally positive. Nonetheless, whilst it is fair to regard the club's success as beneficial to the process of integration, the rigidity of the social labels created by rivalry with their privileged adversaries to the north perpetuated an enduring spectacle of class tension. The antipathy of the two clubs stems then directly from their original proximity to one another, the consequent development of an appropriated class struggle reflecting the fans' appreciation of markedly different histories. <fnote>Author's notes from visit to the Boca Juniors stadium, 20th November 2004. (Stadium address: Estadio Alberto J Armando (La Bombanera), Brandsen 805, y la Vía, La Boca, Buenos Aires). </fnote><fnote>Sean Ingle, 'Why Do River Plate Hate Boca?', 18th October 2000. < URL > (17th November 2004) </fnote>The prevalence of this class ideology is most palpably illustrated in the nicknames ascribed to the conflicting fan bases. Though serious violent confrontation is rare between fans, given that approximately fifty per cent of Argentina's population claims to support one club or the other, the applicability and symbolism of the names affords great significance in contemporary society. River fans are popularly known as 'Millonarios' (Millionaires) and 'Gallinas' (Chickens) by their Boca counterparts, an allusion to their aristocratic timidity. Boca fans are conversely known as 'Bosteros' (derived from the Spanish 'bosta', people of dung), reflecting theoretically humbler origins. Though through a synopsis of the wider supporters it would be possible to take issue with the validity of such rigid labels, the names' universality within Buenos Aires confirms the extent to which a notion of social tension is subscribed to, and the overt association with specific, opposing class brackets provides an insightful framework for the rivalry's historical significance. Revealingly, though such name-calling was originally pejorative, their significance has been reevaluated by the recipients to become adulatory. Inscribed in the buildings surrounding 'La Bombonera' is a great quantity of graffiti positively affirming the Boca label, with claims such as 'Yo soy 100% Bostero, ('I am 100% Bostero') displaying a degree of pride in the team's traditional image, just as it is also referred to by fans in conversation. The River label remains seemingly more negative since such declarations are seldom reciprocated, though the wide use of the labels does nonetheless evidence the extensive appeal of the class struggle ideology. Boca fans positively endorse their sobriquet as it reinforces and upholds their aspirations towards a lower social bracket. Given football's sustained popularity and nationwide appeal, the rivalry certainly elucidates and propagates a tension, particularly within the metropolitan milieu. Though today essentially good-natured, the endurance of this struggle attests to an historical compounding of conflict between demographics, football's public popularity enhancing a nation's awareness of its discrepancies and ultimately fostering a degree of disunity, at odds with the construction of national harmony. <fnote>Anon, 'Futbol en Argentina', 22nd May 2004. < URL > (14th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Anon, 'Futbol en Argentina', 22nd May 2004. < URL > (14th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Tony Mason, Passion of the People? (London, 1995) Consulted at: Roland Soong, 'Brazilian Football Fans', 27th February 2003. < URL > (20th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Author's notes from visit to the Boca Juniors stadium, 20th November 2004. (Stadium address: Estadio Alberto J Armando (La Bombanera), Brandsen 805, y la Vía, La Boca, Buenos Aires). </fnote>In terms of its general appeal however, football has served an essentially positive role as a pervasive national passion. Its popularity in Argentina is arguably without equal across the globe, with the world's the highest concentration of premier division clubs in Buenos Aires testifying to a national obsession. As early as the beginning of the twentieth century, the historian W.H. Koebel emphasised the game's appeal and burgeoning proficiency, noting presciently, <fnote>Anon, 'Argentina Info'. Date page posted unknown. < URL > (21st November 2004) </fnote>"to such an extent has football become the national game that future generations in the Republic will doubtless refuse to believe that the recreation ever possessed a previous home".  <fnote>W.H.Koebel, Argentina, Past and Present. (London, 1910) P.64 </fnote>More recently, national team victory in the 1978 and 1986 World Cups, in addition to club success in the 'Copa Libertadores' and intercontinental competitions, have fuelled a seemingly boundless zeal. Likewise, the country's ability to produce consistently world-class players comprises a source of immense national pride. Though much of such talent arrives at decidedly richer European clubs, as with players such as Juan Sebastian Veron and Gabriel Heinze, the abundance of the resource renders stars of the league almost entirely expendable. Those retained within the 'Primera Division', such as Carlos Tevez and Gaston Fernandez are almost exclusively contracted by Boca or River, who command significantly higher financial resources than other clubs. Though entrenched at the apex of league football, Boca/River dominance has not lead simply to a perrenial sharing of domestic honours however. Perusing the recent results of the national league, one sees notable victories from 'Independiente', 'Racing Club' and 'San Lorenzo' in and amongst the myriad of Boca/River successes. Nevertheless, the Boca/River hegemony certainly dominates the country's media, the two possessing shows on cable television and occupying a substantial proportion of multiple sporting back pages. Such is the popularity of the spectacle of football generally that production companies, without rights to televise the weekly 'Clásicos', deem it worthwhile to simply film crowds in stadiums. Similarly, the game's breadth of appeal outside a purely male sphere is made manifest by the enthusiasm displayed by women and children in being asked where their loyalties lie. It is historically the Boca/River rivalry which has driven this level of fanaticism, the clubs' abundant paraphernalia across the city exemplifying its centrality and power as a daily diversion in city life. <fnote>John Carlin, 'England v Argentina - A History', 19th May 2002. < URL > (17th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Anon, 'Futbol en Argentina', 22nd May 2004. < URL > (14th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Fernando Velarde, 'All the Champions: 2001 - 2010'. Date page posted unknown. < URL > (20th November 2004) </fnote>The success of Argentina in producing outstanding footballers, and their subsequent idolation, also appropriates the game as a constructive force for social mobility. For an immigrant republic founded on upward mobility, the professionalised activity of football has provided a viable avenue out of impecuniousness. Such an experience is best incarnated by former Boca Juniors star and veritable national idol Diego Armando Maradona, whose ascent from virtual indigence to immortal status provides something of a template for what is achievable within the realm of the nation's obsession. Though burdened by well-publicised personal difficulties largely stemming from problems with handling such worship, Maradona's name remains sacrosanct and his ability, in addition to providing a paradigm of social betterment, furthered a golden age of international football following the country's second triumph in the World Cup in 1986. The success of 'la Selección', the Argentine national team, reaffirmed the country's greatness and pride in the immediate years of its return to democracy, following the decline of the military dictatorship of the 1970s and early 1980s. Despite the player's vehement allegiance and sporadic career involvement with Boca, River fans will seldom, albeit begrudgingly, deny him the status of the world's greatest ever player. Maradona's example continues to provide inspiration for a disillusioned lower class, and he and his team's contribution to a period of veritable international footballing glory elucidated the unifying power of national success. <fnote>Anon,'Futbol en Argentina', 22nd May 2004. < URL > (14th November 2004) </fnote>The potential of a national team, particularly a proficient one, to unifying a country's populace has been frequently emphasised in contemporary historiography. As the writer Eduardo Archetti has noted, the team's shirt can be a symbol of unity in a dissolved society burdened by economic and political ills. The actions of the national team reinforce a nation's values and self-perception, asserting ability and strength. Within Latin America, the public's reverence for its national sides, in addition to that of its local clubs, can prove an all-consuming passion, particularly for people of the lower classes. Fans occupying lower social demographics utilise their support to escape frustration with quotidian tedium; fanaticism being often a vehicle with which to vent one's frustrations. As the historian Maurice del Burgo notes, the distractive element central to this mentality was frequently harnessed by the continent's industrial employers in the early twentieth century, who patronised teams to garner company loyalty and avert latent unrest. In support of the national team, football acts as "the great societal equalizer", creating a hugely broad base of support in the extreme emotions of ecstasy and despair it inspires in populations divided by economic, social, racial, religious and political backgrounds. Historically in Argentina, a largely immigrant nation of Italian, Spanish, German, Polish, British and Middle-Eastern ancestry, the emergence of a national side would have provided an effective means of bridging ethnic and cultural differences under a united cause. In the modern climate, with Argentine national identity well advanced of its nascent years, the effect of the game remains much the same in its capacity to harmonise multitidinous demographics. Indeed, this distractive property inherent to football supporting has provided a powerful diversionary tool within the country's society, seemingly glossing over weightier political, social and economic problems. Following the country's chronic economic problems in 2001 for example, the national team's subsequent failure to advance past the first round of the 2002 World Cup proved disastrous for national morale. Conversely, the people's euphoria in hosting and winning the 1978 World Cup enabled a concerted and efficacious distraction for the military dictatorship, averting escalating mass protest against its government and a disastrous human rights record. The widespread allegations of match-fixing against a competent Peruvian outfit during the competition further confirm the political significance of national success, and its potential as a means to mass manipulation. Football reverted to a positive social force in 1986, following the country's second triumph in the World Cup, coinciding with the aftermath of the military's decline and resurgence of democracy. Football's role in Argentina's development has thus had marked ramifications, consolidating a national spirit and pacifying latently hostile groups, yet in consequence functioning as an instrument capable of distracting the masses. <fnote>Tamir Bar-On, 'The Ambiguities of Football, Politics, Culture, and Social Transformation in Latin America'. Sociological Research Online, vol. 2, no. 4 (1997). Paragraph 2.9. Consulted at < URL > (21st November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Eduardo Archetti, Masculinities: Football, Polo, and the Tango in Argentina. (New York, 1999) Consulted at: Kuper, Simon, 'Argentina: so good yet desperate'. (Published in 'The Observer' newspaper, 10th February 2002). < URL > (17th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Maurice Del Burgo, Don't Stop the Carnival: Football in the Societies of Latin America. In Stephen Wagg (ed.), Giving the Game Away: Football, Politics and Culture on Five Continents. (Leceister, 1995) Consulted at: Soong, Roland, 'Brazilian Football Fans', 27th February 2003. < URL > (20th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Tamir Bar-On, 'The Ambiguities of Football, Politics, Culture, and Social Transformation in Latin America'. Sociological Research Online, vol. 2, no. 4 (1997). Paragraph 2.3. Consulted at < URL > (21st November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Simon Kuper, 'Simon Kuper on Football'. Date of article unknown. < URL > (14th November 2004) </fnote><fnote>Tamir Bar-On, 'The Ambiguities of Football, Politics, Culture, and Social Transformation in Latin America'. Sociological Research Online, vol. 2, no. 4 (1997). Paragraph 3.9. Consulted at < URL > (21st November 2004) </fnote>In conclusion, the popularity of football in Argentina has had a profound interaction with the country's development and social formation. The success of the Boca Juniors in particular, owing to its strong neighbourhood ties, greatly aided the building of local identity, improving the standing and spirit of a predominantly Italian immigrant community. The subsequent emergence and universal reach of an appropriated class conflict symbolised by the Boca/River rivalry acted however to cement an image of social heterogeneity, and sharpen public appreciation of demographic differences. As these labels endured and the teams came to dominate the sporting arena in the twentieth century, their significance proliferated, at odds with class relations and the harmony of amalgamated groups. Even today, though essentially docile, the spectacle of a conflict remains, the rivalry perpetuating the image of struggle through the medium of the national passion. Conversely however, the game's general popularity, for both the spectator and participator, heralded an important bridge between disparate immigrant populations in the early years of the country, also providing a diversion for everyday working-class life, and a potential route out of destitution. Combined with the country's ability to produce great players, and success in international competition, this unifying effect also resurged in a more modern context. Such was the extent of this diversionary property however that the nation's glory at times jeopardised political freedom, deflecting protest against governmental mismanagement and bolstering an undemocratic regime. The game's general appeal and the common cause element central to the support of the national team have thus historically served to unify conflicting interests and groups, the hazy mist of which in the extreme instigates mass manipulation and social repression. 