Nineteenth century Peru witnessed great changes in the state's approach to the indigenous majority, with the issue of the "Indian Problem" proving central to debate about the country's postcolonial direction. Peru emerged after independence as a thoroughly divided nation, comprising a small pool of largely city-residing elites and a peasant mass scattered throughout its diverse landscape. With the development of a significant mestizo class, in addition to the existence of black slaves and imported indentured Chinese labourers, Peru was characterised by ethnic heterogeneity. The peasantry remained overwhelmingly Indian in composition however, inhabiting the composite network of community ayllus littered across the Andean highlands. Though incorporated within the state apparatus - just as they had been under the colonial tribute system - the maintenance of traditional towns and villages would be deemed in opposition to the modernising and republican values of an emergent Creole elite. By the century's end, Peru's Indian mass would see repeated efforts to catalyse its integration within the enterprising trajectory of Lima's intellectuals. Despite the liberal republican discourse that fuelled such a drive, Indians were routinely contained along established lines of "paternalistic exploitation". Maintenance of the kuraka system of local chieftainships served the state well, providing a mix of tribute, mita draftees, and various forms of taxation which were rescinded and reinstated as different governments interests lobbied for power. Broadly speaking, this upholding of the municipal system ensured that the Indian worldview remained confined to within the community, providing little scope for wider conception of the world or developing a national consciousness. Though these conditions upheld indigenous isolation, it would be inaccurate to regard Andean people as possessing no political awareness however, as communities continued established traditions of challenging the state along material and moral lines. Furthermore, the military conflict of 1821 that had spawned Peruvian independence had naturally entailed much participation from Indian soldiers, just as later generations would be called upon in defence of the patria against Chilean invaders in the 1880s. Despite the continued physical and ideological distance of Andean communities in the nineteenth century, a progressively greater proportion of Peru's indigenous population became affected by the state's integrationist drive. Both as communities and individuals, Indians could more readily envisage the making of a nation, though this did not necessarily transpire as a desire to belong. <fnote>Thurner, Mark, From Two Republics to One Divided: Contradictions of Postcolonial Nationmaking in Andean Peru. (London, 1997) P.151 </fnote><fnote>Piel, John, 'The place of the peasantry in the nation life of Peru in the nineteenth century', Past and Present, 1970, 46, 108-133, P.115 </fnote><fnote>Klaiber, Jeffrey L., Religion and Revolution in Peru 1834-1976. (Indiana, 1976) P.48 </fnote><fnote>Larson, Brooke, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. In: The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, Vol. III, 558-703. P.569 </fnote>In the immediate period preceding independence from Spain, the Peruvian State sought to alter its relationship to its indigenous subjects with the repeal of the tribute system in 1810. With independence being effectively consolidated in the early 1820s, competing political figures pursued differing approaches to the Indian majority that formed the bulk of the incipient nation's population. As political power remained essentially concentrated within the hands of a metropolitan elite, Creole ideology's overriding view of a disparate indigenous mass became that of an obstacle to be overcome; competing lines of debate would revolve around an essential design for modernity. In an era in which Enlightenment principles of liberty, equality, and citizenship featured strongly, the deep divisions created by ethnic, cultural, and class differences proved problematic to a state model seeking to increase its sovereignty over a diverse landscape. <fnote>Larson, Brooke, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. In: The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, Vol. III, 558-703. P.558 </fnote>Rurally speaking, the nation comprised three distinct geographical areas of a "desert-like" pacific coast, the mountainous Andean range, and low tropical valleys in the Amazon basin to the country's east. Such diversity served to highlight the physical and psychological distance between regions, and resultant lack of a common identity and history for their inhabitants. Ethnic heterogeneity, both in terms of the internal diversity of indigenous groups and divisions of people along caste lines of white, mestizo, Indian, black, and Chinese, further eroded a sense of universality. In spite of the progressive slant that liberal republican discourse would take as the century progressed, the postcolonial system upheld the model of paternalistic exploitation rooted in local kuraka authority. Owing to the economic irrigation created by a prosperous guano-export boom however, tribute could remain abolished in the immediate postcolonial years, though a new judicial system would require personal tax contributions in light of Indians' citizen status. It was the kurakas who largely filled this new fiscal role, cementing ultimately the continuance of the elite's position within a stratified social hierarchy. Peru's masses were overwhelming poor and indigenous: a 1795 official census calculated the population to have been at 1,249,723, a figure that the historian John Piel suggests as seventy-five percent composed of the Indian peasantry. With the bulk of this population scattered across the vast highlands, Indian communities remained fragmented sites of ethnic, cultural, and linguistic diversity stretching back beyond pre-conquest times. Though they acknowledged, and would often rebel against, an overbearing authority constantly imposing and rescinding tribute and tax obligation, individual Indian communities did not at this stage project a sense of solidarity with one another, much less an idea of the nation as a whole. <fnote>Piel, John, 'The place of the peasantry in the nation life of Peru in the nineteenth century', Past and Present, 1970, 46, 108-133. P.110 </fnote><fnote>Piel, John, 'The place of the peasantry in the nation life of Peru in the nineteenth century', Past and Present, 1970, 46, 108-133. P.111 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, Heraclio, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.106 </fnote><fnote>Piel, John, 'The place of the peasantry in the nation life of Peru in the nineteenth century', Past and Present, 1970, 46, 108-133. P.112 </fnote>Following the suppression of the great rebellion of Túpac Ámaru in 1780, Peru's elite ruling oligarchy had cemented its dominance of the Indian majority. Owing to their geographical dispersion, indigenous villages continued to be easily controlled through the use of the parochial kuraka aristocracy. As the country moved into the postcolonial period, the kuraka role officially became that of a 'varayoc', a position filled by local village leaders who would collect the contribución personal. Given the high levels of illiteracy among Andean peasants, their view of such development remains confined to oral history and the contemporary observations of whites and mestizos. It is fair to say, however, that the State erosion of community land rights and the endeavour to impose of model of individual status proved objectionable. Indian rebellions, much as they had been during the colonial period, were often sparked by localised abuse of financial responsibilities, a trend that hinted at widespread dissatisfaction. <fnote>Bonilla, Heraclio, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.106 </fnote>Following the removal of the dual Repúblicas system, the nation's diverse citizens were lauded as Peruvian, but Indians were frequently loath to endorse a progressive liberal ideology. While the state model suggested equality based on common status, the peasantry suffered greatly from the impositions of tax and sporadic restoration of the tribute system. With tribute reinstated in 1826 and surviving until 1854, the peasantry became increasingly disaffected with a state that pursued a judicial attack on their communal land rights whilst tightening its grip on taxation. Though hardly a popularist, Agustín Gamarra's ascendancy to the presidency in 1829 relied heavily on harnessing this localised discontent within the Cuzco department. Through challenging abuses of state power, revolting Indians, just as they did during other uprisings and rebellions, readily displayed a political consciousness and sense of mistreatment, a consciousness similarly manifested itself in their petitioning of the regional audiencia courts. While illiterate, villagers made use of local secretaries to challenge kuraka abuses of power and overthrow disagreeable figures, acts which potently illustrated their engagement with the nation's political system and the rights it theoretically afforded them. <fnote>Larson, Brooke, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. In: The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, Vol. III, 558-703. P.560 </fnote><fnote>Piel, John, 'The place of the peasantry in the nation life of Peru in the nineteenth century', Past and Present, 1970, 46, 108-133. P.115 </fnote>Coinciding with the slump in the guano nitrate export sector that had underpinned elite prosperity in the period 1840-1870, President Mariano Ignacio Prado restored the head tax in 1868 in an attempt to maintain state revenue. Such an act was at odds with the country's drive to modernise and challenge the communal existence of its peasant majority, as it plunged individuals into further financial difficulties and heightened their reliance on the community. Rebellions such as that of Hunacamé in 1867 displayed the persistence of indigenous chagrin, as the country's liberal republican direction continued to erode communal property rights. Such changes further aggravated the peasantry's sense of detachment from state governmental power, despite the efforts of the succeeding civilista president Manual Pardo to inaugurate a programme of assimilation through schooling. This renewed desire to integrate Peru's population reiterated its diversity and the extent of regional isolation. Indian appreciation of the nation's development depended necessarily, then, on proximity to state power and exposure to integrationist efforts, in much the same way that communities' geographical dispersion had impeded their complete dominance in the colonial and pre-Colombian eras. Indians were conscious of state authority's endeavour to exact greater money and increase its power, but their response was to maintain a worldview orientated towards community and existing local ties, with little appreciation for a government project of nationhood. <fnote>Klaiber, Jeffrey L., Religion and Revolution in Peru 1834-1976. (Indiana, 1976) P.60 </fnote><fnote>Klaiber, Jeffrey L., Religion and Revolution in Peru 1834-1976. (Indiana, 1976) P.47 </fnote>Peru's participation in the War of the Pacific in 1879 would, however, lead to greater Indian involvement in the country's development, obligating many individuals to be conscripted within local militias in defence of the patria against the Chilean invaders. This is not to claim that the onset of the war stimulated a wave of untapped patriotism on the part of the indigenous masses, but rather that it exposed the extent to which localities remained essentially inward-looking and with little perception of belonging to a national system. As an investigation by the historian Heraclio Bonilla elucidates, parochial Indians maintained an intense dislike of the 'misti' class - mestizos and whites - which extorted taxes from them and drafted their sons for heavy labour. They saw themselves as divided from the domineering, enterprising culture of the elites, appreciation of which led local merchants in central areas such as Colca and Acostambo to abandon their homes once the war got fully underway. The rise of bands of guerrilla soldiers as defenders of towns and individual regions spelled a plunging into full civil war by 1883, with political authority crumbling across the entire central highland range.  <fnote>Thurner, Mark, From Two Republics to One Divided: Contradictions of Postcolonial Nationmaking in Andean Peru. (London, 1997) P.56 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, Heraclio, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.92 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, Heraclio, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.94 </fnote><fnote>Larson, Brooke, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. In: The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, Vol. III, 558-703. P.641 </fnote>Chilean incursions during the war, though highly deleterious to local economies in destroying stocks and livestock, often fomented mobilised resistance in response. Whilst President Iglesias negotiated the cessation of hostilities between the two nations by signing the Treaty of Ancón in 1883, General Andrés Cáceres continued to oversee popular resistance in the Mantaro region. Though many were involved in incidents of banditry and opportunistic abuse in this period, the war provided the nation's indigenous participants an avenue towards greater appreciation of belonging to a wider cause. In defending their homelands from a foreign threat, the conflict permitted the forging of a heightened consciousness of an inter-community experience, helping to establish "bonds of solidarity". Practically speaking, this entailed the erosion of longstanding ethnic tensions between Indian groups that had considered themselves culturally and often linguistically distinct from their neighbours, in the same way that the Túpac Amaru rebellion had achieved some one hundred years before. By exposing a trend of exploitation on the part of the state government, the war granted Indians a heightened sense of sharing a common experience. Particularly after the withdrawal of Chilean forces, peasant mobilisation sustained political instability in the central sierra, creating a pervasive sense of a rejection of Lima's nation making project. If the war advanced the state's concept of national consciousness for the masses, it did not appear to be endorsed by many. <fnote>Larson, Brooke, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. In: The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, Vol. III, 558-703. P.641 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, Heraclio, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.115 </fnote><fnote>Serulnikov, Sergio, Subverting colonial authority: challenges to Spanish rule in eighteenth-century southern Andes. (Durham, 2003) P.216 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, Heraclio, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.115 </fnote>With Miguel Iglesias presiding over weak political legitimacy in the post-war period, disaffection with the state would materialise as the rebellion led by Pedro Pablo Atusparia in the central Huaraz region. As a direct response to Prefect Noriega's designs on Indian labour and taxation as means of revitalising depleted finances, Atusparia mediated a wave of Indian discontent at state exploitation. Though they had participated in national and local armies in defence of the patria during the war, Indian men were to remain subordinated as the nation endeavoured to rebuild, a marginalisation that fuelled the persistence of guerrilla activity. These groups, in demonstrating a response to external, ruling forces, regenerated an established tradition of questioning state legitimacy. While Indian conception of the nation developed as a consequence of the war, the deleterious legacy of the Chilean army's social and economic destruction undermined confidence in the state's direction. Though maintenance of an exploitative model had facilitated elite control of a peasant mass in preceding years, it ultimately inhibited commitment to the country's liberal trajectory, leading intellectuals to once again examine the "Indian problem" that was retarding modern development. By the end of the nineteenth century, indigenous appreciation of the nation had grown markedly, albeit accompanied by the continuance of divisions over the roles and positions it granted. <fnote>Larson, Brooke, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. In: The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, Vol. III, 558-703. P.569 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, Heraclio, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.106 </fnote>In conclusion, nineteenth century Indian conceptions of the nation developed considerably as Peru established itself after independence. The bulk of the population would remain scattered across a diverse geographical landscape, but state alterations to tribute and taxation systems, the erosion of communal property rights, and participation in a war with a foreign power all contributed to heighten Indian acknowledgement of the nation state. The general trend towards a liberal republic direction would however prove at odds with the indigenous population's desire to maintain their traditional communities, and the gulf between the state's modernising rhetoric and conservative use of the kuraka system inspired significant periods of instability. In challenging financial mismanagement and abuse of power on a local level, Indian groups had an established political consciousness and general distaste for the state's failure to keep its side of the bargain. This did not necessarily equate to a national consciousness however, and it was not until their defence of the patria during the War of the Pacific that Andean communities would begin to more concretely perceive their position within a broader nation. Chilean destruction of local communities advanced notions of a common cause and bridged regional divisions, but such notions did not automatically evolve into patriotism and faith in state power. With the state looking to refill its coffers after the war, much of the central Peruvian highlands descended into revolt. In light of the state's wartime conscription demands, this action highlighted the peasantry's disdain for the government's renewed emphasis on taxation and oppression, and the direction the nation was taking. While the elite would return its attention to the issue of the problematic indigenous majority, Indians themselves appeared at odds with the position imposed upon them, rejecting its assault on their prosperity and rights. 