Following the outbreak of a fatal fire in the 'República Cromañón' night-club on the 30 th December 2004, the city of Buenos Aires descended into a marked period of political crisis. In the aftermath of the incident, which would ultimately claim the lives of one hundred and ninety one Porteños, calls to make those responsible accountable for their actions heralded a prolonged period of protest, spearheaded by a series of organised marches through the city. Whilst the indictment and arrest of Omar Chabán, República Cromañón's eccentric owner, provided the immediate guilty party, the media's criticism of the local security authorities bolstered the public's calls for justice, with blame quickly attached to Buenos Aires's mayor Aníbal Ibarra for overseeing the negligence responsible. Such was the significance of the incident and the circumstances behind it however that the public's discontent quickly altered to become a far broader polemic. Though initially a regrettable local catastrophe, the tragedy promptly catalysed an unprecedented level of public protest and antagonism towards President Néstor Kirchner's government. República Cromañón came to be appropriated, by the protesting masses and media analysts alike, as illustrative of the nation's enduring inability to purge itself of a legacy of political abuse and impunity, exposing levels of corruption that ran all the way to the national government and undermining confidence in the strength of the authorities and democracy. Following the citing of the corruption responsible, the incident became equated as a contemporary case of government ineptitude and abuse of power, ultimately analogous to that witnessed during the country's military dictatorship of some thirty years before. Whilst this reaction was a feature of the demonstrations of established anti-government lower-class protest groups such as the 'Quebracho', it also saw a conspicuous unification with the opinion espoused by media outlets and that of the middle-class. United by disdain for perceived government tyranny, the aftermath of the disaster ushered a degree of consensus within Argentine society rooted in the perception of República Cromañon as a microcosm of the country's continuing problems, severely eroding confidence in government legitimacy and democratic development. <fnote>Gustavo Carabajal, 'Testimonios que complican a Chabán', Pg.16, La Nación. (Buenos Aires, Sunday 9th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Horacio González, 'La noción de tragedia y la necesidad de justicia', Pg.14, Debate. (Buenos Aires, Friday 7th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Horacio Convertini, 'Liberaron a los detenidos en los incidentes de Plaza de Mayo', Pg.29, Clarín. (Buenos Aires, Saturday 8th January 2005). </fnote>After the evacuation of the 'Callejeros' concert on the night of the 30 th December 2004, emergency service inspectors discovered the fire's cause to have been a flare lit by a minor. The firework was reportedly one of many thrown by fans, and upon striking the roof's flammable material quickly instigated an uncontrollable blaze. The alarming eventual death toll of one hundred and ninety-one spectators has been attributed to a series of cavalier omissions and actions by the aforementioned owner of República Cromañón, Omar Chabán, leading inspectors to conclude that the incident was preventable, and spurring the public's outrage. Witnesses testified to the owner's litany of malpractices and liability for the numerous deaths from inhalation of toxic smoke. Chabán has been indicted for, among other accusations, permitting the entrance of over three times the club's approved 1037 person capacity, failing to purchase a non-flammable roofing material, failing to halt the illegal sale of both pyrotechnic material and alcohol inside the building, and the installation of a children's nursery in the female toilet facilities. His forthcoming court hearing will also investigate the closure of four of the club's six emergency exit doors, ostensibly padlocked to prevent the unrecompensed entrance of a further six hundred fans outside the building. As reporting members of the press highlighted, the multitude of safety issues pertaining to the fire's outbreak and consequent severity made manifest an element of corruption. Writing in an article for 'Debate' magazine in the proceeding week, the journalist Mempo Giardinelli enunciated that, given the recent issuing of fire safety certification, an incident of bribery or gross negligence had patently occurred somewhere in the chain of authority. Public awareness of such an oversight on the part of local security swiftly emerged as the basis for protest against the city's government and aspirations that justice for such corruption be achieved. <fnote>Gustavo Carabajal, 'Testimonios que complican a Chabán', Pg.16, La Nación. (Buenos Aires, Sunday 9th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Alejandro Seslovsky, 'Todas la miradas apuntan a él', Pg.34, GENTE. (Buenos Aires, Tuesday 4th January 2005) </fnote><fnote>Gustavo Carabajal, 'Testimonios que complican a Chabán', Pg.16, La Nación. (Buenos Aires, Sunday 9th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Miempo Giardinelli, '¿Quién señor? ¿Yo señor? ¡No señor!', Pg. 16, Debate. (Buenos Aires, Friday 7th January 2005). </fnote>Incidents such as that of República Cromañón have been disturbingly common in the Latin American continent in recent history. Owing to chronic mismanagement exemplified by Chabán, certain businessmen regularly jeopardise safety within their companies in order to compress costs or prevent theft. Awareness of the absence of controls to inhibit resulting safety omissions frequently incites public scepticism over governmental capacity to proffer effective protection. Erstwhile examples of such laxity include the deaths of 464 people in a 2004 Paraguayan supermarket fire, and those of seventeen youths in the 'Kheyvis' night-club fire in Buenos Aires in 1993. The 'Kheyvis' example in particular was repeatedly referred to in the Porteño press following the New Year's Eve episode as evidence of the persistence of urban security issues. Whilst the República Cromañón disaster led to the immediate resignation of several city officials, most notably that of Secretary of Justice and Security Juan Carlos López, protests continued to gather momentum, settling principally on the culpability of the city's mayor Aníbal Ibarra. Daily press articles in national newspapers such as 'La Nación' and 'Clarín' repeatedly criticised the city's fire department and local authorities, reasoning that without their ineptitude, Chabán would never have had the opportunity to endanger the safety of his customers. Significantly, such claims to the authorities' impotence were supported by well-publicised comments from the respected ex-minister of former President Eduardo Duhalde, Juan José Alvarez, appointed by Ibarra to replace Juan Carlos López. Alvarez's emphatic proclamation that "El Estado no cumplió con su tarea y si no cumple es responsable" served unwittingly to undermine his superior's position and bolster calls for the mayor's head. Furthermore, the absence of any differentiation between state and local government in the official's comments suggested government culpability at a national level. With antipathy building in the days following, Ibarra himself became the principal target of a series of street demonstrations, usurping Chabán as the main culprit in the eyes of the protestors. The mayor's refusal to resign and repeated insistence on the exclusive blame of Chabán served to further advance the notion of his guilt, with the retribution demanded by protestors centring upon his accountability. <fnote>'Agencies', '300 dead after Paraguay supermarket blaze', Monday August 2nd 2004. < URL > (Saturday 12th February 2005). </fnote><fnote>Anon, 'El caso de la disco Kheyvis', Friday 31st December 2004. < URL > (Saturday 12th February 2005). </fnote><fnote>Anon, 'Nunca Mas', Pg.2, GENTE. (Buenos Aires, Tuesday 4th January 2005) </fnote><fnote>José Ignacio Lladós,, 'Ocho políticas de inspecciones en seis años', Pg.18, La Nación. (Buenos Aires, Sunday 9th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Leaflet entitled 'Justicia x nuestros Callejeros', received by the author at Plaza Miserere, 9th January 2005. (Address: Plaza Miserere, Once, Buenos Aires). </fnote><fnote>Roberto Gargarella, 'De la falta de cuidado a la tragedia', Date of article unknown. < URL > (Saturday 12th February 2005). </fnote><fnote>Daniel Juri, Interview with Juan José Alvarez entitled 'Alvarez: "El Estado no cumplió con su tarea y si no cumple es responsable."', Pg.30, Clarín. (Buenos Aires, Saturday 8th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Leaflet entitled 'Justicia x nuestros Callejeros', received by the author at Plaza Miserere, 9th January 2005. (Address: Plaza Miserere, Once, Buenos Aires). </fnote>Incited by this collective chagrin, a revealing consequence of the tragedy was the extent and speed with which social protests were organised in the name of garnering justice for the victims. Driven by the belief that corruption was to blame, within two days a group of 600 people, largely composed of friends and family members of those killed, had congregated and marched towards the city's main square, 'La Plaza de Mayo', to protest their demands outside the presidential building. Participation in protests rose exponentially in the proceeding days, with a further three demonstrations taking place over the course of the week. As the journalist José Ignacio Lladós reported, the prevalence of the protests proved much to the amazement of city officials, none more so than the presence of 2500 people in a second march on the 2 nd of January, an increase of 1900 on the previous day. Though such rate of organisation may be regarded as precipitous, its occurrence is potently illustrative of the Argentine people's propensity to take to the streets in defence of their rights. The presence and role of direct democracy in contemporary Argentine society is arguably attributable to a legacy of arduous social conditions. Endurance of a repressive military dictatorship through 1966 to 1983, and equally the economic instability of the superseding democratic tenures of Presidents Raúl Alfonsín, Carlos Menem and Fernando de la Rúa, has spawned a culture of protest in which the knee-jerk reaction to disagreeable government action for much of the populace is instantaneous protest. Particularly prominent in quotidian city life are the actions of organisations such as the 'Madres del Plaza de Mayo', and those of the multitudinous 'Piquetero' groups originating from the poor outer districts. The tumultuous Piquetero campaigns in particular lead to the regular blockading of city sites and streets in an endeavour to draw attention to their causes. While such an approach receives the frequent derision of the more affluent, street protesting has not been purely a pursuit of the city's lower demographics, considering the disaffected middle class's hands-on response to President Fernando de la Rúa's austerity plan during December 2001. Despite the awe of city officials, the speed and size of protests organised in the aftermath of República Cromañón evidenced the role and importance of direct democracy in the contemporary Argentine social landscape, and the presence of a politicised culture as a driving force. <fnote>José Ignacio Lladós,, 'Cuatro marchas con reclamos de justicia', Pg.19, La Nación. (Buenos Aires, Sunday 9th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>José Ignacio Lladós,, 'Cuatro marchas con reclamos de justicia', Pg.19, La Nación. (Buenos Aires, Sunday 9th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Anon, 'General strike paralyses Argentina', Friday 20th July 2001. < URL > (Saturday 12th February 2005). </fnote>Principally as a consequence of ongoing protests from Piquetero groups, the significance of the recent tragedy swiftly altered. Protest over redress for a chronic local security omission became blurred with enduring antipathy for the government at a national level. Whilst figures such as President Kirchner and the Callejeros themselves spoke of not wishing to see the tragedy manipulated for political ends, by the time of the third organised protest the emphasis of the campaigning had altered noticeably. As a report featured in Clarín documented, the emergence of attacks directed at the police and consequent arrests of individual protestors signified the involvement and tactics of established Piquetero protest groups such as the 'Quebracho'. On a ground level, the goal and notion of justice had been re-evaluated and effectively sabotaged, absorbed under the same banner as the more traditional and ongoing demands of such groups for employment, food and health assistance. In the same vein, within a few days the club's location at 'Plaza Miserere' came to feature a substantial quantity of paraphernalia conveying a recurring anti-authority theme, dominating that which was initially placed to express condolences and lament for the loss of life. The site featured banners and posters laced with a lexicon evoking a political struggle, such as "No olvidar, siempre resistir" and "Pobreza en los estamagos", with tents normally associated with Piquetero activity around Plaza de Mayo visible around the exterior of club. Though a subtle transition, both the organised protests and written views expressed at the site evolved markedly into a generalised outcry against the government, the tragedy functioning to advance existing lines of protest and substantiate a pervasive anti-political mentality. <fnote>Simon Watts, 'Argentines protest over club fire', Tuesday 4th January 2005. < URL > (Wednesday 5th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Horacio Convertini, 'Liberaron a los detenidos en los incidentes de Plaza de Mayo', Pg.29, Clarín. (Buenos Aires, Saturday 8th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Author's observations from visiting the exterior of the República Cromañón night-club, 9th January 2005. (Address: Bartolomé Mitre 3006, entre Jean Jaures y La Rioja, Plaza Miserere, Once, Buenos Aires). </fnote><fnote>See Photos 1 & 2, 'Images taken at Plaza Miserere (12/05/05)'. </fnote><fnote>Author's observations from visiting the exterior of the República Cromañón night-club, 9th January 2005. (Address: Bartolomé Mitre 3006, entre Jean Jaures y La Rioja, Plaza Miserere, Once, Buenos Aires). </fnote>Taking into account the press's observation that there had been a degree of hijacking of the third march, such action in the wake of the disaster can be regarded as opportunistic, and the profound negativity toward authority need not necessarily be regarded as reflective of that felt by the city's public as a whole. Nonetheless, the hostility imbedded in the protests did see palpable alignment with scepticism expressed by other segments of Porteño society. A survey of the opinions of its readership published by Clarín in its 'Sociedad' section insinuated the widespread erosion of faith in the authorities induced by República Cromañón. Almost an equal percentage of those questioned from the city and the Buenos Aires province regarded Ibarra and Chabán as the main culprits, with 'La corrupción' and 'Falta de educación' cited as the tragedy's principal causes. Furthermore, the paper reported that 77.5% believed that a similar catastrophe would occur in the future. Whilst the scope of the survey was potentially rather small-scale and limited given its collation of the responses of fewer than one thousand people, Clarín's status as a traditionally middle-class newspaper hinted at a consensus of opinion between the city's social demographics. Though it would be inaccurate to regard Porteño society as being unified in its reaction to the incident, interpretation of its origin did clearly centre upon government mishandling of responsibility and the probable impunity enjoyed by officials. <fnote>44.5% of those questioned attributed 'Falta de educación' as the cause of the tragedy, with 37.1% citing 'La Corrupción'. Source: Mariana Iglesias, 'El 77% cree que habrá otro Cromañón', Pg.32, Clarín. (Buenos Aires, Saturday 8th January 2005). </fnote>Indeed, the validity of this ill-feeling towards the political system was arguably well-supported by the events of the days proceeding the fire. Relatives of the victims were vociferous in their criticism of President Kircher's protracted five day silence on the matter, regarded by many as a calculated move intended to maintain his distance and further proof of the national government's unwillingness to sully its hands in the matter. Similarly, Aníbal Ibarra's refusal to admit any fault, and subsequent escape of an interpellation in the national parliament was also cited as a potent example of the impunity of officials and the partiality entrenched within the gubernatorial system. Ibarra was incidentally decidedly fortunate to avoid any appraisal of his role and latent culpability in the tragedy; his diminished political power clearly observable in evading a hearing by a mere three votes. As the journalist Horacio Convertini commented, Ibarra's role was criticised by parliamentary representatives of both the Left and Right, and his eventual 'success' was in fact the consequence of internal factionalism. The closeness and subtlety behind his escape would unlikely have registered with the city's aggrieved public however, the result serving conversely as additional proof of the system's protection of its politicians. In the wake of the disaster, events seemingly continued to demonstrate the malaise of democracy and the illegitimacy of the nation's government, precipitating a city-wide sense of crisis and advancing the credulity of sustained political decay. <fnote>Simon Watts, 'Argentines protest over club fire', Tuesday 4th January 2005. < URL > (Wednesday 5th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Luis Tonelli, 'Estado, antipolítica y crisis de integración social', Pg.10, Debate. (Buenos Aires, Friday 7th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>37 of the 60 legislators voted in favour of an interpellation, 3 short of that required. Source: Mariana Garcia, 'Ibarra evitó la interpelación por sólo 3 votos', Pgs. 1 & 28, Clarín. (Buenos Aires, Saturday 8th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Horacio Convertini, 'Más testimonios contra Chabán', Pg.29, Clarín. (Buenos Aires, Saturday 8th January 2005). </fnote>Analysts in the media opted to emphasise the theme of political impunity and gubernatorial infirmity even further, echoing and articulating the interpretation of local corruption as a microcosm of the nation as a whole. The writer Mempo Giardinelli, for example, expressed the disaster as "el resultado de años, décadas ya, de corrupción generalizada en todos los estratos sociales". In refraining from distinguishing between city and national authority, Giardinelli alluded powerfully to a multi-levelled infection of government, and thus consequently substantiated, albeit indirectly, the anti-authority backlash of protest groups. More explicit however were his suggestions that politically the Argentine republic remains in its infancy, "es más que probable que triunfe nuevamente la impunidad", with politicians' ability to escape blame a throwback of the former dictatorship and evidence of the enduring decrepitude of the judicial and democratic systems. A counterpart of Giardinelli's, Luis Tonelli, was less histrionic in tone though noticeably in accord with conclusions over the failure to eradicate corruption. The writer sharply criticised public figures for their lack of immediate presence after the tragedy, and the deficiency of state power that this represented. Tonelli conversely warned against the pervasive diffusion of an anti-authority mindset, insisting that the incident, rather than demonstrating the exigency of a further downsizing of administrative power, elucidated the need for a legitimate, effective authority to protect against future episodes. Despite the disagreements of the two writers, the respective focuses of their articles emphasised the profound sense of crisis plaguing Buenos Aires society in the wake of the República Cromañón tragedy. Distrust of the authorities had palpably resurged, the incident suggesting the persistence of endemic corruption, and owing to the apparent impunity granted to those cited as culpable, the enduring decay of a system unable to effectively protect and represent those it serves. <fnote>Miempo Giardinelli, '¿Quién señor? ¿Yo señor? ¡No señor!', Pg. 17, Debate. (Buenos Aires, Friday 7th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Miempo Giardinelli, '¿Quién señor? ¿Yo señor? ¡No señor!', Pg. 17, Debate. (Buenos Aires, Friday 7th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Miempo Giardinelli, '¿Quién señor? ¿Yo señor? ¡No señor!', Pg. 18, Debate. (Buenos Aires, Friday 7th January 2005). </fnote><fnote>Luis Tonelli, 'Estado, antipolítica y crisis de integración social', Pg.10, Debate. (Buenos Aires, Friday 7th January 2005). </fnote>In the wake of the República Cromañón tragedy, the city of Buenos Aires experienced a profound crisis in the calibre of its political system. Catalysed by awareness of corruption, numerous organised protests were held as aggrieved families and relatives sought an explanation for the fire's outbreak and punishment of those culpable. Parallels drawn by the press with the 'Kheyvis' tragedy of 1993 compounded convictions that city security development remained stagnant and ill-equipped to oversee the protection of its citizens. Politicians appeared avid to distance themselves from the issue, with President Kirchner maintaining an interminable silence and the city's Mayor Aníbal Ibarra unwilling to admit any responsibility. Though protestors' demands for retribution were subsequently absorbed to advance the ongoing causes of Piquetero groups, a degree of consensus over the incident's significance emerged between the city's social demographics. Despite parliament's responding fiercely to criticise those involved, events such as Ibarra's aversion of an interpellation effectively served to affirm a sense of the inviolate status enjoyed by those in control. Spurred by the interpretation that the tragedy's circumstances evidenced the permanence of corruption and political impunity at a national level, República Cromañón consequently precipitated a marked resurgence in public scepticism towards the authorities. Analytical sections of the media portrayed the tragedy as indicative of the nation's continuing political decay, and in the abuse of power it elucidated essentially akin to the governance presided over by the antecedent military dictatorship. In advance of a localised example of negligent security, the República Cromañón tragedy elicited the public's renewed mistrust of its political system, ultimately demonstrating the nation's failure to extirpate corruption and achieve decisive progress from its past. 