Following the conquest of the Aztec empire, the Spanish conquistadors sought to locate and extract precious metal resources that would greatly enhance their personal fortunes. The discovery and acquisition of deposits of gold and silver constituted a fundamental aim of the Crown and its conquering subjects, owing to the continually high demand for such commodities in Europe. In the initial post-conquest period of roughly twenty years, the Spanish concerned themselves with quick returns through the seizure indigenous goods and through the use of primitive extracting techniques. After the discovery of more substantial silver ore deposits in regions such as Zacatecas in 1546 however, mining came to occupy a central position in the colonial economy. Repeated discoveries of important sites and the development of production technology meant that a trend towards increasingly larger annual outputs established itself in the sixteenth century. Owing to the significant demand in the Old World, the bulk of the commodity was exported to Europe, enabling many of the industry's proprietors to achieve substantial wealth and greatly stimulating the growth of the internal economy. Indeed, it was the creation of this export sector which ensured that New Spain became a far more significant colonial possession than a mere agrarian-based, feudal society. In striving to fulfil European demand, the merchants and miners stimulated the expansion and development of new areas of the country and induced the commercialisation of the colony's economy. The new wealth flowed into the cities such as Mexico City and Guadalajara, creating demand for a plethora of products associated with the activity of mining. The Crown was naturally ardent to encourage the expansion of the industry, acquiring significant royal revenue in the quinto and overseeing the fulfilling of Spain's substantial demand for the metal. The Crown's tendency to discourage the development of other industries and the wealthy group of miners tendency largely to demand European-produced goods however meant that the growth of local industry outside of mining became somewhat stunted. Silver mining in Mexico nevertheless stimulated the commercial growth of the colony, establishing itself as the central part in which all economic activity came to be related. Its sustained boom period of the second half of the sixteenth century elicited the development of agriculture and manufacturing, enabling the country to become a prosperous and valuable colonial possession. In the initial years after the conquest the acquisition of silver entailed the conquistadors attempting a rapid obtaining of as much of the commodity as possible. The men were focused on receiving quick returns to gain immediate reward to their conquering exploits, employing Indians in primitive extraction methods or simply seizing objects of material wealth from conquered communities. The 1540s however witnessed the uncovering of more substantial sources of silver, following the discovery of important mines such as those of the Compostela in New Galicia in 1543 and the Cerro de la Bufa in Zacatecas in 1546. Owing to the continually high demand for precious metals in Europe, the Spanish proved ardent to establish mines which would grant them great and immediate wealth. Owing to the considerable capital requirements, long-term investment, well-trained and skilled labour force, and high levels of economic and social organisation, the ability of individuals to attain success in the industry naturally rested on their possessing a substantial amount of capital in the first place. The great returns achieved by exporting progressively larger amounts of silver, following the discovery of more mining sites, granted the industry a central importance in New Spain's development. The sustained extraction of deposits from areas like Zacatecas allowed the colony to develop a lucrative economy which ensured it occupied a position of far higher importance than a simple agrarian area of the Spanish overseas empire.  <fnote>Macloed P.47 </fnote><fnote>Brading P.2 </fnote>Indeed, silver mining emerged at the centre of the internal economy's marked development, relegating the agricultural sectors to a peripheral position. The creation of mines and its organisation of labour and equipment, as well as the requirements of infrastructure, frequently meant that large, economically prosperous towns sprung up in new regions to accommodate the new demand associated with production. As the historian Enrique Semo has observed, prominent centres of the internal economy developed adjacent to the production sites. Towns functioned as areas of trade, holding shops such as bakeries, tailors and grocery markets which catered for the demand of those involved in the industry. (TALK about satellite economies idea and wealth retained and flowing into the towns and cattle production)In this way, the search for silver resources facilitated Spain's expansionist designs in the post-conquest period, since sites were developed in northern areas of the country that had previously been outside the jurisdiction of the Aztec empire. The Spaniards desire to obtain the commodity often led to the creation of mines in frontier areas, where hostile Indian groups such as the Chichimecas would plague the settlers. This trend saw the creation of mining enclaves within vast areas of unconquered terrain, which forged economic links with the existing cities of the central regions and achieved the colonisation of challenging regions.  <fnote>Semo P.73 </fnote><fnote>Bakewell P.204 </fnote>Mining's prevalence in the colony became entwined with the Spanish expansion into new regions of the country, particularly in the north. Mining's labour system (wages labour in towns) The high demand in Europe for precious metals such as silver meant that the Crown placed great importance on establishing a colonial system which would maximise production of the commodity. The Crown's ensured its involvement by issuing a legal code and levying a tax on silver produced, and significantly through monopolising the supply of Mercury. Mercury had been essential to the refining processes developed by the 1560s and the Crown's ability to control its supply afforded it great power in regulating its taxing of the royal fifth from all product extracted from the subsoil, since it could calculate overall production by correlating declared output with the quicksilver it supplied. Nonetheless, the Spanish government allowed widespread tax reductions within the mining industry to compensate for its enormous capital requirements and so not to discourage a sector of central importance to its empire's prosperity. The quinto was often reduced to a tenth of the value that the miners were required to pay, and frequently, particularly in the century's later years, this reduction was extended to the refiners, workers and merchants involved in the industry. The Spanish government discouraged the other incipient industries within its colony, in particular the manufacturing sector, by way of protecting demand for it Spanish-produced manufactured goods. This favouring of the mining industry contributed to its becoming the central part of Mexico's economy on which all other activity came to be linked. <fnote>Brading P.16 </fnote><fnote>Williamson P.127 </fnote><fnote>Brading P.17 </fnote>The importance attributed to mining and its central status within the economy also affected the distribution of wealth within the country and had great implications for the restriction on growth of other industries. Though mining ensured that the colony moved away from an agrarian-based tribute system, it essentially consolidated a "feudal-capitalist structure" in which the wealth acquired through production and exportation of the commodity concentrated in the hands of a rich elite. Though it would be false to claim that manufacturing did not develop in the cities during the sixteenth century, its growth was certainly impeded by the elite's tendency to prefer the goods produced in Spain and Europe, using their wealth to purchase products made in Europe. Whilst the wealth created by silver poured into the cities and stimulated the growth and commercialisation of the colony, the mining industry's chief position meant that the development of other sectors was restricted. <fnote>Semo P.71 </fnote>