Breaking formally with Spain in 1821, postcolonial Peru would witness significant changes in the state's approach to its indigenous majority and the "Indian problem". Peru emerged after independence as thoroughly divided, comprising an ethnically heterogeneous peasant mass scattered throughout a diverse landscape, and a small pool of largely city-residing elites determined to secure national progress. Influenced by the core ideals of La Ilustración and a Bolivarian desire to extirpate colonialism's despotic legacy, the limeño ruling class pursued a republican project of integration to secure its position at the apex of national authority. In line with this enterprising trajectory, the tribute and provincial cacique systems were abolished in the immediate post-independence years, furthering the colonial assault on the indigenous nobility begun in the wake of the Túpac Amaru rebellion of 1780. In irrigating the coastal economy, a thirty-year guano export boom would however effectively undermine state-sierra relations and Creole attention to the hinterlands, facilitating the rise of a regional caudillismo. Despite the liberal republican discourse fuelling a modernising drive, Indians were routinely contained along established lines of "paternalistic exploitation", the contradictions of which would come to enhance their political consciousness and inspire salient instances of revolt. While elite interests lobbied for power, the desire to erode communal landholdings and penetrate the Andean interior would inflame civil tensions. Coinciding with the consolidation of liberal control in the 1870s, local rebellions became increasingly more frequent, their characteristics and intensity reflecting the interplay of regionally-specific geographic and socio-economic conditions. Broadly speaking, the War of the Pacific (1879-84) would precipitate greater peasant organisation, and nourish disenchantment with a national project that undermined basic rights. With the government aspiring to heightened implementation of individual taxation via the contribución personal, a renewed integrationist drive further antagonised regional disdain, underpinning a sharpened indigenous reaction to state designs on community life. Though these developments implied a marked growth in Indians' conception of the nation, prevailing Creole interpretation came to belittle such protest, returning to lament the problem of a backward, unassimilated peasant majority. Both as communities and individuals, Indians could by the century's closure more readily envisage the construction of a nation, though this did not universally transpire as a desire to belong. <fnote>Brooke Larson, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. In: The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, Vol. III, 558-703. P.619 </fnote><fnote>José de la Puente Candamo, La Independencia del Perú. (Madrid, 1992) P.269 </fnote><fnote>Alberto Flores Galindo, 'The Rebellion of Túpac Amaru and José Antonio Areche "All must die"'. In Starn, Orin; Degregori, Carlos Iván; and Kirk, Robin (eds.), The Peru Reader: history, culture, politics. (London, 1995) P.158 </fnote><fnote>Jeffrey L. Klaiber, Religion and Revolution in Peru 1834-1976. (Indiana, 1976) P.48 </fnote><fnote>Larson, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. P.569 </fnote><fnote>Paul H. Gelles, 'Andean Culture, Indigenous Identity, and the State in Peru.' In Maybury-Lewis, David (ed.), The Politics of Ethnicity: Indigenous peoples in Latin American states. (London, 2002) P.244 </fnote>In the immediate period preceding independence, the Peruvian State sought to modernise its relationship to its indigenous subjects by repealing the tribute system in 1810. Though Peru had declared its separation from the peninsula in 1821 - one of the last of the South American colonies to do so - the Royalist cause would not be entirely undone until the defeat of the remaining Spanish forces some three years later at Ayacucho. While the 'foreign' armies of Simón Bolívar and José de San Martín directed much of the republican cause, Indian participation in defence of an emergent patria was of central importance. Far from imbuing the nation's leadership with confidence however, this mobilisation incited Creole fears of latent peasant uprising. Although Indian involvement in independence aroused hopes widespread faith in the nation-state, limeño elites regarded an integrationist drive as imperative to cement their authority, particularly in areas of the central sierra where communities had fought loyally for the Royalist cause. Adding substance to the prevailing enlightenment and modernising ideals, the decrees of San Martín in 1821 and Bolívar in 1825 outlawing personal service enshrined a liberal trajectory and provided the impetus for penetration of the Andes.  <fnote>Heraclio Bonilla, 'The Indian Peasantry and "Peru" during the War with Chile'. In Stern, Steve J. (ed.), Resistance, Rebellion, and Consciousness in the Andean Peasant World. 18th to 20th Centuries. (Wisconsin, 1987) P.220 </fnote><fnote>Jorge Basadre, Historia de la República del Perú, 1822-1933. Volume I (Lima, 1968) P.233/4 </fnote><fnote>Víctor Peralta Ruíz, En pos del tributo : Burocracia estatal, elite regional y comunidades indígenas en el Cusco rural, 1826-1854. (Cusco, 1991) P.36 </fnote>While acquiring a republican gloss, the assault on provincial power was nevertheless in many respects a continuation of colonial attempts to erode the authority of the caciques; a policy undertaken in earnest following the tumultuous 'Great Rebellion' of 1780 led by Túpac Amaru II. Though Creole rhetoric would actively deny the political capacity of the peasantry, such insurrection hinted at a developing indigenous consciousness, rooted in acute aversion to intervention in local authority. In general, Creole distaste for the Indian was manifold, rejecting the preference for ostensibly inferior indigenous tongues such as Quechua over Spanish, superstitious syncretic Catholic practises, and an apparently innate aversion to private property and enterprise. Despite the optimistic proclamations of revolutionary leaders, the geographical and ideological gulf between the capital and hinterlands remained great, and the government would face much peasant opposition to efforts at enhanced assimilation. <fnote>Sergio Serulnikov, Subverting colonial authority: challenges to Spanish rule in eighteenth-century southern Andes. (Durham, 2003) P.216 </fnote><fnote>Charles Walker, 'Montoneros, Bandoleros, Malhechores: Criminalidad y política en las primeras décadas republicanas.' In Aguirre, Carlos; Walker, Charles; Vivanco, Carmen, Bandoleros, abigeos y montoneros : criminalidad y violencia en el Perú, siglos XVIII-XX. (Lima, 1990) P.114 </fnote>In an era in which Enlightenment principles of liberty, equality, and citizenship featured strongly, the divisions created by ethno-cultural, economic, and class differences proved problematic to a state model seeking to increase its sovereignty. Geographically, the nation comprised three distinct areas: a "desert-like" pacific coast, the mountainous Andean range, and a set of low tropical valleys in the eastern Amazon basin. Such dissimilarity served to highlight the physical and psychological distance between regions, and resultant lack of a common identity and history for their inhabitants. Ethnic heterogeneity further eroded a sense of universality; both in terms of internal distinctions between indigenous groups and divisions along caste lines of white, mestizo, Indian, black, and Chinese. According to an 1812 estimate, Peru constituted some 1,509,511 inhabitants, of whom 178,025 were Spanish, 954,799 Indian, 287,486 mestizo, and 89,241 black slaves. With the indigenous bulk of this population scattered across the vast central highlands, Indian communities remained fragmented sites of ethnic, cultural, and linguistic diversity stretching back beyond pre-conquest times. While they acknowledged, and would often rebel against, an overbearing national authority, individual Indian communities did not at this stage project a sense of solidarity with one another, much less an idea of the nation as a whole. <fnote>Piel, 'The place of the peasantry,' P.110 </fnote><fnote>Piel, 'The place of the peasantry,' P.111 </fnote>Though burgeoning in a political climate rich in republican ideals, integrationist approaches to the Indian majority initially took something of a backseat as different interests lobbied for power. Within the ruling class, the nation's incipient years were characterised by the tension between liberal republicanism's desire to engender progress and curb colonial excesses, and a conservative mould sharing much of its views with the former Spanish authorities. In cementing control of the government, church, army, education, and commerce, conservative interests would essentially dominate. In any case, a degree of merging of conservative and liberal thought transpired in the late 1820s, reflecting fears of the insurrectionary potential of the interior and a consequent preoccupation with securing law and discipline. Divisions were nonetheless still pronounced over attitudes to the guerrilla bands occupying the capital's surrounding area, with breakaway portions of the liberal contingent seeking alliance with bandolero leaders. Though prominent conservatives would dismiss bandoleros and montoneros alike as common crooks and renounce political agency on their part, the presence of undesirable peasant groups proved central to debates around citizenship. <fnote>Basadre, Historia de la República del Perú. Volume I P.234 </fnote><fnote>Walker, 'Montoneros, Bandoleros, Malhechores.' P.110 </fnote><fnote>Walker, 'Montoneros, Bandoleros, Malhechores.' P.110 </fnote>Elite aversion to mobilised clans aside, these groups can commonly be regarded as exhibiting political consciousness, both in terms of demonstrating demands of the state and reacting to those identified as opposition. Moreover, by exemplifying a direct challenge to national authority, those involved in civil strife informed state definitions of the merits of the ideal citizen. Following San Martín's sweeping promotion of the Indian masses as 'Peruanos', Lima's elites set about contemplating what constituted an originario republicano. Of central importance was the payment of a 'contribution' to the state treasury, usurping the tributo traditionally administered by ethnic chieftains. As the historian Mark Thurner elucidates, citizenship also progressively entailed taking unremunerated community posts, and participation in both public works labour and a newly conceived "labor brigade service".  <fnote>Walker, 'Montoneros, Bandoleros, Malhechores.' P.109 </fnote><fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.30 </fnote>Though this ambitious construction of a postcolonial nation implied commitment to an inclusive political system, the sense of two polarized worlds provided by the legacy of the dual repúblicas system was to be deeply entrenched. Profoundly concerned with securing national progress, Creole ideology's overriding view of a disparate indigenous mass thus became that of an obstacle to be overcome, with competing lines of debate revolving around the imperative drive towards modernity. The weakness of government authority would however preclude an extensive overthrow of the traditional tributary system, leading Indians to remain largely subjects of provincial landowners. Given this frailty, the nascent state was obliged to uphold the colonial model of local authority to bolster its position and secure the C riollo class at the peak of the social hierarchy. With the cacique nobility remaining theoretically outlawed and Lima's courts passing a community land privatisation law in 1828, the emergent liberal thrust was not to be undone, but Peru's formative years essentially heralded an endeavour to impose a republican status on the existing structure. <fnote>Mark Thurner, 'Peruvian Genealogies of History and Nation.' In Thurner, Mark; and Guerrero, Andrés (eds.), After Spanish rule: postcolonial predicaments of the Americas. (Durham, 2003) P.141 </fnote><fnote>César Fonseca Martel, 'Peasant Differentiation in the Peruvian Andes.' In Stein, William (ed.), Peruvian Contexts of Change. (New Jersey, 1985) P.127 </fnote>In spite then of the progressive slant of elite discourse, the postcolonial system essentially upheld a reworked paradigm of paternalistic exploitation rooted in local authority. In line with republican distaste for provincial nobility, the kuraka aristocracy was replaced officially by the 'varayoc'; a position filled by village leaders who would organise tax collection. Equally, the state saw fit to increase the numbers employed within the temporal alcalde role, the aim being to ensure greater regulation and monitoring of taxation, and to provide a fertile climate for individualism, property ownership, and stability. In usurping the last vestiges of the Inca nobility, alcaldes were expressly appointed for their loyalty and fiscal obligation, and enjoyed privileges such as tax exempt status for their support. In the 1830s, these officials were regarded as instrumental in furthering the drive to weaken regional political autonomy, especially within problematic areas such as the Cuzco department where memory of the erstwhile Tawantisuyo, the Inca realm, remained strong even after centuries of Spanish colonial rule. As the historian Víctor Peralta Ruíz highlights, though the varayoc tended to attain a greater quotidian presence than their alcalde counterparts and preside for "un tiempo indefinido en su cargo", the two positions would increasingly be identified as one and the same as the century progressed. While it would not prove immediately enforceable, a later abolition of tribute in 1854 would provide renewed anti-cacique legalisation, affirming the decline in kuraka authority. Following the influx of these new external officials, the power and position of the cacicazgo was gradually eroded, as much in terms of mercantile participation as community prestige. <fnote>Basadre, Historia de la República del Perú. Volume I. P.263 </fnote><fnote>Peralta Ruíz, En pos del tributo. P.111 </fnote><fnote>Peralta Ruíz, En pos del tributo. P.112 </fnote>Given the strength of regional ethnic ties however, this is not to credit the authorities with attaining a precipitous penetration of the highlands, as the void between Creole and Indian worlds remained considerable. In seeking to undermine local cultures, integrationist efforts would inadvertently bridge the cultural and economic dimensions of Indians' existing grievances, intensifying chagrin and inclination towards revolt. The endorsements of progressive liberal ideology notwithstanding, the issue of achieving an efficacious form of centralised state control would prove as elusive for republican officials as it had their Spanish predecessors. The struggle to develop civil and economic links between Peru's multifarious isolated mountain communities and lowland semi-tropical valleys remained unresolved and indeed exacerbated by the country's changing political realities. Despite the Bolivarian rhetoric, a boom within the guano nitrate export sector would irrigate the coast, effectively stalling elite concerns for the interior. Growing rich from this burgeoning economic activity in the period 1830-60, the elite developed indifference towards the nation's founding republican spirit. <fnote>Stern (ed.), Resistance, Rebellion, and Consciousness. P.214 </fnote>In practical terms, the substantial revenues afforded by the boom eroded the economic incentive to further collection of the "indigenous contribution", diverting attention away from tackling the state-sierra gulf. Though this period would culminate in the renewed abolition of tribute in 1854 by President Ramón Castilla, such legislation primarily reflected disregard for tribute's continuing value rather than any dominant liberal spirit. In much the same vein, political weakness and the prosperity of the guano sector would combine to facilitate the rise of a militaristic caudillismo, exacerbating the mercantile "feudalization" of the immediate post-independence years. Some forty regional strongmen held power in the provinces, many of whom faced great problems of sporadic peasant rebellion despite their authority. Just as the government's ability to curb the regional supremacy of any one individual or set of interests depended on proximity to state power, Indian appreciation and engagement with national development bore direct correlation to communities' geographical dispersion. Though they would participate in civil unrest and challenge both metropolitan and rural efforts to exact greater money and enhance authority, the Indian worldview remained orientated towards the community and existing local ties, with little regard for a government project of citizenship. <fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.37 </fnote><fnote>Heraclio Bonilla, 'The Indian Peasantry and "Peru" during the War with Chile'. In Stern (ed.), Resistance, Rebellion, and Consciousness. P.214 </fnote>Ascending to the presidency in 1829, Agustín Gamarra proved to be the figure that most successfully capitalised on the scope for authoritarianism afforded by the postcolonial period. Primarily through harnessing localised discontent within Cuzco and the Sacred Valley, his ascent owed much to an astute ability to channel cusqueño envy at Lima's economic and political dominance of national affairs. Much like the Buenos Aires Governor Juan Manuel de Rosas during Argentina's formative years, Gamarra typified the archetypal military caudillo, attaining an unstable dictatorship that would ultimately provide something of a transient role as the century progressed. While echoing much of the contemporary liberal sentiment, the dictator's political dealings were guided by a calculated conservatism designed to consolidate his position. Though heavily reliant on indigenous support, the president's implementation of conscription during a time of intense civil strife represented a concerted aim to develop a militarised hierarchy as a means to secure power. <fnote>Cecilia Méndez G., 'Incas Sí, Indios No: Notes on Peruvian Creole Nationalism and its Contemporary Crisis', Journal of Latin American Studies, 1991, 28, 197-225. P.211 </fnote>Unable to neutralise sufficiently a turbulent political climate, Gamarra lost his power in 1833 as competing figures struggled for an effective base around which to cement their authority. The next four years saw an equivalent number of presidents, as forces headed Pedro Pablo Bermúdez, Luis José de Orbegoso, and Felipe Santiago Salaverry jockeyed for power. Gamarra would nonetheless return to the presidency in 1838, profiting from an "elitist and authoritarian form of nationalism" heralded by the disbanding of the Bolivia-Peru Confederacy, and reigning President Andrés de Santa Cruz's inability to sustain his tenure as a self-appointed 'Supreme Protector'. Gamarra's return to power revived the gamarrista faction's advocacy of enlightened leadership and a noble class, inaugurating a nationalist drive propped up internally by suppression of the peasant masses and externally via repudiation of opposing foreign influences. Much in the same way that the guano export boom diverted concerns away from the country's interior, an elite set of self-aggrandising tenets would effectively bolster the conservative hold on the country. <fnote>Méndez G., 'Incas Sí, Indios No'. P.215 </fnote>Although it was to be somewhat reworked in succeeding years, the creation and support of an empowered aristocracy as an efficacious model of progress and stability was to achieve a significant ideological legacy. Its contradiction of the nation's republican spirit notwithstanding, such an intellectual current would greatly influence much of the elite's attitude to governance in future years. While components of the liberal contingent lauded a "Liberal Revolution" in 1854 under Castilla, the renewed Bolivarian effort encountered significant obstacles from broad sections of the ruling class that were loath to jeopardise a stratified hierarchy. Efforts to alter the castas fiscal system via the creation of a unitary citizen tax were blocked by an alliance of conservative and opposing liberal forces in an 1856 National Convention, stalling in the process pro-Castilla claims to a new era of "real independence" for the Indian peasantry.  <fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.44 </fnote>Though it is relevant to speak of competition between liberal and conservative currents, this is not to claim that specific individuals or factions need necessarily embody such notions in their entirety. In the desire to articulate a pertinent vision for national advance, much of the ruling class would champion a mixed and at times contradictory bag of liberal and conservative ideology. Going against the Enlightenment emphasis on equality and individual liberty, much of Peru's social development would prove to bolster the existing social structure. As the historian Cecilia Méndez G. has succinctly observed, Peru's ruling class pursued something of a "traditionalist modernization"; the lauding of an entrepreneurial, capitalistic direction that offered no threat of altering existing social hierarchies.  <fnote>Méndez G, 'Incas Sí, Indios No.' P.217 </fnote>This dominant approach would greatly undermine state-sierra relations and the ostensible endeavour to advance control over the highlands, further inhibiting the government's understanding of the Indian worldview. While a resurgent Bolivarian spirit appeared to strengthen by the time of the 1870s, liberalism would in the second half of the nineteenth century lose much of its popular façade. This change was effectively instigated by a decline in elite economic prosperity, the consequences of which were to unify conflicting conservative and liberal visions of the national project. Owing to the slump in guano prosperity, the authorities were compelled to address more avidly the issue of maintenance of state revenue, leading President Mariano Ignacio Prado to restore the head tax in 1868. In furthering the assault on communal landholdings and reaffirming egalitarian ideals, such a piece of legislature was naturally consistent with the prevailing liberal republican discourse. In its financial implications however, this act proved at odds with the drive to modernise and challenge the communal existence of its peasant majority, as it plunged individuals into further financial difficulties and heightened their reliance on the community.  <fnote>Méndez G, 'Incas Sí, Indios No.' P.218 </fnote><fnote>Klaiber, Religion and Revolution. P.60 </fnote>In essence, the existing caudillismo took a liberal twist, pushing much of the poor indigenous majority into even greater indebtedness to a dominant rural land-owning class. Equally, just as an individualised fiscal system proved deeply detrimental to those it was theoretically intended to assimilate, it inadvertently reasserted the existing dislocation of the Andean mass. Rebellions such as that of Huancané in 1867 displayed the persistence of indigenous chagrin, following the continued erosion of property rights. From the strong anti-indigenous perspective of figures like civilista president Manuel Pardo, such revolt confirmed claims to Indians' innate savagery and simultaneously legitimised the need for an enlightened aristocracy and plutocratic style of governance. Indeed, as the son of the illustrious conservative satirist Felipe Pardo, Manuel Pardo embodied the prototypical elite, advancing the validity of an upper class as a means towards stability. <fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.44 </fnote><fnote>Klaiber, Religion and Revolution. P.47 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, 'The Indian Peasantry'. P.221 </fnote><fnote>Méndez G., 'Incas Sí, Indios No.' P.217 </fnote>While the elite lamented Indian backwardness, broad sections of the indigenous majority were becoming progressively more apt to challenge objectionable government action. Through denouncing power abuses, revolting Indians, just as they had done during colonial uprisings and rebellions, readily displayed a political consciousness and sense of mistreatment, a consciousness that manifested itself in their petitioning of regional audiencia courts. While largely illiterate, villagers made use of local secretaries to challenge state officials and overthrow disagreeable figures, acts which potently illustrated their engagement with the nation's political system and the rights it theoretically afforded them. Given the high illiteracy among Andean peasants, their view of such development remains confined to oral history and the contemporary observations of whites and mestizos. It is fair to say, however, that state attrition of community land rights and a model of individual status proved objectionable. While illiteracy impeded constant response to the racialised denigration posited by the limeño press, many communities, such as Huaraz in 1887, made use of their secretaries to defend their position through letters to state officials. Despite a consolidated elite discourse that negated their political agency, Indian rebellions were most commonly sparked by localised abuse of financial responsibilities, a trend that hinted at widespread dissatisfaction. <fnote>Stern (ed.), Resistance, Rebellion, and Consciousness. P.214 </fnote><fnote>Klaiber, Religion and Revolution. P.49 </fnote><fnote>Mallon, Peasant and Nation. P.186 </fnote><fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.114 </fnote>On a national level, the escalation of protest bore direct relation to the abolition of tribute outlined in the 1854 legislation. For the Indian masses accustomed to communal social arrangements, the imposition of fees for an entire range of natural commodities such as firewood and grazing space for cattle was exasperating. Indigenous displeasure centred on a wholesale rejection of the entrepreneurial values of the white and mestizo 'misti' class, values which completely inverted their traditional relationship to the environment. Just as Creole rhetoric would deride Indians' apparent ineptitude, dispersed communities were incapable of comprehending Lima's progressive model. The peasantry's problems intensified in the fallout to the War of the Pacific (1879-84), in which the government attempted to tighten further its fiscal grip with the aim of averting the onset of a recession. No longer able to subsidise municipal authority as during the guano boom, the creation of a poll tax levied on each citizen was identified as the sole means of revitalising governmental coffers. This in effect entailed a decentralisation of state authority, which in insisting citizens pay the provincial government, as opposed to the national treasury, served to jeopardise the peasantry's interaction with the republican authorities. Broadly speaking, this heightened scope for hacendado exploitation, since non-landowners were no longer enjoyed the same access to natural resources. Accordingly, a sense of contributing directly to the patria was undermined, sharpening peasant disillusion with a state that afforded scant protection or rights. <fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.113 </fnote><fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.114 </fnote>That the state would confront more frequent, intense incidents of rebellion at this time had much to do with the war's impact on the peasantry. Following Peru's refusal to declare neutrality in a conflict between Bolivia and Chile over nitrate deposits in the Atacama Desert, the government became forced to confront the deleterious incursions of a foreign invader. For the nation's Indians, military participation led to greater involvement in the country's development since many became conscripts within local militias in defence of their homeland. Rather than stimulating a wave of untapped patriotism however, the outcome of this involvement was to illustrate the extent to which localities remained essentially inward-looking and with little perception of belonging to a national system. As the historian Florencia E. Mallon highlights, Peru remained "a nation that existed in barely more than name", the diverse local reaction to the occupation of extensive areas exposing the limits of the nation-building project. In much of the central sierra, the rise of bands of Montonera guerrillas in defence of the land spelled a plunging into full-scale civil war by 1883. With political authority crumbling across the highland range, merchants and landowners in central areas such as Colca and Acostambo opted to abandon their homes, reflecting fear of an eruption of class-based conflict. <fnote>Bonilla, 'The Indian Peasantry.' P.219 </fnote><fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.56 </fnote><fnote>Heraclio Bonilla, 'The War of the Pacific and the National and Colonial Problem in Peru', Past and Present, 1978, 81, 92-119. P.92 </fnote><fnote>Florencia E. Mallon, 'Comas and the War of the Pacific.' In Starn, Orin; Degregori, Carlos Iván; and Kirk, Robin (eds.), The Peru Reader: history, culture, politics. (London, 1995) P.169 </fnote><fnote>Larson, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. P.641 </fnote>Being highly detrimental towards local economies in destroying crops and livestock, Chilean incursions thus often fomented peasant mobilisation. Whilst President Iglesias negotiated the cessation of hostilities under the Treaty of Ancón in 1883, General Andrés Cáceres continued to oversee a popular resistance in the Mantaro region. Though many were involved in incidents of banditry and opportunistic abuse, the war provided indigenous participants an avenue towards greater appreciation of belonging to a wider cause. In defending a region from a foreign threat, the conflict permitted the forging of an enhanced consciousness of inter-community identities, helping to establish "bonds of solidarity". Practically speaking, this entailed attrition of longstanding ethnic tensions between Indian groups that had considered themselves culturally and often linguistically distinct from their neighbours, as the Túpac Amaru rebellion had achieved some one hundred years before. By illuminating both the state's exploitation and inability to protect its citizens, the war granted Indians a greater sense of sharing a common experience. Particularly after the withdrawal of Chilean forces, peasant mobilisation sustained instability in the central sierra, creating a pervasive sense of a rejection of Lima's nation making project. If the war advanced the state's concept of national consciousness for the masses, it did not appear to be endorsed by many. <fnote>Larson, Andean Highland Peasants and the trials of Nation Making during the Nineteenth Century. P.641 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, 'The War of the Pacific.' P.115 </fnote><fnote>Puente Candamo, La Independencia del Perú. P.32 </fnote><fnote>Bonilla, 'The War of the Pacific.' P.115 </fnote>This is not to suggest however that the composition of wartime peasant reaction and civil conflict within Peru's hinterlands was uniform, nor that uprising was merely the product of a unified objection to state and regional elite authority. Though the war provided the stimulus for civil strife in many regions, it did not spark a universal lower-class revolt. Based on the idóneo-led Montenera bands of poor peasants, Cáceres's continued resistance overtly undermined state efforts at pacification, eliciting a diverse range of reactions from regional class interests. Within communities, support for the breakaway general depended on a complex interaction of factors, particularly the shape of local power dynamics and the extent of geo-political detachment from centralised authority. Within the Mantaro Valley in the Junín department, something of a north-south divide developed based on differing socio-economic and cultural characteristics. In the valley's south around the Huancayo province, the prolonged destructive presence of the Chilean forces - and the collaborationist stance adopted by prominent local landowners like Jacinto Cevallos - inspired the projection of a class-based proto-nationalism on the part of the local peasantry. Possessing sufficient power to mobilise, the peasantry fought both the Chilean invader and higher-class interests alike, articulating a love for the homeland as the place in which one was born, drew subsistence, and prospered. Conversely, with a relatively lesser Chilean presence and greater entwining of interests, Mantaro's northern social groups did not to replicate the mutual hostility of their southern counterparts, instead proffering a multi-class defence of the land. This owed much to the relative local impotence of the montoneras: the northern elite, feeling less threatened, could more readily assert their support for Cáceres. Reflecting the local elite's dominance, peasant nationalism was not be given the same opportunity to develop, with the lower class remaining more easily controlled. <fnote>Mallon, Peasant and Nation P.185 </fnote><fnote>Mallon, 'Comas and the War of the Pacific.' P.177 </fnote><fnote>Mallon, 'Comas and the War of the Pacific.' P.179 </fnote>In the north-western Department of Cajamarca, a unique set of circumstances spawned an alternative national resistance, rooted in an alliance between the elite and peasantry in rebellion against the state. Dismayed by the government's inability to counter the invasion, local landowners and merchants directed the peasantry in an effective challenge of the Chilean forces. The ability to formulate and manipulate a multi-class, multi-ethnic resistance owed much to the lack of strong native roots in the region. For the village peasantry, the absence of a communal tradition was further compounded by the paucity of economic opportunities, reducing the bulk of the population to a virtual serfdom perpetuated by hacendado control over the land. With peasants confined to dependence on the local patrón, regional confrontation had not been characterised by agrarian class conflict, but rather by feuds and competition internal to the land-owning social tier. In the context of a wartime defence of land and property, this situation afforded the peasantry little opportunity to attain a cohesive struggle autonomous from the interests of their social superiors. <fnote>Mallon, Peasant and Nation. P.230/1 </fnote><fnote>Mallon, Peasant and Nation. P.232 </fnote>With Miguel Iglesias presiding over weak political legitimacy in the post-war period, a strictly indigenous disaffection with the state would however gain momentum in parts of the country more conducive to independent protest, materialising most palpably as the rebellion led by Pedro Pablo Atusparia in Huaraz. As a direct response to Prefect Noriega's iniquitous designs on labour and taxation, Atusparia mediated a wave of Indian discontent at exploitation. Atusparia's supporters would appropriate their militancy as affirming their status as true citizens, seeking to unhinge a system that neglected the reciprocity intrinsic to fiscal convention. This incident would inspire numerous subsequent examples, inciting revolt within localities such as Ilave, Huanta, Azángaro, and Puno. Though they had participated in national and local armies in defence of the patria, Indian men remained subordinated as the nation strove to rebuild, a marginalisation that fuelled the persistence of guerrilla activity and propensity to rebel. These groups, in demonstrating a confrontational response to external ruling forces, regenerated an established tradition of questioning state legitimacy.  <fnote>Thurner, From Two Republics to One Divided. P.18 </fnote><fnote>Basadre, Historia de la República del Perú. Volume IX. P.35 </fnote><fnote>Larson, Andean Highland Peasants. P.569 </fnote>While indigenous appreciation of the nation grew markedly as a consequence of the war, the resultant mobilisation elucidated the continuance of creole problems with the interior. Motivated by fears intensified by developments across the sierra, the elite would respond with greater efforts at subjugation. Reinvigorated by an emergent positivism and racist biological strands, Peru's prevailing liberal discourse reaffirmed the ideology of enlightened government and elite dominance. With the Indian more concretely transformed into a racial 'other', the cultural and political void between coast and sierra was both redefined and reconfirmed. While much of the country's disparate populace might more clearly project an idea of citizenship at the century's end, the authorities would be apt to counter challenges to political authority, revitalising the assault on the Indian geographical and psychological landscape. <fnote>Méndez G., 'Incas Sí, Indios No.' P.218 </fnote>In conclusion, nineteenth century Indian conceptions of the nation developed considerably as Peru established itself after independence. The bulk of the population would remain scattered across a diverse geographical landscape, but state alterations to tribute and taxation systems, the erosion of communal property rights, and participation in a war with a foreign power all contributed to heighten Indian acknowledgement of the nation state. The general trend towards a liberal republican direction would nonetheless prove at odds with the indigenous population's desire to maintain their traditional communities, and the gulf between the government's modernising rhetoric and conservative use of the varayoc system inspired significant periods of instability. In challenging financial mismanagement and abuse of power on a local level, Indian groups manifested an established political consciousness and general distaste for the state's failure to keep its side of the bargain. This did not necessarily equate to a national consciousness however, and it was not until their defence of the patria during the War of the Pacific that Andean communities would begin to more concretely perceive their position within a broader nation. Chilean destruction of local communities advanced notions of a common cause and bridged regional divisions, but such notions did not automatically evolve into patriotism and regard for state power. With the government looking to refill its coffers after the war, much of the central Peruvian highlands descended into revolt. In light of a wartime conscription demands, this action highlighted the peasantry's disdain for the government's renewed emphasis on taxation and oppression, and the direction the nation was taking. Though maintenance of an exploitative model had facilitated elite control of a peasant mass in preliminary years, it ultimately inhibited commitment to the country's liberal trajectory, leading intellectuals to once again examine the "Indian problem" retarding modern development. While the elite would return its attention to the unruly indigenous majority, Indians themselves appeared at odds with the position imposed upon them, rejecting its assault on their prosperity and rights. 