The early work of the Chilean poet Gabriela Mistral was rooted around the central themes of maternal love, nature and childhood. Her third poetic collection, "Ternura", published in 1924, made frequent use of this thematic core, exploring the maternal relationship and the inherent connection between nature and femaleness. Critical interpretation of her work, such as the analysis of Manuel Pedro Gonzalez, posits this focus to be a consequence of events within her own life, regarding the mysterious suicide of her lover Romelio Ureta in 1909 as eliciting a perennial yearning for an unrealised maternity. Mistral's rural background and experiences as an unqualified teacher certainly influenced the subject and direction of her work, ingraining a profound appreciation of nature and its forces, and the indigenous cultural traditions constructed around them, as well as the social value of the teaching profession. The poem "La Tierra", from "Cuenta-Mundo", the fifth section of "Ternura", encompasses a conspicuous lauding of the rural, Indian lifestyle of which the poet was so familiar. Constructed as a maternal tutoring of a child, the poem celebrates a mode of living that, though human and entailing the use of artificial instruments, maintains a close harmony with natural forces. Though "La Tierra" does not display an overt response to specific destructive social or political trends, the poem's focus and content serves as a potent eulogy of rural life and thus subtly opposes a spiritually-defunct metropolitan experience. In its employment of simplistic language and universal symbols, the poem achieves a markedly accessible style through which a complexity of ideas can be effectively conveyed, employing a repetitive verb usage and structure which consolidates the overall childish tone. In establishing a didactic relationship between an anonymous mother and child, the poet arguably seeks to reclaim an educational voice from her society's male-dominated tutelary system, thus utilising poetry as a feminised medium through which the mother's role can elucidate the inherent totality of nature. The poet seemingly seeks to feminise the notion of poetic responsibility, developed initially by her Nicaraguan antecedent Rubén Darío, delineating a generalised provincial experience that demonstrates the cultural and spiritual value of maintaining intimacy with nature. <fnote>Manuel Pedro Gonzalez, "Profile of a Great Woman", Hispania, (Dec., 1958), pp. 427-430. P.429 </fnote>The theme of childhood entails then a personal significance for the poet, for whom the lack of opportunity to raise children within a conventional family unit induces a profound sense of mourning for maternity. The role of the mother occupies a central importance within Mistral's work, as an individual who possesses an educational responsibility for her children. In sustaining her focus on childhood throughout the "Ternura" collection, poetry functions as a personal outlet through which the poet is able to aspire towards fulfilling the role linguistically, in the absence of any physical possibility. The initial stanza of "La Tierra" immediately establishes this tutelary relationship, whereby the poet instructs an unidentified Indian child to form a physical attachment to the earth upon which he stands. Though encouraging obedience to her imperatives, the child is treated with prominent sentiment in such tender gestures as "hijo mío", and is merely ushered into lying prostrate upon the earth. The child functions as a symbol of an untutored and impressionable figure, through whom the poet can project her appreciation for the earth and encourage a return to nature's forces. That the child is "indio" forges an immediate link with her provincial Chilean background, and confirms the poet's desire to laud and minister to a perpetually marginalised component within her country. Equally, her existing experience as a teacher fuels the poem's benevolent instruction, enabling the construction of a feminised didacticism in which mother and nature are intimately connected. Having directed the child into pursuing a permanent closeness with the land, irrespective of his transitory emotional states of "cansado" or "alegre", the poet establishes then a crucial connection between femaleness and nature. In the resulting rhyming couplet between the second and fourth lines, nature is palpably feminised through the juxtaposition of "la Tierra" with "ella", a connection which also advances the dual quality of the maternal role as something which both encourages an engaging with nature and is itself intrinsically linked. The imperative "juega" maintains a maternal guidance, stimulating an active, distinctly childish mode of interaction with the exalted earth. Whilst not an overt reaction to any corrupting alternative direction which contemporary life may impose upon her anonymous figure, the opening stanza effectively establishes an affinity between femaleness and nature which guides the child into a fundamental appreciation of nature, and makes manifest Mistral's desire to utilise her medium as a maternal force to compensate for her own loss of physical motherhood. <fnote>Stephen M. Hart, A Companion to Spanish-American Literature. (Tamesis, 1999) P.82 </fnote><fnote>Marjorie Agosin (ed.), Gabriela Mistral, A Reader. (New York, 1993) P.19 </fnote><fnote>Stephen M. Hart, A Companion to Spanish-American Literature. (Tamesis, 1999) P.83 </fnote>In its subsequent verses, "La Tierra" develops into a broad celebration of indigenous culture, demonstrating its inherent harmony with nature and ability to maintain a connection with a higher spiritual plane. Specifically, it is the "tambor indio" which both aurally portrays Indian modes of cultural interaction with the natural environment and provides a vehicle through which the listener can witness nature's unified and perpetual forces. The drum functions then as a general symbol of Indian culture, occupying a central ceremonial significance as an interactive asset with profound revelatory properties. In belonging to the earth, being "de la Tierra", it perfectly mirrors the dynamic forces and facilitates a connection with nature. Significantly, just as the drum engages with rather than encroaches upon the surroundings, other exhibited components of Indian culture are not described as environmentally destructive. As such, whilst the child hears "el hacha comer la selva", potentially a manifestation of human ruination, the stanza maintains an unbroken rhythm, continuing the notion of a culture's unity with its milieu and thus neglecting to apportion any vitriolic interpretation of such consumption. Indigenous behavioural patterns are accordingly portrayed as commensurate with nature, owing to the clear worship granted to the earth and its soil upon which human life remains dependent. Though representing this sophisticated notion of sensual engagement bridging a spiritual connection, the poet nonetheless maintains a simplistic and repetitive lexicon, sustaining the accessibility of her subject matter. The repetition of "Se oyen" and "se oye" focuses the reader upon the basic instruction of listening to the drum, and furthers the motif of educating a child. The apparent linguistic simplicity also enhances the fluidity of each line's metre and the poem's overall progression, enabling the perfect reflection of the drum's own rhythm which in turn displays that of nature. This sustained flow also aligns with that conveyed by the poem's imagery, with the drum's constant beating portraying the infinite intermingling of a river's cascades, <fnote>Sara Castro-Klarén, Sylvia Molloy, Beatriz Sarlo (eds.), Women's Writing in Latin America: an anthology. (Oxford, 1991) P.28 </fnote><quote>"Rueda y rueda, se oyen los ríos en cascadas que no se cuentan". </quote>The overall effectiveness with which this unity is represented points to the poet's sense of the continuity and relationship within each expressive medium. If the drum functions as an efficacious lens, then the poem itself need serve as a projecting device of a universally beneficial engagement with nature. In constructing a patent appreciation of indigenous culture, and the unity with nature it comprises, Mistral's poem proffers then something of subtle diatribe of contemporary socio-political trends. As the critic Beth Miller has observed in a general study of Gabriela Mistral's social ideology, a synopsis of the poet's work points to a commitment to "Americanism"; the praising of Indian forms of organisation, and deep disapproval of repressive, iniquitous political systems. The focus on a return to what is traditional and spiritually nourishing, which her depiction of Indian life within "La Tierra" both functions as and represents, encompasses a eulogy of modes of life that are antithetical to the emergent and deleterious patterns of the contemporary social climate. Though her poem does not directly address or portray the debilitating onslaught of scientific progress or oppressive political systems, her powerful portrayal of a lifestyle in which artificial devices such "el hacha" noticeably do not encroach upon the earth's natural order, insinuates a reaction against a mainstream culture devoid of the reverential attitude to the land heralded by the indigenous mindset. In establishing the unity between femaleness and nature and achieving a motherly tone of instruction, the poem's trajectory arguably also insinuates an endeavour to reclaim society's educational modes, and impede the continual imposing of a male-dominated, progress-orientated system of values and customs. Through utilising poetry to feminise the didactic voice, the poet aspires to redirect the "Niño" to a purer life away from an isolated, spiritually-void existence. <fnote>Beth Miller (ed.), Women in Hispanic Literature, Icons and Fallen Idols. (London, 1983) P.219 </fnote>The repeated employment of simple linguistic and rhythmic techniques, both within "La Tierra" and her work as a whole, substantiates Mistral's desire to incorporate rural experiences and elevate provincial traditions to a plane of higher cultural value than the "urban artifice" she perceived within the opposing metropolitan environment. Whilst influenced by the advance of modernism, her poetry remains grounded in the universal, avoiding the esoteric, Classical allusions of the Rubendarian School. "La Tierra" is significant however in neglecting to use Christian references, and represents an unusual choice of vernacular given the poet's sustained use of biblical symbolism and imagery throughout her poetic career. Similarly, the poem refrains from illustrating specific locations or objects of her upbringing in the village of Vicuña in the Elqui valley. This absence, both of classical references and those pertaining to her own parochial, Christian background, proves then congruent with the poet's desire to project an accolade of a generic Indian culture, universalising and making accessible her praise of a harmonious form of life. Her great affinity for the people and traditions of rural Chile, combined with her own education in didactic methods as a teacher, informs a yearning to exalt and connect with a lifestyle rooted in a rudimentary and appreciative interaction with the earth's natural forces. <fnote>Sara Castro-Klarén, Sylvia Molloy, Beatriz Sarlo (eds.), Women's Writing in Latin America: an anthology. (Oxford, 1991) P.28 </fnote><fnote>Sidonia Carmen Rosenbaum, Modern Women Poets of Spanish America. (1945, Westport, Connecticut) P.178 </fnote><fnote>Manuel Pedro Gonzalez, "Profile of a Great Woman", Hispania, (Dec., 1958), pp. 427-430. P.430 </fnote><fnote>Sidonia Carmen Rosenbaum, Modern Women Poets of Spanish America. (1945, Westport, Connecticut) P.172 </fnote>The poem's final stanza returns to the poet's directing of the child, whom she now addresses in an even more comforting tone, preparing him for the ultimate event of her death. The benefit of sensory engagement with the earth is reinforced, becoming a source of solace, with the intimacy of the physical embrace displayed by "pecho a pecho ponte con ella" consoling the bereaved child. Though maintaining the established didactic tone, the poet introduces a degree of ambiguity in her instruction, the effect of which enhances her portrayal of "ella" as representing both her in the maternal role and nature itself, and thus further substantiating their interconnectedness. This obliqueness of identity is maintained by the outcome of the child's connection, with the broken figure of "la madre" returning whole. The poet achieves a notion of the mother returning to its source, death encompassing a positive outcome in facilitating a reconciliation of the earth's fragmented parts. The poet's reassuring of her child stems from personal experience of this sensory interaction, relating that the earth "me tenía y que me entrega", testifying that he has nothing to fear. Using verbs conjugated in the imperfect tense furthers her emphasis of the earth as a perpetual and pervasive force, sustaining the notion of nature's basic continuity and the benevolence bestowed upon those who maintain their innate closeness to it. The final alternate line rhyming couplet between "entrega" and "entera" further emphasises the image of a realised harmony, achieving a prominent juxtaposing of the poem's main notions of nature's totality and its nourishing effect on those who possess the requisite consciousness of its beneficence. Interaction with the earth ultimately enables her child to witness the accomplishing of her role, becoming guided into the fulfilling relationship with nature established by the essential spirituality of his Indian cultural background. In conclusion, "La Tierra" reflects a desire to use poetry as medium to fulfil a maternal role denied in physical form. The employment of a simplistic vocabulary and universal symbols, consolidated by a strong and basic rhythm, establishes a childish tone which facilitates the projection of an accessible set of ideas. The poem's potent delineation of the earth's central role in the totality of nature, and the ability of Indian culture to convey and connect with this unity, effectively glorifies the cultural and spiritual framework of a marginalised people within the poet's contemporary social context. Furthermore, the repeated use of imperatives confirms an instructive tone, in which the poet adopts the position of an affectionate mother who, through ushering her child into an appreciation of nature, can praise the indigenous cultural background and protect him from an upbringing devoid of spiritual fulfilment. The anonymous child's significance, as a symbol of an untutored impressionable individual, acquires a broader resonance in representing a multitude of youth, reflecting the poet's dual purpose of satisfying her own desire of motherhood and propagating a reaction to social and political trends which insidiously alienate her populace from a fundamental and fulfilling existence. In feminising the notion of poetic responsibility, Mistral elucidates the inherent connection between femaleness and nature, with her poem culminating in an ambiguous representation, substantiating their interconnectedness. For the poet, the spirituality intrinsic to the poem's generic indigenous culture is rooted in a profoundly reverential approach to the earth, derived as a direct result of sensory engagement with the natural forces relayed by the "tamblor indio". Though not employing an overtly polemical tone, "La Tierra's" lauding of this cultural framework suggests a strong affinity for rural traditions, implying something of a reaction against contemporary society's tendency to devalue and conspire against nature. The poem aspires towards the interlinked tasks of the empowering of the female and eliciting a return to natural forces, ultimately concluding that only through returning to a natural sphere can her child overcome dislocation and reunite with the earth's totality. 