The conquest of the Inca empire in 1532 saw the creation of a nascent model of colonial government, beginning a period in which Spain would endeavour to establish control over its new territory. Owing to its erstwhile conquering successes, Spain had an established tradition of assimilation, bringing conquered peoples under the crown's jurisdiction through conversion and allegiance to the Catholic Church. The notion of a 'spiritual conquest' pertained to the degree to which, following initial military and political subjugation, the colonists were able to proselytize the various indigenous inhabitants of its newly acquired regions. By the time of the conquest of Peru however, enthusiasm for evangelization had declined markedly within the Church and governmental authorities, with circumstances in Peru itself further constraining the enactment of a theological conquest. Internecine feuding, sustained Indian insurgency, and an inauspicious set of geographical facets meant that indigenous groups largely retained their traditional spiritual tenets in the initial years. However, even during the proceeding years of greater royal colonial control and organization of the Indians under Francisco de Toledo's Viceroyalty, full evangelization became effectively marginalized by the priority of establishing control over a part of the crown's empire that had strayed unpalatably far into private hands. As such, whilst a varying degree of "syncretism" occurred in indigenous communities, the colonists were to prove ultimately uncommitted to altering parochial traditions deemed unthreatening to power. Congruently then, from the outset of Spain's presence in Peru conversions were sought as a means of acculturating and assimilating distinguished local caciques of the former order under a new religious framework, coinciding with the extirpation of that of the old. Using religious conversion as part of the integration of eminent native contingents, the Spanish were from the beginning able to insert themselves as overlords of an existing hierarchical structure in place of their predecessors. Evangelization became utilized as a political expedient, a noble-orientated policy of Christianization being adopted without an extensive aspiration to radically subvert the spiritual worlds of the politically-negligible masses of the lower strata. Whilst sixteenth century Peru did not then witness a widespread and absolute alteration of the Andean spiritual world, evangelization served as an efficacious instrument of requisite assimilation, propagation of the Catholic paradigm aiding the creation of a pervasive imperial structure. <fnote>Edwin Williamson, The Penguin History of Latin America. (London, 1992) P.101 </fnote>The conquest of Peru, like its Aztec precursor, provided the Catholic authorities with access to a highly populated area of the New World. Sixteenth-century Peru however was not to witness a pervasive conversion of the pagan masses, as for the Spanish crown and its conquistadores, motivation for conquest was more firmly rooted in secular, material aspirations. Thus, the superimposing of Churches onto existing indigenous religious sites, such as those located around Cuzco and Lima, served more as means to acquire wealth than as exercises in the destruction of temples of heathen worship. Belief in the efficacy of evangelization, formerly promoted as the justification and focus for Spanish presence in the Americas, had eroded substantially as a result of practical experience. Colonial authorities became somewhat less concerned with achieving the widespread, unequivocal conversion that had theoretically provided the impetus for previous conquests. Tellingly, there was no grandiose promotion equivalent to the Aztec conquest's symbolic deployment of twelve Franciscan friars at Veracruz in 1524. Indeed in Peru the Church established itself as being far more orientated towards the resident Spaniards than to their indigenous subjects. Whilst the institution had around 350 priests by the 1560s, its clergy had principally tended to the spiritual welfare of their countrymen, with missionary endeavour confined to the small-scale activity of the secular clergy. Aside from the general disinclination, Peru's cultural and geographical facets provided further obstacles to any latent program. The Andean regions housed a variety of native peoples, many of whom were dispersed in the remote and formidable physical terrains outside of the empire's main cities. These assorted groups spoke numerous, often markedly different languages and many had traditionally maintained little contact with their Inca lords in the years preceding the Spanish invasion, making them more resistant to intervention in their communities than had previously been encountered. Consequently, circumstances peculiar to the new territory and its conquest's falling late in Spain's New World invasion meant that by Peru's post-conquest years evangelizing aspirations had receded behind the more pragmatic emphasis on what was materially obtainable. These initial years then witnessed a relative apathy for the extensive spread of the Catholic faith, alteration of indigenous spiritual tenets having subsided markedly from the agenda. <fnote>Henry F. Dobyns and Paul L. Doughty, Peru, A Cultural History. (New York, 1986) P.84 </fnote><fnote>Edwin Williamson, The Penguin History of Latin America. (London, 1992) P.98 </fnote><fnote>Henry F. Dobyns and Paul L. Doughty, Peru, A Cultural History. (New York, 1986) P.83 </fnote><fnote>Mark A. Burkholder and Lyman L. Johnson, Colonial Latin America. (Oxford, 1994) P.85 </fnote>The Spanish were nevertheless from the outset ardent and successful in speedily extirpating the Inca nobility's official religion, destroying religious ties and beliefs that conflicted with the new state paradigm upon which their authority rested. Simultaneously removing non-compliant nobles and suppressing the Inca's elite religion became paramount to subverting the sovereignty, both political and spiritual, of the former order. Aside from the early revolts, the most significant of which was Manco Inca's rebellion, the Spaniards achieved marked success in pacifying regions and consolidating their position. The colonists were fully aware that the replacement of the existing aristocracy with members of the conquering contingent would provide the principal avenue towards bolstering a tenuous hold on the state. Nevertheless, the rudimentary structure continued with evangelization, combined with political and economic incentive, serving as the central component in the incorporation of compliant members of the Inca and rural nobility after their military and political subjugation. Evangelization enabled then the creation of formal religious and cultural connections with distinguished figures, facilitating the creation of a superstructure. Such an approach patently fulfilled a political need, appeasing latent Indian resistance and enabling the conquerors to insert themselves at the apex of a pre-established, stratified imperial structure. Accordingly, the colonists favoured the continuation of existing provincial rule, maintaining through local caciques a system of indirect governance based on hereditary figures in a similar way that the Incas had done. Forcing compliance with, if not necessarily belief in the new state's Catholic faith, proved then politically advantageous, with important regional links being established in order absorb dominant local figures. <fnote>Henry F. Dobyns and Paul L. Doughty, Peru, A Cultural History. (New York, 1986) P.64 </fnote><fnote>Henry F. Dobyns and Paul L. Doughty, Peru, A Cultural History. (New York, 1986) P.78 </fnote>Whilst the Spanish colonists achieved success in stabilizing their position, the initial post-conquest years were not to witness any sustained extension of such 'spiritual conquest'. Whilst they could hardly be deemed to be self-governing, the immediate post-conquest period afforded the colonists a degree of autonomy, the Crown it seems being more focused on activities elsewhere in its empire. As such, despite the appointment of a Viceroy in 1542, the conquerors were largely unrestrained by royal controls. Initially dividing into factions loyal to the leading conquistadores of Francisco Pizarro and Diego de Almagro, the fierce competition for the untapped resources of the land and its dormant labour force incited a period of civil and political turbulence. Consequently, internal instability would retard efforts to pacify conquered territories, manifest in the widespread Indian revolts, meaning that evangelization gained no strong footing or impetus. Whilst the encomienda system became established early, commonly the only contact maintained between overlord and subject became the yearly exchange of tribute granted to the encomendero, with Spanish culture and its Catholic religion being concentrated within the cities. Much the Indian population did not then endure an absolute alteration of their spiritual worlds and persisted in their worship of traditional provincial huacas, the continuance of which at times inspired native militant resistance. Even by the middle of the sixteenth-century when Spain had established a more substantial presence in Peru, native uprisings would continue to occur, their impetus principally deriving from a spiritual perspective. A salient example of such response was that of the 'Taki Onqoy' movement of the 1560s, which saw disaffected, exploited indigenous groups revive their traditional beliefs to generate animosity towards those imposed upon them. As such, the disease epidemics that had ravaged many regions were appropriated in a spiritual context; neglect of original deities being interpreted as the reason for and solution to the contemporary crisis of political subjugation. Such resultant native insurgency exemplified that spiritual tenets could be crucially intertwined with compliance, insufficient indigenous spiritual integration under the Catholic paradigm at times jeopardizing the new state's authority. <fnote>Charles Gibson (In Leslie Bethell, Colonial Spanish America (Cambridge, 1987)P.367) </fnote><fnote>Henry F. Dobyns and Paul L. Doughty, Peru, A Cultural History. (New York, 1986) P.84 </fnote><fnote>James Lockhart, Spanish Peru, 1532-1560, A Colonial Society. (London, 1968) P.206 </fnote><fnote>Edwin Williamson, The Penguin History of Latin America. (London, 1992) P.86 </fnote>The proceeding years of Francisco de Toledo's Viceroyalty however saw fuller Royal control and extension of Christianization. The encomienda system of apportioning varying amounts of labour to individual Spaniards become subject to more control, coinciding with the use of the "reducciones" policy. Under this program, native peoples became forcibly resettled away from their traditional lands into areas around the main cities, enduring a greater attempt to inculcate them in the state principles. Whilst the program represented a more concerted effort to redirect native lives, its practical results served to reinforce existing trends. Specifically, that success in evangelization materialized as highly varied, native proximity and interaction with the epicentres of Hispanic culture acting as the fundamental determinant of acculturation. The efforts towards conversion often lead to the syncretism of Andean and Catholic beliefs, the levels of which naturally differed between regions. Toledo's chief aim was however to use Christianization as part of a more rigid organization of Andean peoples, propagating the official monotheistic religion at the centre of the labour system while phasing out the privately operated encomiendas. From the perspective of colonial government then, manipulation of parochial spiritual tenets did not aspire to a spiritual overhaul, it being more concerned with a desire to extend control. Though the Crown certainly benefited from the natives' adoption of religion and customs where achieved, as long as Indians fulfilled the requisites of tribute they were largely left to their own devices. <fnote>Edwin Williamson, The Penguin History of Latin America. (London, 1992) P.101 </fnote><fnote>Sabine MacCormack, '"The Heart Has Its Reasons": Predicaments of Missionary Christianity in Early Colonial Peru', Hispanic American Historical Review, 65 (1985), pp. 443-466. P.453 </fnote><fnote>James Lockhart, Spanish Peru, 1532-1560, A Colonial Society. (London, 1968) P.206 </fnote>In conclusion, the success of the 'spiritual conquest' of Peru proved varied in the sixteenth-century, the degree to which it was sought pertaining to its perceived utility. Whilst it would be spurious to regard the Crown as completely apathetic towards a more widespread evangelization, conversions were principally pursued selectively to establish imperative political ties and bolster its position. Even after the turbulent years of the immediate post-conquest period, and the resultant greater control over Andean groups, the authorities proved ultimately unsuccessful in eradicating many traditional spiritual tenets with infiltration into this sphere resulting in varying levels of 'syncretism'. The extent of acculturation, and the conversion to Catholicism within it, seemingly correlated directly with the proximity of groups to Spanish culture in the cities. Whilst a total destruction of indigenous beliefs had not then occurred by the end of the sixteenth-century, the crown had wrested control of Peru from private hands and shepherded the multitudinous native groups into a structure where it occupied a key position and figured prominently in the sharing of the empire's profits. Thus, whilst absolute penetration of the Andean spiritual core did palpably not occur, the superimposing of the Catholic model achieved an organizational framework. The first century in Peru culminated in a scenario that was palatable if not ideal to the authorities, where consolidating the Crown and its Church's authority created a productive economic and political structure despite varying success in religious subjugation. 