In common with the views in the western media and academia which he aims to disprove and which point to China as the next rising 'super power' and a threat to American hegemony, Gerry Segal's analysis of China is explicitly based on realist assumptions. In many respects Segal's opinion, supported by evidence of a declining Chinese economy; a defensive and regionally-bound military and an incompetent government lacking in ideology, are convincing in disproving China's perceived or potential world status. However, as Shaun Breslin points out: China does matter - but how and who for? The answer to this question will differ according to different theoretical approaches. Clearly, the assumption on Segal's part that international relations is the arena of superpowers and rivalry led him to conclude that China was not a terribly important country. However, the aim of this essay is to expose the importance of China through a theoretical approach which places China within a larger capitalist world order. This approach will allow the recognition of non-state actors, in particular, multi-national corporations, the Chinese public and the relationship of these actors with the state. <fnote>Segal, G. (1999) "Does China Matter?" Foreign Affairs Vol. 78 No. 5 </fnote><fnote>Breslin, S. (2004) (eds. Buzan, B. and Foot, R.) Does China matter?: a reassessment: essays in memory of Gerald Segal Routledge: London, p. 113 </fnote>Segal repeatedly highlights China's potential importance: "China is better understood as a theoretical power...", but fails to identify any immediate importance. This essay, on the contrary, will argue that China has immediate importance and that any potential importance resulting from this could significantly affect the prevalent, capitalist, world order. The following aspects of China's global importance will be addressed: <fnote>Segal, G. (1999) "Does China Matter?" Foreign Affairs Vol. 78 No. 5, p. 1 </fnote>The role of China as the source of cheap products for the West, as a result of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and a huge and cheap Chinese workforce. The importance of the above to a broader analysis of global capitalism, where it will be argued that, contrary to realist analyses, states and MNCs are to a large extent, governed by the contradictions of capitalism and possess relatively little potential for voluntaristic action. China, as an essential element to the temporary resolution of the contradictions of capitalism will thereby be identified. An assessment of the potential 'power' of China as a result of these contradictions which leaves both domestic China and global capitalism vulnerable to change and upheaval. The role of FDI in China has been highlighted as a key element of economic reform in China and a possible source of economic growth: "foreign firms, either directly or indirectly, have accounted for approximately three fourths of China's exports". Breslin argues that China has become "all but dependent on export growth as an engine of overall domestic economic growth". FDI in China has also had significant effects on the rest of the world. <fnote>Gilpin, R. (2000) The challenge of global capitalism : the world economy in the 21st century Princeton University Press, p. 283 </fnote><fnote>Breslin, S. (2005) "Power and Production: rethinking China's global economic role." Review of International Studies Vol. 31, p. 738 </fnote>The decreasing prices in material goods in Europe and the US are largely due to China's new role as the 'workshop of the world'. As the source of cheap, manufactured products which are exported to "more lucrative markets in the developed world", China can be seen to sustain our current way of life. A way of life which is increasingly embracing a "disposable", "wear-once" culture, and an ever-growing desire to spend on material possessions. It is for this reason that China is of immediate importance. Not only does its cheap labour force mean that the prices of our clothes, computers and cars are less expensive than they might otherwise be, but "it is revolutionising the relative prices of labour, capital, goods and assets in a way that has never happened so quickly before". It could be argued that the importance of cheap labour to the 'western lifestyle' is not a new phenomenon and that countries such as Bangladesh, India or the Philippines have the same importance attached to them. However, there is a distinguishing factor between China and these other countries: the vast size of its population and therefore its potential workforce. China's encouragement of foreign investment has "effectively doubled the global labour force, hugely boosting the world's potential output". Its effects do not go unnoticed in other developing countries and even in Japan which feels economic pressure "as production moves to China, where wages are just 4 percent of comparable Japanese manufacturing wages". The opening of China's workforce to foreign companies and its resulting role in the current nature of capitalism, thus clearly plays an important role in the world today, from the cheap products available to consumers throughout the developed world, to the increase in competition among developing countries, particularly in Asia. <fnote>Breslin, S. (2004) (eds. Buzan, B. and Foot, R.) Does China matter?: a reassessment: essays in memory of Gerald Segal Routledge: London, p. 113 </fnote><fnote>(2005) "How China runs the world economy" The Economist Vol. 376, Issue 8437 </fnote><fnote>(2005) "How China runs the world economy" The Economist Vol. 376, Issue 8437, Abstract </fnote><fnote>Breslin, S. (2004) (eds. Buzan, B. and Foot, R.) Does China matter?: a reassessment: essays in memory of Gerald Segal Routledge: London, p. 116 </fnote>The immediate importance of China as described above, will now be placed within the larger context of global capitalism in order to highlight the importance of China's role in reconciling the contradictions of capitalism. Many commentators point to China's economic dependence on the US, while others argue that the US could not sustain its current hegemony without China's exports. An appreciation of these two opinions as evidence of a inter-dependent relationship demonstrates the force of global capitalism which "is characterised by profound frictions and conflicts". <fnote>Gamble, A (1999) Marxism and Social Science (Gamble, A. ed.) London: Macmillan Press Ltd p.103 </fnote>China has an economic history as an isolationist and largely autarkic state. This obviously includes the post-revolutionary Maoist years of the twentieth century but also dates back hundreds of years prior to communist China. The motivations behind opening the doors of the Chinese market in the 1970s must be addressed to establish why such a revolutionary change in policy took place. Two factors can explain this decision: firstly, an awareness on the part of the Chinese government that China was "being out performed by its neighbours, most irksomely by Taiwan", which as described above, is a problem which has been redressed following the introduction of FDI. Secondly, there was a need to reinforce legitimacy in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) following the disastrous results of the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution which forbad the use of international trade to promote economic growth. Evidently, the spread of global capitalism had meant to Xiaoping that "No country (could) now develop by closing its door..." Further evidence of China's dependence on the benefits of global capitalism can be exposed by observing China's performance in international institutions such as the UN Security Council and more significantly, the WTO, where it "has been acting for the most part as a system-maintainer, not a system-reformer or system-transforming revolutionary". While some may argue this is simply indicative of an apathy towards or unwillingness to get involved with international affairs, it is also clearly linked to the fact that at present, China would have too much to lose through questioning the prevailing order. <fnote>White, G. (1991) The Chinese state in the era of economic reform : the road to crisis London : Macmillan, p. 3 </fnote><fnote>Xiaoping, D. as quoted in Kelly, J. (1985) "China: It cannot harm us" Time January 14, 1985 Vol. 125 No. 2 </fnote><fnote>Kim, S. S. (2004) (eds. Buzan, B. and Foot, R.) Does China matter?: a reassessment: essays in memory of Gerald Segal Routledge: London, p. 51 </fnote>The West and particularly the US is also victim to this idea of constraint due to dependence. In the same way that China needs capital investment from the rest of the world, the rest of the world needs China. The foundation of this relationship is what Arrighi refers to as "a capitalist logic of power - a logic, that is, in which command over economic capital constitutes the basis of the pursuit of power". While the relationship between the accumulation of capital and the accumulation of power cannot be denied, Arrighi's emphasis on the pursuit of power and therefore the element of voluntarism in capital accumulation, is perhaps still connected to a realist analysis of power rivalry. For he goes on to suggest that because of the geographical move of capital to China, China will have the opportunity to balance "economic and political power...as the regional hegemon" and to place itself "in a much more competitive position vis-à-vis the United States". However, it might perhaps be more useful is to sideline this emphasis on state power politics, and assess instead China's important position in simply sustaining global capitalism. <fnote>Arrighi, G. (2005) "Hegemony Unravelling" New Left Review Vol. 32 Mar/Apr 2005, p. 28 </fnote><fnote>Arrighi, G. (2005) "Hegemony Unravelling" New Left Review Vol. 32 Mar/Apr 2005, p. 39 </fnote>The three main contradictions of capitalism as described and identified by Marx prove useful in exposing China's importance to the capitalist world order. Firstly, "the inherent contradiction in capitalism between its capacity to produce goods and the capacity of consumers to purchase those goods" is evident in the move of production to China. Arguably, this is evidence of a core-periphery relationship between Western consumers and Chinese labourers. It would be completely impossible to imagine British textile workers producing clothes for our high streets and for British companies to maintain their current profits without increasing the price of the clothes. Others may argue that this spatial separation between the producer and the consumer does not exist, as Chinese people themselves are increasingly benefiting from the products they produce. However, as will be argued in the last section of the essay, at present the size of the purchasing, middle class in China is not sufficiently large to disprove a core-periphery analysis. <fnote>Gilpin, R. (1987) The political economy of international relations Oxford : Princeton University Press, p. 36 </fnote>Secondly, "the law of concentration (or accumulation)...whereby, competition forces the capitalists to increase their efficiency and capital investment or risk extinction" has arguably been reconciled by the introduction of China into international economics. A successful company increases efficiency by producing a sellable and appealing product using minimal production costs. Clearly, as described earlier in the essay, China provides minimal cost production, as Anita Chan points out "the minimum wage in China is the lowest possible price at which the government can sell their workers' labour in international markets..." The competitive logic of capitalism means that following the move of one company to China, others must move "citing the fact that competitors have already gone and they cannot compete if they don't follow". <fnote>Gilpin, R. (1987) The political economy of international relations Oxford : Princeton University Press, p. 36 </fnote><fnote>Chan, A. (2001) China's Workers under Assault: The exploitation of labour in a globalising economy East Gate: New York, p. 12 </fnote><fnote>Breslin, B. (2005) "Power and Production: rethinking China's global economic role." Review of International Studies Vol. 31, p. 753 </fnote>Thirdly, Marx identifies an unavoidable fall in the rate of profit due to the fact that as industries expand, they must find ways of investing the surplus capital which they accumulate. But, to employ more people and increase production will eventually result in a fall in the rate of profit despite an increase in the rate of surplus. Gilpin contends that classical liberal economists believe that "a solution could be found through such countervailing devices as the export of capital and manufactured goods". To concede this, is to demonstrate the importance of China as one of the main recipients of exported capital. <fnote>Gilpin, R. (1987) The political economy of international relations Oxford : Princeton University Press, p. 36 </fnote><quote>"An increasing number of major multinational companies do not produce anything themselves anymore, leaving the production process to contractors..." </quote><fnote>Breslin, B. (2005) "Power and Production: rethinking China's global economic role." Review of International Studies Vol. 31, p. 747 </fnote>This statement is indicative of the contradictions of capitalism described above. The most successful and therefore, most competitive companies in the world increasingly rely on China's seemingly unlimited workforce as a source of cheap production and greater profits. In some instances, it may seem that foreign investment in China has its origins in similarly underdeveloped countries such as Taiwan. What must be recognised is that countries such as Taiwan represent an intermediary stage of a process which originates in near monopoly-status companies. For example, the largest footwear factory in the world which is located in China, is a Taiwanese-run enterprise that produces running shoes for Addidas, Nike, Reebok and other major (American or European) brand names. To summarise, China does matter: in fact its role as the biggest and ever-growing production force in a chain of densely-networked companies and contractors, is indispensable to the current capitalist world order. <fnote>Chan, A. (2001) China's Workers under Assault: The exploitation of labour in a globalising economy East Gate: New York, p. 12 </fnote>This chain, as argued above, is born out of the contradictions of capitalism. This leaves such a system open and susceptible to vulnerabilities. The final section of this essay will discuss the possible disruption of such a chain with reference to China's domestic politics and the strain its role in the chain puts on domestic politics, thereby exposing the potential importance of China to the global order. Three factors can be identified which could contribute to instability and therefore change in China's political situation. Firstly, increasing unemployment, the causes of which can be directly associated to China's role in global capitalism, in particular the government's decision to join the WTO. The State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) of the 1950s and 1960s, while inefficient and to a large extent, redundant, did provide employment to millions of workers across China. However, as Lardy points out, if China continues to subsidise these SOEs, the efficiency gains of WTO membership will fall far short of what studies postulate. Privatisation or abolition of SOEs will mean and has meant significant increases in unemployment. The importation of machinery and equipment to aid production and efficiency, thereby further reducing costs has also resulted in further lay-offs. In 2002 it was estimated that employment in the automobile industry was expected to fall by 500,000 and in agriculture by 11 million. These figures may seem insignificant in a population of over one billion. However, what should be noted is, as An Chen describes, the state itself lacks adequate financial means to establish a nationwide system of social welfare benefits for the poorer sections", leaving the unemployed no means of subsistence. <fnote>Lardy, N. R. (2002) Integrating China into the Global Economy Brookings: Washington DC, p. 122 </fnote><fnote>Lardy, N. R. (2002) Integrating China into the Global Economy Brookings: Washington DC, p. 106 </fnote><fnote>Chen, A. (2003) "Rising Class Politics and its Impact on China's Path to Democracy", Democratisation, Vol. 10, No. 2, p. 151 </fnote>Secondly, China's Gini coefficient has jumped rapidly during the last twenty years and reached 43.4 in 2003. Inequality is stark in China with the poorest 20% taking up just 6% of all income. Inequality is an important source for instability, most significantly when people are aware of it. There is evidence to suggest that this consciousness of comparative inequality can only have increased in recent years. Growth and wealth is centred along the east coast of China, particularly among the four 'Special Economic Zones'. However, there have been rapid increases in internal migration from rural areas to cities due to the perceived prosperity of workers there. This migration has ensured a constant supply of willing workers, particularly for foreign-invested enterprises. However, it has also surely meant a spread of knowledge and consciousness of inequality within China. Furthermore, the beneficiaries of economic growth, unlike during the Maoist years, are now free to indulge their wealth in material goods, previously unavailable to them. This disparity in wealth is evident to any individual in China where "animosity towards wide socio-economic disparities is still deeply rooted in the psyche of most Chinese citizens, particularly the poor". <fnote> URL  </fnote><fnote>Chen, A. (2003) "Rising Class Politics and its Impact on China's Path to Democracy", Democratisation, Vol. 10, No. 2, p. 148 </fnote>Lastly, following the decline of ideology as a legitimating force for the CCP, the importance of providing the people with what they want should not be underestimated. Increasingly, this has meant the opportunity to purchase 'western' goods such as cars, fridges and air conditioners. However, as the production force for such products, this as Marx would point out, is almost impossible. Clearly, many Chinese people have benefited from consumerism; however, it will be many years before the country will have a sizable wealthy middle class, and until there is a middle class majority in China, a disgruntled and unsatisfied working class will remain the majority, which combined with the other two factors undoubtedly form the source of potential upheaval within China. The importance of workers to the Chinese government and indeed their own perceived importance should not be underestimated. Arguably, the decision to take military action during the Tiananmen Square demonstrations of May 1989, was triggered by the addition of workers to what began as a student protest. <fnote>Gilpin, R. (2000) The challenge of global capitalism : the world economy in the 21st century Princeton University Press, p. 285 </fnote>To conclude, Segal's conclusion that China is not a terribly important country has been contended not through a discussion of Segal's own terms of analysis, but through an analysis which stems from an alternative overall approach. It has been argued that by placing China within a capitalist world order, one can appreciate its significance to both the lifestyle of millions of people around the world and also to the continuance of global capitalism in its current form. Key to this argument, is an appreciation of the ever-changing and non-static nature of global politics, as they respond to the constant need to reconcile the inherent contradictions of capitalism. In the final section of the essay, the vulnerabilities of such a system have been exposed, with particular reference to China's domestic politics. This is perhaps indicative of the fact that despite claims by institutions such as the IMF and WTO, economics and politics remain distinctly separate issues in the eyes of capitalists in multi-national corporations, thereby allowing the free movement of capital without the hindrance of political concerns. This is most evident in the fact that despite claims of a replacement "of realpolitik in rationalisations of western policy by human rights considerations", the production targets of western companies rely on the exploitation and abuse of the human rights of Chinese workers. Repeatedly in this essay, the factor of China's sheer size has proved important. It is what distinguishes it from other producers in the Asian region and what potentially will prevent the instabilities described above, from manifesting themselves in the form of a mass workers' movement. Despite this, the inequalities in China, related to growing corruption, are arguably of such significance that change in some form is inevitable. This change, due to China's immediate importance in the global order, will undoubtedly have marked effects on the world and its people. <fnote>Freedman, L. (2004) (eds. Buzan, B. and Foot, R.) Does China matter?: a reassessment: essays in memory of Gerald Segal Routledge: London, p. 33 </fnote>