The description in the title of this essay of the capitalist social order as being antagonistic and crisis prone is not a sufficient summary of Marx's conception. His conception does not simply consist of a description of the capitalist social order, but of the notion that it is in fact antagonisms and the tendency towards crisis which constitute the very essence or actuality of capitalism. This dialectical account of the capitalist social order is what distinguishes Marx from other IPE theorists, who arguably have devoted their lives and work to reconciling the antagonisms and crises of the capitalist social order without addressing their causes. Through the use of immanent criticism and historical dialecticism, Marx aimed to expose the actuality of capital, "not as a totality ossified into a thing, but a living, mobile social relation". The two words social and relation are key to understanding this conception. For as the essay title suggests, his conception identifies at its foundation, the social basis of the capitalist order. In other words, capitalism cannot be removed from its human source of production and reproduction, and as with all social relations, their essence and being constitutes and relies upon antagonisms and contradictions. <fnote>Desai, M. (2002) Marx's Revenge Verso: London, p. 55 </fnote><fnote>Bensaïd, D. (2002) Marx for our times Verso: London, p. 245 </fnote>Here, the importance of Marx's dialectical method must be highlighted. This essay aims to evaluate Marx's conception through an assessment of its empirical or existing applicability, therefore the method of his conception must be accepted. Fred Moseley argues that "the widespread criticisms of Marx's theory...are erroneous because these criticisms presume a logical method...that is fundamentally different to Marx's own logical method." To evaluate Marx's conception on a theoretical basis would therefore require an analysis of dialectical method. Yet, for the purposes of this essay, an empirical evaluation will prove more useful to an understanding of International Political Economics. <fnote>Moseley, F. (1993) Marx's method in Capital : a re-examination Humanities Press Atlantic Highlands, N.J. p. 7 </fnote>The starting point should be an identification of what the capitalist order means or how it appears to an IPE student for this is where Marx started. In a similar way to the way Smith, Ricardo and other political economists observed a tendencial fall in the rate of profit - an idea that became central to classical political economy, current IPE theorists observe and study the 'globalisation of capital'. What Marx did was to expose how the profit rate was determined, and by extension of his conception of antagonism, this essay will evaluate the applicability of this conception to the observable phenomenon of the 'globalisation of capital'. The argument will progress as follows: <fnote>Desai, M. (2002) Marx's Revenge Verso: London, p. 75 </fnote>An explanation of the foundation of Marx's argument as based on the necessity of class conflict and the interdependent relationship between the capitalist and the worker. An examination of examples of the contradictions which result from this antagonistic relationship, which show themselves or appear to us in the form of tendencies such as the fall in the rate of profit. The application of Marx's conception of the capitalist social order to the 'globalisation of capital', particularly, the internationalisation of production. As Meghnad Desai points out, "the essence of Marx's theory is that cycles arise from a basic antagonism between labour and capital, while at the same time, they are mutually interdependent". Marx demonstrates that this is the result of the commodification of labour, making the distinction between necessary labour time - the time it takes for a worker to reproduce his or her wages, and surplus labour time - the remaining time that he or she works in a day, which as Marx argues, is the source of profit. Therefore, without the surplus labour time provided by a human worker, a capitalist can make no profit and yet as the 'bearer' of the economic law of capital, the goal and motivation of a capitalist is profit. This dependence is reciprocated by the worker who finds him/herself in a capitalist social order and requires employment in order to sustain subsistence. <fnote>Desai, M. (2002) Marx's Revenge Verso: London, p. 68 </fnote><fnote>Booth, W. J. (1989) "Examining Capitalism: The method of Marx's political economy" Political Studies Vol. 37, no. 4, p. 619 </fnote>The afore mentioned economic law of capital which requires the accumulation of capital through profit, and which originates from primitive, private accumulation, can therefore be seen to be subject to "counteracting influences, (for example, the dependence on the worker)...checking and cancelling the effect of the general law and giving it simply the character of a tendency". Tendencies, such as the tendency of the fall in the rate of profit are the observable economic or political consequences which form the appearance of capitalism. These tendencies to use Marx's words, provide the form within which the contradictions of labour/capital antagonism, (or class conflict), have room to move. <fnote>(Brackets added.) Bensaïd, D. (2002) Marx for our times Verso: London, p. 280 </fnote><fnote>Marx, K. Capital Vol. 1 as quoted in Bensaïd, D. (2002) Marx for our times Verso: London, p. 244 </fnote>An example of a contradiction which has found 'room to move' in the tendencial fall in the rate of profit is that between a move to develop the productive forces without limit and the need to confine the development of the productive forces within the limits of capitalist social relations of production. The need to compete compels the capitalist to discover and use more efficient means of production. This inevitably results in the employment of less workers due to an introduction of efficient machinery and technology, and/or a reduction of wages in order to reduce the cost of necessary labour time. Evidently, both consequences run counter to the interdependent relationship of the worker and capitalist described above. Capital therefore is in danger of losing the surplus labour time on which it relies. In Marx's own words: "the higher the development of capital, the more it appears as a barrier to production, and therefore also to consumption..." And yet, the compulsion toward the higher development of capital is ever-increasingly evident. <fnote>Clarke, S. in (eds. Albritton. R., Itoh, M., Westra, R., amd Zuege, A.) (2001) Phases of capitalist development : booms, crises and globalizations Palgrave: Basingstoke, p. 85 </fnote><fnote>Marx, K. (1939) Grundrisse the Rise and Downfall of Capital in McLellan, D. (1977) Karl Marx, Selected Writings OUP, p. 365 </fnote>Another example is "the inherent contradiction in capitalism between its capacity to produce goods and the capacity of consumers to purchase those goods". When the consumer and producer is one and the same person, the capitalist is faced with the problem of creating a profit where the worker/consumer requires high enough wages to purchase the products he/she produces. This puts extreme limits on the proportion of surplus labour time that a capitalist can obtain from a worker. This contradiction has found its 'room to move' in the tendency to geographically separate the producer from the consumer, which will be discussed below. <fnote>Gilpin, R. (1987) The political economy of international relations Oxford : Princeton University Press, p. 36 </fnote>We now turn to the observable phenomenon of the 'globalisation of capital' which has been linked to tendencies such as the fall in the rate of profit and the geographical separation of the consumer from the producer. For example, the decline of the automobile industries in developed countries such as Britain and Germany is arguably indicative of a need to prevent further decline of the rate of profit. With the introduction of efficient technology and machinery, the owners of the means of production have faced a crisis stage in fall in the rate of profit. This results from the fact that labour power becomes redundant as soon as it is no longer necessary to employ it for enough hours in the day to produce surplus capital. However, as evident within the automobile industry, an alternative source of labour can and has been found in the developing world thereby globalising or internationalising the production and reproduction of capital. A prime example, is the growth of foreign direct investment in places like China, where "the minimum wage...is the lowest possible price at which the government can sell their workers' labour in international markets...".This is supported by Simon Clarke who points out that "the tendency to develop the productive forces without limit, and the need to confine the development of the productive forces within the limits of profitability unfolds on a world scale..."  <fnote>Marx, K. (1939) Grundrisse the Rise and Downfall of Capital in McLellan, D. (1977) Karl Marx, Selected Writings OUP, p. 489 </fnote><fnote>Chan, A. (2001) China's Workers under Assault: The exploitation of labour in a globalising economy East Gate: New York, p. 12 </fnote><fnote>Clarke, S. in (eds. Albritton. R., Itoh, M., Westra, R., amd Zuege, A.) (2001) Phases of capitalist development : booms, crises and globalizations Palgrave: Basingstoke, p. 80 </fnote>Similarly, the tendency to separate geographically the producer from the consumer can explain the movement of the productive forces to the developing world. This is the consequence of an approaching crisis whereby the demographics of the developed world have changed to such an extent that the majority now consists of consumers. These consumers may still play a role in the production of the commodities which they consume, but in a distanced or alienated form. This is contrary to the developing world where the average consumer purchasing power is extremely low and where workers are increasingly responsible for the surplus capital of the commodities sold by the international capitalist. <fnote>Shutt, H. (1998) The trouble with capitalism : an enquiry into the causes of global economic failure Zed books: London, p. 192 </fnote>To conclude, through an evaluation of the applicability of Marx's conception at different stages of the development of the capitalist social order, it has been shown, as Marx argued, that Capital is indeed simply the observable element of an inherently antagonistic and crisis prone order. The true strength of his conception is that it can explain capitalism as it appears to us and the changes in its direction. For when the inherent contradictions of capitalism manifest themselves in such a stark form that decreasing returns set in and competitive pressures intensify, the stage is set for the change of phase in capitalist expansion and it is this change which averts crisis. By applying Marx's conception of the capitalist social order to the observable phenomenon of the day, we are led to identify causative tendencies of capital, followed by the causative contradictions of these tendencies and finally the antagonistic basis of the fundamental social relations on which capitalism relies. One can take from this what they will, but there is no doubt that this conception exposes and goes a long way towards explaining the political and economic inequalities of international political economy. 