Marxism, as constructed by many philosophers, economists and historians including Marx, is a method. Dogmatic or doctrinal approaches to Marxism, like those of the Soviet Union and the revolution of 1917, are irrelevant to a discussion of the life or death of a method or science for the study of politics. As Luk치cs states of orthodox Marxism: "It is not the 'belief' in this or that thesis, nor the exegesis of a 'sacred' book. On the contrary, orthodoxy refers exclusively to method." The following aspects of Marxism will be examined to determine the tradition's relevancy in our world today: <fnote>Luk치cs, G. (1990) History and Class Consciousness Berlin: Merlin Press Ltd p. 1 </fnote><list>the application of dialectics and the realist approach to studying society;determinism, particularly in regard to human beings and their roles in society;the emphasis on the means and ownership of production which Marx identifies as the origin of political power.</list>By looking at what separates Marxism from other schools of thought, I will highlight the importance of its humanist nature and fundamental aim of social progress: characteristics that underpin its continuing applicability in the world today. Fundamental to the relevance and life of dialectics is the premise that societies and politics are non-static and constantly changing. Contradictory therefore to "the end of history" and the implied death of Marxism as proclaimed by Fukuyama, are the analyses offered by Marxists who apply dialectics to our world today. The common aim of political scientists is to explain and understand the world, societies and events. In order to do this we must discover some kind of 'truth' and it is here that Marxism can prove very useful. 'Truth' is most often associated with the collection of facts, but as Luk치cs points out: "the 'facts'...must themselves be subjected to a historical and dialectical examination." It is argued that isolated 'facts' as discovered by scientists or researchers cannot be separated from the context from which they come. "Dialectical method and scientific realism hold that the (observable) appearance of things (and our experience of them) must be penetrated to identify underlying causal relations; including what causes things to appear to us the way they do." In order to find out the truth, or as Hegel puts it, the actuality of a subject, (be it an event, government, society or even an individual), we must investigate and understand how different contributing factors relate to each other in making the subject what it is. <fnote>Luk치cs History and Class Consciousness p. 7 </fnote><fnote>Tant, T (1999) Marxism and Social Science (Gamble, A. ed.) London: MacMillan Press Ltd p.123 </fnote>To return to the relevance of dialectics today: perhaps the most useful aspect of this method is that it reminds us that the world we live in is not stationary, that we have not reached "the end of history". For by examining capitalism dialectically with the aim of finding actuality, the contradictions and 'crises' of capitalism are revealed. One of the most fundamental examples of this was identified by Ricardo who, as Marx writes, "proves that wages and profits rise and fall in inverse ratio to each other, without affecting the relative value of the product." This inverse relationship clearly holds problems in a society where the worker is also the consumer and it can help explain the move of manufacturing industries to developing countries. In fact Ralph Miliband goes so far as to say that: "this Western stake in Latin America, the Middle East, Africa and Asia...is one of the dominant elements, if not the dominant element, of present-day international relations." What distinguishes Marxists from other academics or economists like Ricardo, is the reason which draws them critically to examine politics today: namely a feeling of dissatisfaction and a will for improvement. For as Gamble states, capitalism "is characterised by profound frictions and conflicts...which threaten not just its own survival but the survival of the human species itself." <fnote>Marx, K (1976) The Poverty of Philosophy Moscow: Progress Publishers p.45 </fnote><fnote>Miliband, R (1973) The State in Capitalist Society: The Analysis of the Western System of Power Quartet Books Ltd p. 15 </fnote><fnote>Gamble, A (1999) Marxism and Social Science (Gamble, A. ed.) London: MacMillan Press Ltd p.103 </fnote>The concept of determinism has been widely criticised among those of the post or neo-Marxist tradition. Gramsci's work, which emphasised the importance of ideology and the significance of agents, was perhaps the first example of a break from fundamental determinism. However, it must be remembered that Marx himself acknowledged the role of the agent: "Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please; they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past." Determinism may appear to be a pessimistic constraint on an otherwise optimistic tradition. However, agents (individuals or groups) can achieve a positive control of their existence by appreciating the dialectical relationship between structure and agency which conditions determinism. Again, this rests on the notion of actuality: "...only a being that has the faculty of knowing its own possibilities and those of its world can transform every given state of existence into a condition for its free self-realisation." This statement could hardly be more relevant to a student or academic of politics. By understanding the limits of an existence (for example of an individual, which may involve a complex relationship involving many factors, including education, location, up-bringing and culture), change of existence becomes a possibility. While this notion is more usually associated with 'class-consciousness', it is perhaps helpful to apply it to other areas of study. For example, by fully understanding the actuality of the World Bank, which may of course involve an analysis of its relationship with other institutions or individuals, one can move beyond the conflicts and constraints which comprise it. The continuing relevance of determinism, lies therefore in one's ability to realise and understand its significance in the construction of a subject. <fnote>Marsh, D (1999) Marxism and Social Science (Gamble, A. ed.) London: MacMillan Press Ltd p.322 </fnote><fnote>Marx, K (1984) The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte London: Lawrence & Wishart p.10 </fnote><fnote>Marcuse, H (1941) Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the rise of social theory New York: Oxford University Press p.154 </fnote>The emphasis on the means and ownership of production is an element of Marxism which has emerged as a result of the methods of study described above. Dialectical and determinist studies of politics have led Marxists to conclude that: "The mode of production of material life conditions the social, political and intellectual life processes in general." It is argued that those with the means of production are the ruling class in a society, that is to say, they are the origin of political power. If Marxism is dead, this theory should be proven wrong. Yet there are numerous examples which illustrate the fact that, in our day and age, where the nature of capitalism has supposedly changed dramatically since the time when Marx was writing, power resides within the class which controls capital. <fnote>Marx, K (1977) Preface to A Critique of Political Economy (ed. McLellan, D) as quoted in Howarth, D (1998) New Political Thought An Introduction Lawrence and Wishart Ltd p.127 </fnote>This power can manifest itself in many different, complex and often unobservable ways. To take one example, programmes on television are often replicated from one channel to another with little variation or space for originality. At present, there are soaps, often badly made; lifestyle improvement programmes, where the bulk of the content comes from the individuals or families who are being exposed and examined; reality television, again where no creative thinking or originality is necessary; multiple crime thrillers which unfailingly and repeatedly follow the same handful of plots and quiz shows, where the prize is funded by the thousands of people who apply by telephone to appear on the show. This pattern of uniformity is evident in practically all other products, from best-selling novels to the clothes we wear; from the food in supermarkets to the content of newspapers. If this is not political enough for a conservative application of the word 'politics', it can be argued that this same pattern is evident in political parties. Marx's own words are useful here to provide an explanation for this phenomenon: "What he (the supplier) supplies is not only a useful object, but also and above all a marketable value." It is paramount to those with the means of production and therefore capitalism, to produce products of minimum cost and maximum profit. This not only has the effect of worsening the quality of products, but also of restricting creative input or originality. Once a programme is established on television and has become popular, not only does every other channel produce its own version, but any other ideas will be rejected until its marketable value has been bled dry. A status quo is therefore sustained where those with the means of production can continue to work the way they do without complaint or significant criticism from workers, consumers and voters. <fnote>Marx, K The Poverty of Philosophy p. 40 </fnote>To conclude, three fundamental elements of Marxism have been examined to determine their relevance in our world today, and therefore to examine whether Marxism is dead. The benefits of applying the method of dialectics and the concept of determinism have been highlighted in unearthing the actuality of the institutions, events and cultures we study. If nothing more, the importance of Marxism in this respect is to be aware of the social, political and economic context to which so many of our truths are attached. For example, it is recognised that the commonly used and accepted method of describing the economic growth and wealth of a country and its people, the GNP, needs to be analysed and its ability to iron out the inequalities within a country needs to be recognised. An example of the effect of capitalism and the actions of those who own the means of production on a factor which affects practically everyone in our society, the content of television, demonstrates how a Marxist interpretation of capitalism can explain the world in which we live, in this case the tendency towards uniformity, repetition, low production values and dumbed-down content. I wish to offer no identification or labelling of classes, as this can only result in a dogmatic approach which may stray from the methodological basis of Marxism. It is also important to maintain an analytical approach to the schools of thought we apply in the study of politics: to subscribe to one method alone without question cannot promote progress but repetition. Whether one accepts and agrees with the conclusions which Marxists draw or not, the tradition has an intrinsic validity which is now more relevant than ever before: with the aim of social progress and change, it identifies the inequalities of our world. 