This essay will tackle the two title questions separately. Firstly, why do so few Americans vote? There are numerous theories which attempt to explain consistently low turnouts in both Presidential and local American elections. I will examine the following factors which explain abstention in the United States: The argument of apathy and disaffection versus contentment among the non-voting electorate and a rejection of the rational choice model in explaining abstention Practical difficulties which prevent voters from both registering and voting and the comparative significance of these causes in explaining abstention. The causes of apathy and deliberate abstention among the electorate, namely: a lack of representation (the inherent problems of a two-party democracy); exclusion from the political system and the reasons associated with the decreasing participation in community life and civic engagement in America and the lack of competition between the two parties, particularly in the 'safe states'. Secondly, I will compare the two arguments that debate the role of individual choices over regular patterns in voting behaviour with particular reference to socio-demographic factors and how they may have changed in recent years. Here I will argue that a relatively new pattern in voting behaviour has emerged among the evangelical Christian societies of America, which may appear to be based on individual choices but in fact can be seen to relate to a feeling of membership to these sub-communities. The 2004 Presidential elections received the highest turnout since 1968. I will look at the reasons for this increase in turnout as part of my analysis of abstention. However, American elections historically suffer from low turnout. The United States is below all other 22 established democracies in terms of electoral turnout bar Switzerland. Before 1900, turnout neared 80 percent of the eligible voter, yet since then, turnout has only ever exceeded 60 percent in Presidential elections and in more recent years, the figure has been closer to 50 percent. While it is important to recognise the different way that turnout is calculated in America, (number of votes cast divided by the total number of eligible adult citizens, compared to most countries where turnout is based on lists of registered voters), it is clear that turnout in America is consistently lower than expected for the largest and strongest liberal democracy in the world. <fnote>Putnam, 2000, Political Participation in Bowling Alone, Simon and Schuster </fnote>Before examining the question of low turn-outs in American elections, we must consider why high turn-out is important and recognise that the question could be quite different: ""Why do people bother to vote?" as if nonvoting were the natural pattern or expected behaviour and voting required explanation." While it is widely accepted that the vote one casts is not going to decide an election, nor may it have any significant effect, there are arguments to support the act of voting that show the desirability to societies of high turnout in elections. Elections are a means of communicating satisfaction or dissatisfaction with a government, and for most Americans, voting is the only way they choose to influence the government. A high turnout indicates that the basic principles on which liberal democracies operate have been achieved, i.e. the universality of access, the equality of influence and the accountability of government. A low turnout can therefore be seen, not as an indication of contentment and satisfaction, but more likely, as an indication of dissatisfaction and exclusion. As Perea (2002) argues, political participation has been seen as a mechanism to compensate for socio-economic inequalities, which means that low turn out could signify the exclusion of large portions of the population from the political system. <fnote>Flanigan, W. H. and Zingale, N. H, (1991) Political Behaviour of the American Electorate CQ Press, p. 23 </fnote><fnote>Perea, E. A. August (2002)"Individual characteristics, institutional incentives and electoral abstention in Western Europe" European Journal of Political Research vol. 41, no.5 pp. 643-673 </fnote>The rational choice model of voting behaviour explains abstention according to the cost of voting which out weighs the benefit. The model is based on the idea that the benefits (B), multiplied by the probability that a voter would cast the deciding vote (P) should exceed the cost (C) of voting, (e.g. registration, travel to polling station, decision-making time). However, in nearly all cases, C > PB. Therefore rational choice fails to explain why millions of people (59.6% of those eligible to vote in US elections, 2004) choose to vote despite the cost. <fnote>Steelman, A. (2004) 'The Paradox of Voting', Region Focus, Fall 2004  URL  </fnote>While there is a lot of theory based on the sociological and psychological reasons for abstention, we must not forget the basic practical difficulties that many people face in actually registering and casting a vote. It is important to appreciate the historical factors of disenfranchisement which may have led to abstention and may still contribute to it now. For example, the effects of the "infamous literacy tests" which prevented many black voters in many Southern states from voting in the 1960s. Despite the fact that these tests were abolished in 1965, the legacy of disenfranchisement is one which can be difficult to abolish. For exclusion from the political system can create a non-voting ethos within a family which may be passed from one generation to the next as will be discussed later in this essay. <fnote>Evans, J. A. J (2004) "Non-voting and Abstention" in Voters and voting: an Introduction Sage Publications </fnote>The United States is one of the only countries which still requires initiative on the part of the electorate to register to vote. Practical difficulties relating to abstention can be divided into two categories: those which disenable an eligible voter from voting and those which prevent a registered vote from being counted. Jocelyn Evans in 'Voters and voting: an Introduction' identifies a number of factors which provide obstacles to voters registering to vote. Misunderstanding the rules and regulations due to complexity and language difficulties are particularly relevant in the United States where the registration process differs from state to state and where large ethnic minority communities live and still speak English as a second language. The non-universality of the regulations of registration across the United States can be seen as a significant factor in increasing abstention for the different and changing methods of registration and voting can become confusing and misleading, particularly to the more mobile citizens of America who generally have to re-register every time they move. Large Hispanic communities where Spanish is spoken at home and where a decent understanding of English is not always accessible among the poor, can in some cases be alienated from the political system. Causes of apathy among the American electorate have often been put down to a lack of representation of much of the electorate due to a two-party democracy. For example, in recent years where the Democrat Party have shifted ever more to the right, there has been a notable lack of representation of people who take left-wing stances on issues in the United States. This is supported by the success of Ralph Nader in the 2000 elections. However, it is arguable that this was not such an important factor in 2004, where feelings of anger towards Bush among left-wing voters, particularly in relation to issues such as the war in Iraq, the environment and the deregulation of industries, meant that rather than abstaining, they felt the importance and urgency of voting for Kerry. This may help to explain the 3.6 percent increase in democrat turnout. Putnam has argued that low turnout in elections is a reflection of a broader disengagement from community life. He identifies an intercohort change according to generation, which due to entertainment such as the internet, television and computer games has led Americans to be less socially engaged with the communities in which they live and therefore less concerned with politics and current affairs: in the 2004 elections young people again failed to turnout in significant numbers to vote. <fnote>Putnam, 2000, Political Participation in Bowling Alone, Simon and Schuster </fnote>A lack of competition between parties can be interpreted in two ways. Firstly, a perception that the 'race to the white house' is a very close battle, is likely to have the psychological effect of provoking people to vote, for to refer to the rational choice model, the probability that one's vote would be a deciding vote is increased. This could have been a factor in the 2004 elections, where for months the pollsters reported leads of no more than a few percentage points. However, this is likely to affect those people who already intended to vote because they were concerned in the first place about who would win. The second interpretation refers to the competition created by opposing policies of the two parties. This could have been the case in the 2004 elections, for it was clear that Kerry took an opposing view of Bush's action in Iraq. However, many felt that he failed to offer an alternative solution and that, if he was elected President, his policies, (in particular, foreign), would not differ greatly from George Bush's. This may have contributed to a greater feeling of despondency and apathy among left-wing voters, who may have resorted to abstention. The issues at stake in an election and the policies adopted towards them by the two parties could be a main reason for abstention in the United States. America has a very wide selection of sub-cultures and communities with greatly varying attitudes toward politics and policies, and it is inevitable that the issues raised by politicians are not those which concern a large proportion of the population. The resulting exposure of fraud and possible corruption following the 2000 election, has led to an awareness that one's vote, despite having registered, may not be counted. In the run up to the 2004 elections, NPR news reported administrative problems in registration. For example, in Ohio where the GOP secretary of state refused to accept registration forms printed in the newspaper because they were not the correct weight of paper and the allegations by democrats that the organisation employed by republicans to administer the registration of voters, was directed to destroy registration applications from likely democrats. Allegations and speculation ran high in the 2004 elections. Whether they hold any truth or not, the effect of doubt in the electoral system could be quite considerable among non-voters. To summarise, despite the fact that party organisations are stronger than ever and that the election process has become a professional and rich industry, it seems many people feel disengaged from politics in America. This is indicated by the fact that the number of people under 35 who read a daily newspaper has dropped from two thirds in 1965 to one third in 1990. It is likely that in some cases, abstention is an indication of contentment, particularly among the middle class suburban communities, where the quality of life in most cases is acceptably high. However, for those who could benefit from political reform, particularly in relation to healthcare and unemployment, abstention could be a result of some of the practical difficulties in registering and voting, outlined above. People with lower individual means, (e.g. education, income, experience), have fewer resources to cover the costs of participation which will involve processing information, reaching decisions and finding the time to vote. This can result in apathetic attitudes which makes it harder to motivate people in this situation to vote.  <fnote>Putnam, 2000, Political Participation in Bowling Alone, Simon and Schuster </fnote><fnote>Perea, E. A. August (2002)"Individual characteristics, institutional incentives and electoral abstention in Western Europe" European Journal of Political Research vol. 41, no.5 pp. 643-673 </fnote>Explanations of voting behaviour can be linked to those of abstention. For example, the effects of one's family on one's decision firstly whether to vote or not, and secondly whom to vote for, can be quite considerable. The Jennings study which examined this effect showed that 58 percent of seventeen-year-olds in 1965 had adopted the party identification of their parents. Party identification plays an important role in elections. The lasting attachment of tens of millions of Americans to one of the parties establishes a basic division of electoral strength within which the competition of particular campaigns takes place. Party Identification is probably based not on a relentless support for the party which one identifies with, but on a persistent resistance to contrary influence. Clearly, in the 2004 election party identification and partisanship played a large part for many voters; especially in an election where the traditional values of each party were highlighted in both campaigns. Similarly, the traditional voting preferences of other social and ethnic groups played an important and predicted part in the recent election. For example, 57 percent of all white Americans voted for George Bush in contrast to 11 percent of African-Americans. <fnote>Flanigan, W. H. and Zingale, N. H, (1991) Political Behaviour of the American Electorate CQ Press, p. 60 </fnote><fnote>Campbellal. 'Impact of Party Identification' in The American Voter, Wiley, p.121 </fnote><fnote>Campbellal. 'The Development of Party Identification' in The American Voter, Wiley, p.121 </fnote>The importance of individual choices is evident in relation to the issue which was unique to this election: the war on terror. This issue through its controversial nature and huge media coverage can be seen to have played a large part in determining which way a voter cast his or her vote. The New York Times estimated that it was of third and importance to the electorate. Here lies perhaps the only example of instrumental voting evident in the election. For those who cast their vote according to a desire to feel the benefits of a secure and pro-active government in the war against terrorism, voted according to their individual interests. This kind of individual decision can be seen to cross the boundaries of class, age, gender, ethnicity or psychological make-up which may usually determine a regular pattern of voting behaviour. For example, a working class, typically democratic supporter, may vote Republican despite his or her interests in welfare and economy due to a perceived personal threat from terrorism. This analysis is an example of how regular voting behaviour can change and it can usually be associated with an interest or rejection of a particular policy, perhaps unique to an election. Another example of the importance of individual choice in 2004 may be evident in the votes which were cast according to moral and religious values, (rated the most important issues in deciding the election by the New York Times). I will end with an analysis of this factor as it can be seen to have relevance in both explaining abstention and general voting behaviour. It has been suggested that Karl Rove identified the possibilities of mobilising the 4 million evangelical Christians who had abstained in 2000, in order to boost the support for Republicans. 42 percent of Americans describe themselves as evangelical Christians and 8 out of 10 people in Florida and Ohio said they voted according to moral and religious reasons. At first glance, these statistics may indicate the power of individual morals and beliefs in regards to issues such as abortion, same sex marriage and stem-cell research, in affecting the way someone votes in an election. However, I would like to argue that sociological, regular patterns of behaviour can be seen to underpin this political action. <fnote>As quoted by Wyn Grant (November 2004) in Analysing the 2004 American Election a lecture given at the University of Warwick </fnote>It could be argued that class based politics has been replaced to a certain extent by cultural based politics. While the issues that evangelical Christians base their political views on are usually associated with individual choice, it can be said that they also reflect the communities and sub-cultures to which these people belong. "New Life Church was a frenzied hive of religious purpose where people wore buttons saying "I'm a values voter". Where Christians in the past, generally abstained from politics for reasons such as a feeling that politics and politicians were corrupt and non-Christian, (evident in Bill Clinton's affair and the drink-driving charges against George Bush), conservative Christianity can be said to have become politicised. So like any other group in society, for example trade unions, who have an explicit political nature, conservative Christianity can affect peoples' political action through sociological effects of membership and conformity in community. This 'new' political community in the electorate has been described as highly significant in determining the outcome of the 2004 election: "...in this election, millions of people felt there was a compact between an anointed one and the Almighty". <fnote>Egan, T. (2004) State of the Union: The Evangelical vote, BBC NEWS,  URL  </fnote><fnote>Egan, T. (2004) State of the Union: The Evangelical vote, BBC NEWS,  URL  </fnote>To conclude, it is impossible to pinpoint what exactly makes someone abstain or vote, and what determines the way someone votes. "...one can, almost indefinitely spin out associations between, say, turnout and rate of illiteracy, domestic mail per capita, government intervention, number of parties, and so on. One can always 'explain' the relationship in terms of a partial and ad hoc theory". However, it is obviously important to identify factors which affect voting behaviour. It seems that the practical difficulties of registration and voting carry unknown levels of significance, for it can be argued that the trouble and confusion associated with voting may have a psychological impact than cannot be measured. This seems inexcusable in a modern and liberal democracy. Secondly, the role of 'impact' and personal issues (in particular, the war on terror), appear to influence the individual choices of citizens. Lastly, I have identified an emergence of a political culture in America based on moral and religious values, which in a liberal and representative democracy, is surprising and possibly dangerous. <fnote>Bottomore, T. B. (1979) Political Sociology London: Hutchinson, p.289 </fnote>