<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>With the dramatic change in workplace, the demand for the highest quality in both products and services is increasing drastically. Hence, employee commitment becomes crucial if the company has to remain competitive whilst facing all these business pressures. The front-line staff in an organization, like sales assistants, receptionists, etc., plays a major role here, as these are the ones that come in contact with the customers the most. Organisations today are giving increasing importance to the front-line staff as the management realizes that excellence in service can be achieved only by means of having efficient and dedicated employees as their front-line staff. The employees occupying the position, as front-line staff should not just be friendly to their customers but they should be masters in what they are doing to please customers. (Schlesinger and Heskett, 1991) <heading>COMMITMENT</heading>Commitment was always believed to be a "taken for granted" assumption (Legge, 2005:214) for directing behaviour. But recent studies have conceived commitment in two distinct ways. The orthodox approach refers to commitment as an individuals psychological bond to an organisation, as 'affective attachment and identification'. (Cooper and Hartley in Legge, 2005: 214) but the definition usually employed was given by Porteral. (1974) that define commitment as the relative virtue of an individual's involvement with or in an organisation. Because of the difficulty in relating the variations in employee commitment, contrasting views emerged that defined it as ' the binding of an individual to behavioural acts' (Kiesler and Sakumura in Legge, 2005:215). This approach sees commitment to be in terms of the cost lost to the individual if he/she were to leave it. So, according to this definition individuals are more likely to be in the organisation if the organisation binding (including pension scheme, specific training etc.) is high. <heading>BASES OF COMMITMENT TO CUSTOMER SERVICE</heading>To understand employee commitment to customer service better, behavioural approach can be taken into consideration. Behavioural approach means how well can an employee manage to satisfy the needs of a customer on an individual level, i.e. to what extent can an employee go to provide exemplary service to its customers. Generally, in providing exceptional customer service to its customers, in comparison with its competitor organisations, an individual employee undertakes round-the-clock improvement on the job together with exercising effort and striving for the welfare and interest of its customers. Employees continuously strive for quality, this is not just a psychological state of mind or simply an optimistic attitude, this is of utmost importance to the employee, owning to the fact that it involves expenditure of energy and effort on part of the employee. The four major bases of employee commitment to customer service are affective, normative, calculative and altruistic. (Etzioni, 1988; Coleman, 1990 quoted in Peccei and Rosenthal). <heading>Affective Commitment</heading>As described by Allen and Meyer (1990) the affective basis for employee commitment is where an employee is emotionally attached to an organisation. In this case, the employee devotes himself completely to serving the organisation better, forming an emotional attachment with the organisation. Providing high quality service to customers delivers a sense of innate contentedness to the employee. An employee develops emotional bonds with the organisation when he/she understands and identifies the goals and values of an organisation and is inclined to provide cooperation and support to the organisation in achieving these goals. Here, employees strive for excellence and please the customers in every possible way because they enjoy doing it. (Peccei and Rosenthal, 1997) When an individual attaches his/her 'fund of affectivity and emotion to the group' (Kanter, 1968: 507), invests emotional energy in the group and is loyal to its members and the organisation as a whole, it can be described as 'cathectic cohesion commitment', which is commitment to some social relations. (Kanter, 1968) Commitment can also be understood as 'partisan, affective attachment to goals and values of an organisation' (Buchanan II, 1974: 533) wherein an employee is attached to an organisation for his/her own interest, not forgetting that his contribution is extremely crucial for the entire organisation. Here, an individual truly believes in and acknowledges an organisation's goals and values, is inclined to work hard for its success and aspires to work for it enduringly. (Mowday, Steers and Porter, 1979) <heading>Normative Commitment</heading>Normative commitment is not as well known as affective, but is extremely practicable; here an individual does something because he has been brought up to do so. Here, 'Customer service behaviour would be normatively driven, based on the internalization of appropriate service values and norms by the individual' (Peccei and Rosenthal, 1997:70) and employees try to give their best and please customers only because they believe it is their moral obligation to do so. An individual considers work as his duty and responsibility towards the organisation. (Allen and Meyer, 1990) Normative commitment is an obligation to perform and can be defined as 'totality of internalized normative pressures to act in a way which meets organizational goals and interests' (Wiener, 1982: 471). The only way an employee will not be concerned about the repercussions of what he does is when he/she is extremely committed and inclined towards work. Employees that are committed to the organization show behaviour different from the non- committed employees. They stand out as they perform their job not because they aim at making profits but because they know and understand that 'it is the "right" and moral thing to do' (Wiener, 1982: 471) Randall and Cote (1990), consider normative commitment as the moral obligation or duty that an individual develops owing to the fact that an organisation is investing in them. Employees may feel they have a moral commitment working in the organisation when they realize that the organisation has spent a lot of time as well as effort in training and developing them. Eg. when an organisation pays an employee's academic fees in order to improve their qualification. The employee may feel obliged to pay the organisation back by continuously working for it after completing their studies. Generally, normative commitment occurs when an employee finds it hard to reimburse the investment an organisation has made in them. O'Reillyal. (1991), used value to explain commitment. When there is unanimity between an organisation and employee's values organisational commitment results. Schoorman and Mayer (1992) supported this assumption and explained how value commitment exits only when an employee acknowledges or believes in an organisation's goals and values. In accordance with Allen and Meyer's (1990) argument, Jaros et al.(1993) consider normative commitment to be moral commitment. The difference between affective and normative commitment becomes clear, as normative commitment is only a moral obligation or duty and not an emotional connection with the organisation. The degree of an employee's psychological attachment to his/her organisation is described by means of internalization of both values and organisational goals. <heading>Calculative Commitment</heading>The earliest portrayal of calculative commitment approach was by Etzioni, in 1961 and he was amongst the first ones to say that calculative commitment of an employee is a give and take affair. An employee aims at providing excellent service to customers but only as a means to gain benefits in the form of rewards, promotion, recognition, etc. from the organisation. Individuals work hard on behalf of the customers, presenting their problem to their seniors/superiors, as a calculated move as employees are aware that pleasing customers would mean rewards and benefits. Thus, employees benefit themselves by this process of pleasing and serving customers. Providing high quality service is given paramount importance in all three approaches and forms a very crucial work goal for an employee, but for very different reasons. In case of calculative the reason being gaining rewards and returns from the organisation for their work towards satisfying customers. The strength of an individual's calculative orientation to customer service can be captured by the following expression: <table/>Calculative commitment can be clearly understood as optimistic or pessimistic orientation of a minute intensity that arises owing to the contributions made by employees to the organisation, generally matching the level of performance and contributions made by an individual. Penley and Gould (1988) describe calculative attachment as 'a commitment to an organisation which is based on the employee's receiving inducements to match contributions' (Penley and Gould 1988:46) This form of organisational commitment is based on mutual exchange. This attachment is conceptually more of less like the circumstances explained by Wiener (1982) where rewards and recognition solely influence the behaviour of an individual. Hence, it can be said that calculative commitment is distinct from affective commitment. Randall and O'Driscoll (1997), define calculative commitment as one 'based on an exchange relationship with the organization' (Randall and O'Driscoll, 1997:606) Employees develop commitment to an organisation because they foresee a bright future in the organisation in terms of promotions and other cost benefits. Generally, employees committed to an organisation in this way continue to work with the organisation because they need to do so for their benefit. The extent to which employees in an organisation are committed is not simply a result of how well an organisation rewards them for their performance. The indices of commitment as described by Nick Oliver (1990), suggest that rewards and investments have an equally important role and need to co-exist. Rewards help in increasing only loyalty towards the job and the organisation, together with a sense of satisfaction from the job where as investments are important in relation with the objectives of the organisation, regularity, participation, etc. This clearly indicates that different aspects of behaviour are governed by different mechanisms of employee commitment and simply providing rewards becomes largely unreasonable. <heading>Altruistic Commitment</heading>The organisation is given primary importance by the employee in this case. The sole reason for an individual's commitment is a strong connection and identification with the organisation. This can therefore be understood as organisational commitment (OC) directed type of customer service, which represents 'other-oriented, altruistic action'. (Peccei and Rosenthal, 1997:71). The organisation in question is the only one to benefit heavily from altruistic approach to employee commitment hence making this approach very different from the others mentioned above. According to Peccei and Rosenthal (1997), the extent to which an employee is attached to the organisation can be measured taking into consideration two variables: <table/>By multiplying the scores of various respondents on 'organisational commitment' by 'customer service climate' a combined measure of an employee's altruistic inclination towards customer service was formed. It is seen that individuals who are committed to the organisation they are working in, are very likely to give a lot of emphasis to the quality of service together with giving importance to pleasing and satisfying the organisation's customers. The above approaches may all be 'analytically distinct' but they are not essentially 'mutually exclusive' (Peccei and Rosenthal, 1997:71) <heading>EMOTIONAL LABOUR</heading>The beginning of 1980s saw the decrease of the manufacturing sector, the expansion of the service sector and the increased participation of female workers in the labour market which led to the attention on the concept of emotional labour (Taylor, 1998). Employees in an organisation are continuously expected to 'establish and maintain rapport, maintain enthusiasm and a positive attitude at all times' (Rose and Wright, 2005:154). Other authors like Holman, mention the compulsion to 'smile down the phone' (Holman, 2003:127). The work ethic of 'emotional labour' was first described by Hochschild (1983) but quite a lot of authors have picked on it now. Hochschild, first used the term, emotional labour, as 'the management of human feeling, during social interaction within the labour process as shaped by the dictates of capital accumulation', having three elements: feeling management as part of paid work; mainly during social interaction within the workplace; supervision and measurement to the performance of employees. In addition, emotional labour was divided into two categories: 'surface act' that deceives not oneself but others (e.g. maintaining outward appearance); 'deep act' that deceives oneself as much as deceiving others (e.g. the direct exhortation of feeling). Thus, emotional labour is demanded in the new workplace as standardised goods and services by means of the mass production are not able to satisfy the quantity or detail of customer' needs any more, and 'quality-conscious consumers' have emerged largely (Hochschild, 1983: 84, 85, 86). Emotional labour can also be defined as 'the regulation and expression of emotion in exchange for a wage' (Holman, 2003:127). Rose and Wright (2005) believe 'emotional labour' to be twofold. On one hand it can be a constant source of burden and pressure, as not every employee can feel positive and motivated all the time, which causes dissonance between real feelings and the feelings on display. This dissonance has been connected to emotional exhaustion and lower job satisfaction (Holman, 2003). On the other hand, it makes a customer happy by giving them what they want. It also gives employees' a rise in feelings and can also have a positive outcome satisfaction derived from the job. (Rose and Wright, 2005). The principal problem faced by the management is that of the balance of quality and quantity. Mulholland (2002) recognizes that although managers might give the customers a feeling or impression of exceptional service the reality is very different. 'the increasingly intensified pace of work suggests in practice that the system facilitates little more than the minimum service standard.' This viewpoint documented by Holdsworth and Cartwright (2003) clearly suggests that employees find it hard to maintain quality in service when they have to deal with calls quickly and have the pressure of a large number of customers still waiting to be served. This puts them under a lot of mental pressure. Within the emotional labour process of an organisation, management should provide emotional empowerment (e.g. Total Quality Management through team working) for its employees, as management cannot possibly train their employees with regard to every possible interaction between them and the customers, although they attempt to prescribe the likely feelings and expressions of customers. However, to eliminate negative discretion and encourage positive, the emotional labour within the organisation is supervised by monitoring and controlling that are associated with performed-related pay system. Furthermore, employees are forced to deploy emotional labour - deep act rather than surface act -, not least due to the changing concept of service from technical delivery towards focusing on how it is delivered and competitive environment in the service sector (Taylor, 1998). For example, an employee at Flight path explained in relation to her recent experience with a rude customer, that despite the customer's rude attitude and behaviour, she urged herself to treat the customer as a different type of person only because she thought of the customer as one who pays her wages. Thus, during the emotional labour process the employees suffer from not only physical and mental problems but also emotional draining. <heading>ACHIEVING COMMITMENT THROUGH MANAGEMENT OF EMOTION</heading>Every job has some element of emotional labour. For an employee in an organisation, the display of a certain set of feelings and emotions is required occasionally/regularly for its customers. A lot of occupations like police service, emergency services, practicing law, health and safety services, debt collecting, etc. have extremely powerful emotions involved, it is these occupations where social interaction plays a very crucial role in achieving organisations goals. With growing competition, emotional labour has become extremely commonplace in the service sector. It therefore becomes extremely important that positive feelings be induced in customers so that they continue to be loyal to the service. An employee's feelings coupled with emotions are given paramount importance, as they are cardinal for the productivity of the employee together with the employee's ability to provide high standards of service. (Hochschild, 1983) Hence, it will not be wrong to say that the management of emotion refers not only to managing our own but others' emotions as well. (Class Notes OPBC, 2005) In achieving organisational commitment aimed at affective commitment approach, i.e. where an employee really enjoys his job, recruitment of people who are friendly or do not find it difficult to communicate with people and have a natural talent for it will help the organisation positively. For an organisation to be successful in today's competitive scenario relying solely on how an employee naturally is or on an employee's basic and personal characteristics is not adequate hence, rewards and promotions have to be given on a regular basis to encourage employees from being more productive for the organisation. Rewarding employees helps to achieve calculative commitment. Having firm control over their emotions plays a very important role whilst dealing with customers as employees come across all kinds of customers. Therefore it becomes imperative for organisations to provide training opportunities to its employees on a regular basis to improve all kinds of skills resulting in quality enhancement that elicits normative commitment towards the organisation. To achieve altruistic commitment, the management should know how to mould its employee's mindset to one, who respects and connects with the organisation so as to be extremely loyal to it. Using language effectively and persuasively is solely to make the customers comfortable, loyal and connected to the organisation, in reality however, increasing importance is given to changing behaviour more than values and emotions. Typically, Employees will not fit into only a single category but will change depending on work pressure, job autonomy and trust in employment relationship (Sturdy, 1998; Edwards et al., 1998 quoted in Class Notes OPBC, 2005). <heading>Surface Acting </heading>Hochschild (1979, 1983) explains how an employee performs emotional labour in either one of the ways mentioned above. The individual in question may follow display rules by means of 'surface acting', which is not a genuine feeling. This involves showing emotions that are not actually experienced, this is achieved by a systematic procedure involving verbal as well as non-verbal signals, including facial expressions, tone of voice, etc. An airhostess describes how she would make sure that the passengers on board do not panic in a crisis situation- ' Even though I'm a very honest person, I have allowed my face not to mirror my alarm or my fright. I feel very protective of my passengers... my voice might quiver a little... I feel we could get them to believe...' (Hochschild, 1983: 107) The airhostess uses surface acting to show how calm she is in a crisis, when actually the opposite is true. This is more like ' smiling but not meaning it' (Class Notes OPBC, 2005) <heading>Deep Acting</heading>The employees in this case 'psyche themselves' in such a way so as to experience a desired emotion. An airhostess describes how she controls herself when a customer is really annoying to her-'Watch it. Don't let him get to you' (Hochschild, 1983: 55). Here, excessive training is provided to an employee in order to prepare him to face all kinds of situations, which might result in normative commitment. This is more like ' smiling and sometimes meaning it' (Class Notes OPBC, 2005) <heading>Spontaneous and Genuine Emotion</heading>An employee may naturally experience what one might be expected to say in a particular situation and emotions do not always have to be worked out. A nurse who might show grief in the form of a sigh on seeing an injured child might not have to 'act', the emotion comes in naturally. (Hochschild, 1983). Genuine emotions and genuine commitment to an organisation are something that cannot be taught to an employee through a training process but it comes from within. This is more like ' smiling and meaning it' (Class Notes OPBC, 2005) All the above management of emotions result in employees becoming more committed towards their organisation owing to the fact that they feel involved in the organisation in a variety of ways. <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>In conclusion, it can be said that for an organisation to be successful in comparison to its competitors, it must know how to keep its employees committed, reducing turnover. Understanding the bases of employee commitment is a means through which it becomes easy for an organisation to decipher how to maintain its human resource in the organisation. To keep an employee satisfied is the duty of an organisation and this satisfaction eventually leads to commitment or loyalty towards the organisation. Being a part of the service sector means dealing with all kinds of customers on a large scale. This can be achieved successfully only if an employee has a firm control over his/her emotions, in the absence of which dealing with such a huge pool of consumers is a 'Herculean' task. An employee will only be willing to go that extra mile for his/her organisation if he/she is committed in an affective, normative, calculative or altruistic way. 