<heading>Introduction</heading>Food in itself lacks the power to unite or divide people, societies and nations. Yet, when we impose values on food commodities and food-related activities, we ironically empower them to empower or disempower us. In a more simplistic manner, food has the ability to "distinguish and to discriminate, include and exclude"; it demarcates ethnic, class, racial, wealth and national boundaries. <fnote>Warren Belasco, "Food Matters: Perspectives on an Emerging Field", in Warren Belasco and Philip Scranton (eds.), Food Nations: Selling Taste in Consumer Societies (New York, 2002), pp. 2. </fnote>As a result, food has become a useful tool of analysis because it can capture the dynamic shifts in various social identities we possess over time and place. Warren Belasco neatly encapsulates food as a fluid tool of analysis in that "food...does not merely symbolise or represent in the static sense but rather moves, penetrates and transforms." Hence it is the task of historians, sociologists and anthropologists to capture this change in its entirety by "moving beyond food as a metaphor and cultural symbol"; analysing food in the structure it resides in. In effect, food becomes an important subject of analysis when we situate the analysis of food in a social context. Analysing food discourses will reveal social structures, patterns, unity and disunity. It is indeed the ideal tool and subject of analysis that will allow the practitioner in this domain to unravel cleavages, alignments and identities between people, societies and nations. <fnote>Gillian Feeley Harnik, "Religion and Food: An Anthropological Perspective", Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 63 (1995), pp. 565. </fnote><fnote>John C. Super, "Food and History", Journal of Social History, 36.1 (2002), pp. 170. </fnote>In recent years, social historians have started to recognise this consequential role of food and food-related activities as subjects of enquiry which has widened the scope for food studies. Till this stage in time, food as a field of study has been firmly established and the "transformation of food from a marginal subject of interest to a few agricultural historians to one recognised for its potential for exploring new dimensions of the past is now almost complete." Inevitably, the popularity and credibility of food-centred discourses have in turn made this field "more specific and particular" yet "more general and comprehensive." In this sense, the study of food often suffers from and yet thrives in the absence of a defining paradigm. On this note, where should one fix this essay topic in the whole discourse of food? <fnote>Super, "Food and History", pp. 165. </fnote><fnote>Super, "Food and History", pp. 165. </fnote><fnote>Super, "Food and History", pp. 165. </fnote><fnote>Priscilla Parkhurst Ferguson and Sharon Zukin, "What's Cooking?", Theory and Society, 24 (1995), pp. 196. </fnote><heading>Argumentative Framework</heading>Essentially, the essay will reveal how food illuminates national cleavages as much as national solidarities in two parts. The first part of the essay will focus on food as a subject of analysis and provide a historical perspective on how food creates and divides people, societies and nations in two Latin American countries, Mexico and Belize. This section will also provide a more in depth definitional analysis of "cuisine" and "nation", providing the essay with a functional theoretical framework to work with. The next part of the essay will adopt food as a tool of analysis through the use of an unconventional means of examining a food blog, to reinforce the thematic concerns of this essay. This section will provide a contemporary perspective on how food and food-related activities, such as food blogging reveal cleavages as much as they conceal and deconstruct them. While both sections are structurally different, they reinforce each other through common issues discussed and themes revealed. The former section affirms the centrality of food to nation-building in Latin America through a historical account of the development of national cuisines in both Mexico and Belize while the latter provides a contemporary discussion on the role and importance of food through a Latin American food blog. <heading>A Historical Approach </heading>The national divisive or integrative ability of food will be examined historically with regards to two countries; Belize and Mexico. These two case studies are sufficiently diverse to encapsulate unique nation-building experiences, yet both are structurally and historically similar to entail a comparative study of the role of food in creating or uniting national cleavages. "Belize is an interesting place to look at food, globalisation and nationalism" as Richard Wilk asserted rightly, "because it is one of the least likely places where you would expect to find a national cuisine." Since colonial times, Belize's demographic composition has hindered nationalism as it is populated entirely by immigrants, of whom "many...have shed their ethnic and national identities". Despite this obstacle, Belizean cuisine has evolved to encompass rice and beans, both of which combined, epitomised a Creole cuisine. In a similar light, the cultural history of food in Mexico has definitely revealed more ethnic, class and racial cleavages during the Spanish Conquest than in its post-independence years. Jeffrey Pilcher has extensively traced the "long and contentious process" of the making of a Mexican national cuisine in his book, ¡Que Vivan los Tamales! This national development in Mexico mirrors that of Belize in that the final national cuisine that emerges is a distinctive mestizo cuisine - Mole Poblano. It is the fusion of regional culinary delights that forges Mexico's national identity. <fnote>Richard R. Wilk, "Food and Nationalism: the Origins of "Belizean Food", in Warren Belasco and Philip Scranton (eds.), Food Nations: Selling Taste in Consumer Societies (New York, 2002), pp. 69. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 69. </fnote><fnote>Jeffrey M. Pilcher, ¡Que Vivan Los Tamales! Food and the Making of Mexican Identity (Albuquerque, 1998), pp. 2. </fnote>Before we analyse the role of food in processes of nation building; it is vital that we set workable definitions for "nations" first and then "cuisines", leading up to the conception of "national cuisines" which epitomises the centrality of food in nation building processes. In Benedict Anderson's definition, a nation is "an imagined political community and imagined as both inherently limited and sovereign." It is imagined because the "nation" is a concept that every member within it acknowledges yet the "members of the nations will never know most of their fellow members, meet them or even hear of them, yet in the minds of each lives the image of their communion." It is also limited because the "nation" shares borders with other nations and only has jurisdiction over itself and its boundaries, "beyond which lie other nations". Lastly, it is also "sovereign" because as a nation, it holds the exclusive right to exercise supreme political authority over a geographic region which encompasses a group of people. Extending this line of thought, nationalism is an ideological belief in the sovereign right of the nation which further legitimises the existence of nations. In multiethnic nations, nationalism remains an ideology torn by many cleavages, ethnic, class, region, religion and race. As such, Ernest Gellner makes a robust point alluding to the importance of a national cuisine within a nation: "one of the most central claims of nationalism is that the nation should be a single political and cultural unit, that the territorial state should also have a national cuisine".  <fnote>Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (London, 1983), pp. 15. </fnote><fnote>Anderson, Imagined Communities, pp. 15. </fnote><fnote>Anderson, Imagined Communities, pp. 15. </fnote><fnote>Anderson, Imagined Communities, pp. 16. </fnote><fnote>Richard R. Wilk, "Beauty and the Feast: Official and Visceral Nationalism in Belize", Ethnos, 58 (1993), pp. 294. </fnote>A "cuisine" is more exactly defined as "ongoing food ways of a region" that asserts a certain hierarchy of social norms which shapes and limits eating habits and preferences to those norms. In this light, national cuisines bear two similar features related to Benedict Anderson's concept of a "nation". It is imagined because cuisines operate most ubiquitously in the minds of people. As Sidney Mintz reiterated, it is a concept operating at the level of consciousness because "when people have one, they know what it is without regard to what other people may tell them, because they have been eating it for all of their lives and so they can talk about it." It is also sovereign because national cuisines belong to a specific community or communities of a specific nation. Its sovereignty is asserted when "food is construed as a cultural artefact and emphasis is placed on the nation's historical claims to it, even though these foods might be shared by many other nations." With this conception of a national cuisine, it is evident that food creates, conceals and unites national cleavages through the inclusive and exclusive nature of national cuisines. <fnote>Sidney W. Mintz, Tasting Food, Tasting Freedom. Excursions into Eating, Culture and the Past (Boston, 1996), pp. 104. </fnote><fnote>Mintz, "Tasting Food, Tasting Freedom", pp. 96. </fnote><fnote>Mintz, "Tasting Food, Tasting Freedom", pp. 96. </fnote><fnote>Shannan Peckham, "Consuming Nations", in Sian Griffiths and Jennifer Wallace (eds.), Consuming Passions: Food In the Age of Anxiety (Manchester, 1998), pp. 173. </fnote><heading>Food Creates, Reflects or Reinforces Cleavages </heading>Fundamentally, both Mexico and Belize came under European rule, under the Spanish and British Occupation respectively. Within this colonial context, the European colonial powers interpreted everything through their concept of race, by extension, diet and food norms were characteristic of each separate racial or ethnic group within the colony. During this colonial period, there was no public space for the development of a coherent Belizean or Mexican cuisine because food was more divisive than integrative. The Spanish Conquest of the New World brought together "two vastly different cultures with equally distinct culinary traditions." During this colonial period in Mexico, food became a racial demarcation of what it meant to be Spanish and Indian. Corn tortillas and wheat bread became symbolic representations for two differentiated societies, the República de los Indios and the República de los Españoles respectively. Being Indian meant "ordinary things" like tortillas, kidney beans, chiles, tamales, squash and a few fruits. On the other hand, the Peninsular Spaniards were always thought to be racially superior to the indigenous mestizo population. Food reflected and reinforced this racial superiority as "...the relations of domination established in the colonial period were represented by the stigmatizing of certain indigenous foods as "Indians" and hence unfit for consumption by non-Indians."  <fnote>Pilcher, ¡Que Vivan Los Tamales! , pp. 3. </fnote><fnote>Judith Friedlander, What It means to be Indian in Hueyapan (New York, 1975), pp. 96. </fnote><fnote>Mary Weismantel, Food Gender and Poverty in the Ecuadorian Andes (Philadelphia, 1988), pp. 9. </fnote>In close comparison, Belize was also racially segmented during the colonial period, of which food became an important marker of race, class and ethnicity. Belizean food was influenced by a colonial system of cultural valuation which placed local food products at the bottom and expensive imports at the top. Food reflected class distinctions when elitism was associated with "a remarkable range in luxury imported food and drink, often identified with a place of origin in Europe". More notably, racial and class cleavages were reinforced through the rise of a local, middle class petty bourgeoisie who were ethnically mixed and increasingly identified themselves as Creoles rather than as Europeans or Hispanics. They "frowned upon local food such as fresh fish, tropical produce and game meat" and adopted foreign food items from the Mexican or mestizo culture in the northern district of the country. Although food became clear demarcations of class, race and ethnicity, these cleavages were more fluid. In actuality, indigenous food became "delicacies as long as they were prepared according to European recipes and smothered with imported sauces."  <fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 73. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 75. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 75. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 75. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Beauty and the Feast", pp. 308. </fnote><heading>Food Conceals, Eliminates or Fuses Cleavages</heading>The formation of national cuisines is truly a post-colonial, post-industrial process. Both Mexico and Belize are excellent case studies for the study of how food unites nations despite regional, racial and ethnic diversity. In post-colonial and post-revolutionary regime of Belize and Mexico respectively, both took the leap in "imagining distinctive national identities but paradoxically lagged behind in achieving (true) national unification." From here, food played a major role in fostering national identities and consciousness. The emergence of a creolized form of national cuisine in both Mexico and Belize testify to the integrative ability of food. <fnote>Pilcher, ¡Que Vivan Los Tamales! , pp. 66. </fnote>The twin processes of the consciousness and emergence of a national cuisine in Mexico, mirrored an "... Aztec God, (that) wore many masks." This complicated process of national cuisine formation passed through three distinct periods. Following Independence in 1821, elites often defined the national cuisine in European terms, excluded the lower classes and their food, "tamales and other corn products from respectable dinner tables." In 19th century Mexico, national cuisines thus reflected more cleavages as European culinary experiences reigned supreme over Mexican indigenous food. Wealthy Mexicans often adhered to French haute cuisine; their "kitchen manuals contained recipes for the basic sauces espagnole, velouté... stylish appetizers include quenelle soup..." Following on to the Porfirian period in the early 20th century, the revolutionary concern for a national workforce led to the tortilla discourse. This elitist food discourse prompted a nation-wide campaign to replace corn with wheat in the national diet. Through languages of nutritional science, elites during this discourse claimed that the race of wheat was more superior because it was affiliated to the work of culture and hence it was the key to national progress. At the end of this arduous process of cuisine formation, Mexican's national cuisine emerged in a Creolized form as a dish known as Mole Poblano which had both Indian and Spanish influences. In a symbolic sense, Mole Poblano becomes the emblem of a mestizo heritage and epitomises the fusion between regions, races and remarkably, the historical cleavage between the Old and New World. Mexican national cuisine has emerged because of, rather than, despite the increasing articulation of regional and ethnic cuisines. In reality, food that divides nations may in turn be the uniting ones. <fnote>Pilcher, ¡Que Vivan Los Tamales! , pp. 46. </fnote><fnote>Pilcher, ¡Que Vivan Los Tamales! , pp. 153. </fnote><fnote>Pilcher, ¡Que Vivan Los Tamales! , pp. 63. </fnote>Likewise, the development of a national cuisine in Belize also reflected the role of food in creating national cleavages in some cases while uniting them in others. Even with the existing racial cleavages during the colonial period, there were uniting forces that laid the foundations for the gradual emergence of Creole food as the "national cuisine" of Belize. Given the small size of the colony and degree of inter-ethnic interaction, people of all races and ethnicities were forced to work together across cultures and class. Specific recipes and cooking techniques were exchanged when the Creole working class women were hired in elite households and foreign cooks were hired by timber companies and sugar mills to feed a multiethnic workforce. All these multiethnic culinary sites allowed people of all cultures and classes to work together, "engaged in various kinds of creolization that led to convergence."  <fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 77. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 77. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 77. </fnote>In contrast to the Mexican case study above, the formation of a Belizean cuisine reflected more contemporary forces that also fostered national consciousness. Firstly, there was a rise in awareness of local food with the huge increase of Belizeans emigrating overseas. Among expatriate Belizean Americans, food became the central source of national identity and a focus of sentimental link to the home country. As such, Belizeans began to reconstitute their national identities in foreign places through the adoption of ethnic and national cooking. More so, this rise in national consciousness was sustained by the emergence of ethnic restaurants abroad which becomes sites of national familiarity. By 1972, there was a "Belize Bar and Grill" in Brooklyn, New York, where one can find Belizean Belikin beer and have a traditional cuisine of rice and beans along with other generic Caribbean dishes. Secondly, there was a surge in tourism in the mid 1980s that increased the demand for authentic Belizean cuisine. In response, chefs often included a "Belizean Dish of the Day" on their menus and some hotels responded with a lunchtime plate of rice and beans.  <fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 81. </fnote><fnote>Wilk, "Beauty and the Feast", pp. 311. </fnote>Indeed, many issues that were once seen as localized are now being reinterpreted in a global context. While in many ways, Belize is an isolated example, the processes taking place there that shape cuisine and national identity are exactly the same as those existing in many other places in the world. The Belizean experience simply illustrates the tension and interaction between conflicting forces of division and integration between the local and global which ultimately led to varied forms of national cuisines that are "creolized, deterritorised, reimagined & commodified."  <fnote>Wilk, "Food and Nationalism", pp. 68. </fnote><heading>A Contemporary Approach</heading>Moving on from a historical perspective of the role of food in societies, this section will examine food as a tool of analysis, in particular the food-related activity of food blogging will illuminate similar thematic issues explored previously. To begin with, the term "blog" is an abbreviated version of "weblog" used to describe an online journal, containing dated entries, often made by a sole author. More specifically, the focus of analysis here is on food blogs which are commonly understood to be weblogs devoted directly and mostly (if not entirely) to discussions on food or food-related activities. Since the turn of the century, food blogging has emerged as a popular mode of food writing to the extent that the International Blogging Awards introduced a separate category for the Best Food Blog in 2005. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that this blog phenomenon is also propagating considerably in Latin America, particularly in Panama. This sets the national context of the food blog that has been selected for analysis as the author of the blog is a Panamanian. The spread of food blogging in Panama is articulated by Armando Carrasco in an article titled "Esos Diarios Virtuales", or "those virtual diaries" in English (Refer to "Appendix One" for a scanned copy of the article). Along with the surge in food blogging, there is also an increased interest in food studies; food magazines, cookbooks, culinary schools, television chefs are merely the most popular manifestations of an upsurge in interest in this field. Inevitably, the next challenge for food connoisseurs will be to adopt more contemporary tools of analysis for such novel developments in this domain. As food blogging remains an unexplored domain for academic research in food studies, this essay will adopt this unconventional mode of analysis which should be rewarding. <fnote>Super, "Food and History", pp. 173. </fnote>Owing to the vastness of the food blogosphere, the number of possible food blogs for academic analysis is also extensive. As such, the essay will limit the analysis to one of the most notable Latin American blog to facilitate an adequate discussion of thematic issues without losing depth. The culinary journal selected is titled "The Cooking Diva Blog" and it is written and updated by Chef Melissa De Leon. In particular, the essay will focus on relevant food blog entries pertaining to Latin American cuisine, especially so to two food sections categorised as Ethnic Cuisine: from Latin America and Ethnic Cuisine: Ecuadorian or Andean. This is to streamline the analytical focus towards the thematic concerns of the essay. "The Cooking Diva's Blog" is deemed as the best food blog for analysis because it has earned its reputation worldwide by winning the best Latin American blog in the 2007 Global Weblogs Award.  <fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "2007 Bloggies: The Cooking Diva Wins Best Latin American Weblog!", The Cooking Diva Blog, 13 March 2007. < URL > (2 May 2007). </fnote>This food blog reveals Latin American cuisines through a holistic presentation of Latin American food cultures, customs, festivals and events, from the perspective of a female Panamanian. Moreover, it is an added bonus that the author, Chef Melissa De Leon, is a renowned female food connoisseur and esteemed chef in the field who graduated from the USPCI, and a Certified Personal Chef granted by the USPCA (United States Personal Chef Association). Her credibility as an author on national cuisines arises not only from her culinary credentials and experiences, but also from her passion for Latin American cultures and cuisines. There is a particular line that strikes a cord with a purpose of this essay; she expressed that "sharing glimpses of those (culinary) experiences could be a wonderful way to draw our (her) friends and readers into a deeper understanding of Latin American culture." Hence, the essay hopes to situate the analysis of national cuisines within a cultural context, examined through the lens of a food blog. <fnote>Melissa DeLeon & Panama Gourmet, "About the Chef", Panama Gourmet, < URL > (2 May 2007). </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "Food for the Soul: Holy Week & Lent in Latin America", The Cooking Diva Blog, 22 March 2007. < URL > (2 May 2007). </fnote><heading>Food Blogs as Cookbooks of Shared Experiences</heading>As a tool of analysis, a food blog functions retains its usefulness as a cookbook presented in a new form. As with traditional cookbooks, food blogs with recipes often illustrate the divisive or integrative power of food to include or exclude people, unite or divide nations. As evident from culinary blogs such as "The Cooking Diva Blog", food blogs may feature diverse recipes of national cuisines. Through their writing and sharing of recipes, these food blog authors may help "unify a country by encouraging the interchange of foods between regions, classes and ethnic groups"  as "recipes move where people may not." For instance, Chef Melissa De Leon noted in one of her blog entries on coffee beans, how food may become the uniting factor that ""reunites cultures and people all over the world." She illustrated the integrative ability of food by stating that "whether our (coffee) beans are from Colombia, Costa Rica, Brazil, Africa, Ecuador or Panamá, we all have our favourites." More notably, cookbooks function on a higher level as collective memory and identity of the nation. One of the most distinctive blog entries comes from her recipe for and description of Mexico's national cuisine: Mole Poblano. She noted that, "The 'mole' is one of the most enigmatic and interesting foods from the whole world. It´s preparation and final result depends upon the diversity of ingredients used from city to city in México, and the personal preferences of the cooks. It is a very personal, unique dish which with the help of your imagination and personal touch will reach new dimensions in your kitchen." From here, it is demonstrated that a culture's food is clearly preserved in its recipes and has come to symbolise that culture and its homeland. "Recipes embrace the past and also locate a group's identity in the present." With that, food blogs function as an open book of collated recipes which become handy tools of analysis when we unravel their symbolism. <fnote>Pilcher, ¡Que Vivan Los Tamales! , pp. 2. </fnote><fnote>Arjun Appadurai, "How to Make a National Cuisine: Cookbooks in Contemporary India", Comparative Studies in Society and History, 30 (1988), pp. 7. </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "From the Tropics: Fiesta Cashew Mole with Grilled Chicken", The Cooking Diva Blog, 11 April 2007. < URL > (2 May 2007). </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "Coffee: The Elixir of the Tropics", The Cooking Diva Blog, 26 March 2007. < URL > (2 May 2007). </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "From the Tropics". </fnote><fnote>Janet Theophano, Eat My Words: Reading Women's Lives through the Cookbooks They Wrote (New York, 2002), pp. 83. </fnote><heading>Food Blogs as Doorways to the Unexplored</heading>Very often, historians have adopted traditional and formal sources, such as governmental food policies, national cuisines discourses and rations to study the patterns of food consumption, production, tastes and preferences in a society. While such sources are more credible, they are limited by their top-down perspectives derived purely from the public sphere. As such, an analysis of food blogs will provide a counter-perspective by opening up personal and domestic culinary sites to the public eye. Like any other food blogs, "The Cooking Diva Blog" is a public culinary site accessible to all, yet it is also a backdoor to a domestic kitchen that brings us to the personal life and culinary perspectives of a female cook, in turn illuminating larger regional and national culinary themes. One important dimension revealed through her home recipes is the larger theme of Latin American home-style food which is often obscured when commercialised national cuisines are emphasized over local delicacies. She mentions the importance of plantains in domestic cooking as it is "a tradition in Latin American home style food to have ripe bananas or plantain with your main dish at lunch or dinner." Similarly, she conveys the same idea through her description of the Pescado Frito or Crispy Fried Whole Fish as "a notorious element in the Latin American, tropical kitchen. Its golden colour shines among the plates of natives and visitors. It is a tradition for the tourist and an everyday delight for the locals." A notable illustration of how food is often fused with local customs is elaborated in her extensive review on making Tamales on Christmas Eve in preparation for a family feast on Christmas day. From recalling her own personal experience, she nationalised the tamales making experience by presenting Tamales as a "Panamanian delicacy which secret recipes and techniques have been carried by families, generation after generation" In a way, food unites families on a personal level as much as it unites societies on a national level. <fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "La Receta del Dia: Banana Scallops", The Cooking Diva Blog, 30 May 2005. < URL > (5 May 2007). </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "La Receta del Dia: Pescado Frito (Crispy Fried Whole Fish)", The Cooking Diva Blog, 19 August 2005. < URL > (5 May 2007). </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "The Corn-Quest Tales & a Delicious Recipe to Prepare", The Cooking Diva Blog, 27 Dec 2005, < URL > (5 May 2007). </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "The Corn-Quest Tales & a Delicious Recipe to Prepare", The Cooking Diva Blog, 27 Dec 2005, < URL > (5 May 2007). </fnote><heading>Food Blogging as an Open Forum</heading>In close relation to the above, a food blog not only unites people and societies through the recipes it encompasses; food blogging as a food-centred activity also unites people regionally, nationally and globally. Fundamentally, a food blog is a more democratic form of media from the point of view of production as it is accessible to anyone with internet access and a certain level of IT skills. By virtue of this democratic nature, food blogs open up the field of published and public food writing to a much wider range of authors - practically anyone with an interest in food. Thus, this open space brings in new perspectives from diverse people bound together by a common interest in food who may document the range of food-related practices they engage in as part of their everyday lives. As such, food blogs provide a valuable source of primary data for researchers. Furthermore, food blogging also bestows a "foodie" identity upon the authors of food blogs. Through the production of blogs, foodies have become symbolic cultural intermediaries who often mediate between the professional media (such as cookbooks) and their audiences. Food bloggers thus gain a significant degree of cultural power to influence the culinary practices and tastes of people. As such, food blogging as an activity is important in itself. <heading>Food Blogging as a Culinary Discourse</heading>Finally, national cuisines are sustained through continual consumption, production and consciousness of it. Food blogging represent an informal, bottom-up process of consolidating and sustaining national cuisines. As noted earlier, national cuisines function mostly in the minds of people, hence it is crucial that people are actively engaged in sustaining a cuisine by "using ingredients, methods and recipes on a regular basis to produce both their everyday and festive foods, eating the same diet more or less consistently and sharing what they cook with each other." Moreover, a holistic understanding of national cuisines comes with an understanding of the cultures they are embedded within. "The Cooking Diva Blog" offers this holistic account of national cuisines with pictorial and video illustrations. More strikingly, the symbolism of food comes along with culinary events and festivals and her coverage on the Holy Week illuminates this connection. She emphasizes the importance of the Holy Week which comes about from the fusion of three main influences, "...indigenous, European, African, and the role of the Catholic Church in Latin American popular culture." Extending from the fusion of food cultures to a fusion of ethnic cultures, she expressed that "Spanish (and Portuguese) conquerors brought their religious beliefs with them when they came to the Americas, and these beliefs blended with the beliefs of the indigenous tribes in this part of the hemisphere at that time... At the end, those are the factors which have blended along centuries to give Latin America a unique culture of its own." Ultimately, food customs are derived from the national cultural context they are embedded within. Chef Melissa De Leon has effectively illustrated this correlation between cuisines and cultures through her presentation and celebration of food as an integral feature of Latin America in "The Cooking Diva Blog". <fnote>Mintz, Tasting Food, pp. 98. </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "Food for the Soul: Holy Week & Lent in Latin America", The Cooking Diva Blog, 22 March 2007. < URL > (2 May 2007). </fnote><fnote>Chef Melissa De Leon, "Food for the Soul". </fnote>Stringing up all the above issues discussed, it is evident that a food blogging discourse may illuminate as much as it may conceal important thematic issues in this field of study. As blogging is a relatively new phenomenon, very little sociological study has been done on it, much less on food blogging and identity. It is important that we adopt this mode of enquiry with full understanding of its limitations. Some food blogs may offer "offer rare witty excursions into the semiotics of food rather than work that sets research agendas" hence it is crucial that we are meticulous in our choices of food blogs for academic analysis. Furthermore, food blogs offer perspectives from personal experiences which may be inherently biased. It is important that we are also equipped with prior academic knowledge of the issues or themes we are exploring, hence using a food blog as a complimentary tool to further expand those themes. <fnote>Ferguson and Zukin, "What's Cooking?", pp. 195. </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>At this stage, it is vital that we recall the vastness of this domain of food studies. The infinite nature of the discourse at hand empowers us to select only certain tools of analysis for certain aspects of study. Essentially, the essay has focused on the analysis of food and its role in creating, reinforcing, bridging and fusing national cleavage. With this thematic issue in mind, the entire essay has examined such forces of unity or disunity within the regional framework of Latin America from two distinct yet complementary approaches. The first approach provides a historical overview on the development of national cuisines in both Mexico and Belize. In this respect, food emerges as a subject of enquiry more than a tool of analysis. The comparative analyses of the culinary regimes and national cuisine formation processes in Mexico and Belize have revealed similar trends. In the early stages of national cuisine formation, food actually reveals and creates more cleavages in society; food habits and preferences often reflect and demarcate clear ethnic and racial divisions within a multiethnic context of a colonial regime. Yet food also has the complementary ability to unite societies. In the final stages leading up to the emergence of a coherent national cuisine, food may become the emblem of national unity. The fact is that both Belize and Mexico emerged with a creolized national cuisine that fused regional, ethnic and racial cleavages. In this light, the divisive or integrative power of food becomes a fluid concept, suggesting the ability of food to assert either role over time. While the first approach encapsulates the fluid ability of food to divide or unite nations, the second approach views food-related entities and food-centred activities as important tools of analysis which swing back to the fact that food is an important subject of enquiry. Food historians have often adopted a diverse array of sources for insight into culinary regimes; these sources include cookbooks, travel narratives, literature and paintings. Moving away from these traditional sources of analyses, this essay has adopted a food blog as a tool of analysis which has some crucial implications. Firstly, the importance of a food blog derives from it being a modern manifestation of a cookbook, fulfilling the traditional purposes of a cookbook and uniting the nation through an exchange of recipes and common culinary experiences. Secondly, the importance of a food blog stems from the related activity of food-blogging which creates a community of "foodies" that ushers in multiple perspectives, ranging from the personal to the political. In turn, this affirms the multidisciplinary nature of this field and opens up new possibilities and directions for the historian, anthropologist, sociologist and many more. Taken together, food blogs and food blogging become viable means of sustaining national cuisines. A national cuisine cannot exist unless there is a community of people who eat it, cook it, have opinions about it and engage in dialogue about it. In effect, an active national cuisine translates into national solidarity. In all, the thematic concern of the essay has been holistically addressed through two distinctive yet complementary modes of enquiry. The conclusion is simple yet complex. Food may create national cleavages however they acknowledge, conceal and fuse them to a far greater extent such that food unites nations more than divides them in reality. 