This essay rests on a fundamental basis that there is an intricate link between the abstract world of theory and the real world of policy. The key idea is that theory is applicable to the real world and does reflect the real world, though with varying perspectives to varying degrees. The timeframe set for the context of this discussion is the aftermath of Cold war, as we witnessed the switch in world power configuration from a bipolar power structure to a new world order. In particular, I will limit the discussion to branches of realism and liberalism as I believe both provide the best analytical frameworks to analyse the nature of America's power in the 20 th century. The focal point will be on how these theories interpret the exercise of American's power (use and/or abuse) in relation to other nation states, discuss the sustainability and legitimacy of America's power in the years to come and hence her role in setting the global world order. By extension, the various theoretical approaches will lead to a further discussion of whether America's exercise of power is justified or not and whether it showcases itself in as a de facto unipolar hegemon or a multipolar activist. There is a consensus in both of the theories that America does possess the power to dominate though they differ in varying degrees in their acceptance of it. With the demise of the cold war stabilizing bipolarity, the US along with Japan and western Europe have reaffirmed their alliance partnerships, contained political conflicts, expanded trade and investment between them and avoided a return to strategic rivalry and great power balance. In addition, the US is still as superior in many aspects; in terms of military power - the US is the only country with both nuclear weapons and conventional forces with global reach. American military expenditures are greater that those of the next 8 countries combined, and it leads in the information-based "revolution in military affairs". In economic size, America's 31% share of world product is equal to the next four countries combined (Japan, Germany, Britain, France). In terms of cultural prominence, the US is the number one film and television exporter in the world. Despite the consensus on American's dominance, the realist approach views the nature of America's power and the exercise of that power in relation to other nation states differently from liberalism. On a general level, the two core ideologies in realism are state centric and power centric by nature hence the world prescriptions it offers, provides legitimacy for the US to assume a dominant role in international affairs and advocates the US to focus on interests rather than ideology and to seek peace through strength. Realists advocate that states act according to interests and interests is defined according to power which is defined narrowly in military strategic terms and by extension, this view does provide justification for America's exercise of power in the international realm. This is reflected accurately to a certain extent when US has tried to demonstrate that greater benefits accrue from accepting the US rather than from challenging the unipolar order - by punishing Iraq and Afghanistan, offering a US-China partnership as long as China agrees to be a junior partner and relying on multilateral mechanisms to promote their objectives, e.g. in the Persian Gulf. In relation to the paragraph above, the exercise of power in the global arena will be based on pragmatism and rationality (realpolitik) rather than morality since there is an absence of an international morality that can be applied to nation states. By this notion, there is no way we can judge American's exercise of power. Specifically, both Machiavelli and E.H.Carr see principles or morality as subordinated to policies; hence America's exercise of power is linked to pragmatic considerations and interests. Even though actions and ideologies are wrapped up in language of morality and idealism, they are generally balanced by a more pragmatic search for the national interest. Wilsonian morality has long tussled with the realpolitik of Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Kissinger and does so even in the words and deeds of George Bush. In this respect, liberals will argue that US exercise of power can be questionable. This is substantiated by the view taken by offensive realists like John Mearsheimer who sees states as pragmatic power seekers and will always alter the existing distribution of power even if such an action may jeopardize their own security On the flip side, there is the aspect of defensive realism taken by Waltz and Joseph Grieco who defend the role of US and argue that states have security as their principle interests and therefore seek the requisite amount of power to ensure their survival. They will probably view US exercise of power in third world states like Iraq and Afghanistan as legitimate defensive actions. After all, Henry Kissinger wrote "a nation's survival is its first and ultimate responsibility. It cannot be compromised or put to risk". This view of American power does spell trouble if US is led by an administration that rejoices in rejecting or abrogating international treaties, acting unilaterally rather in multilateral concert with others in pursuing its notion of security. Despite the practical analysis of America's power, there are obvious limitations to realist interpretation of America's power. Firstly, even though interests may be defined according to power, their definition of power is too narrow. It fails to take in account that though all states may seek power but not all states seek to maximize power and fail to differentiate between the notions of hard and soft power. The exercise of both will yield different results; if America were to dominate with the use of the latter, perhaps its exercise of power will be deemed as more legitimate and respected. Secondly, it does not explain how states define, redefine or formulate their interests and liberalism will supplement this failure by directing attention to the way in which domestic and international factors interact to change states' definitions of their interests. In addition, an important point is that the statist view of international relations is increasingly challenged as information revolution is creating virtual communities and networks that cut across national borders. Transnational corporations and non governmental actors (terrorists as well) will play larger roles. September 11 th was a terrible symptom of the deeper changes that were already occurring in the world. Technology has been defusing power away from governments and empowering individuals and groups to play roles in world politics including wrecking massive destruction. Privatization has been increasing and terrorism is the privatization of war. Lastly, reality is so complex and ambiguous that the policies which we choose to call "realistic" at any particular moment depends to a significant degree on personal predispositions and perspectives. On the other hand, Liberalism provides an alternative perspective to how we view America's power and how it should be exercised. In particular, liberal institutionalists like David Mitrany would question the effectiveness of America's sole exercise of power as he argues that transnational co-operation is a necessity in order to resolve common problems. His core concept is ramification, meaning the likelihood that as states become more embedded in an integration process, the cost of withdrawing from cooperative ventures increases. Hence, American's exercise of power will only be justified and effective if it operated with the awareness and intention of integration. Furthermore, Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye reinforces that the world was not to be seen as state-centric, and not to be dominated by a hegemon as the centrality of other actors such as interest groups, transnational corporations and INGOS had to be considered. America will then be one of the many diverse actors in a cobweb of international relations linked through multiple channels of interaction. Similarly, balance of power theorists also tends to view American's dominance with a skeptical and less accepting approach. As today's American dominance will lead inexorably to global or local alliances against it. American power is not a solution, but a problem in itself. The world, on this view, demands some sort of balance and so, in time, one will form as others gang up against the arrogant hegemon. Yet the actual feasibility of this idea of "bandwagoning" against America is doubtful as the incentive to ally with America is even stronger in reality. Lastly, unlike realists who see American dominance in the world as an asset, liberals give creditability to America's power only to the extent that it is used to defend other members of the liberal community, to discriminate in certain instances in their favour and to override in some circumstances the domestic sovereignty of states in order to rescue fellow human beings from intolerable oppression. Yet this raises the issues of humanitarian intervention and national sovereignty; intervention without invitation is intrusion and breaches international law, hence how far do we intervene in domestic affairs even if it is done in the intention of "liberation"? By extension, this theory has failed in this aspect because the US has constantly been questioned about its "liberation" policies in third world states; for example, Lebanon, Bosnia and Somalia. This theory assumes that liberalism is agreed upon internationally and is the best form of system and fails dangerously when it does not take into account that the idea of 'crusading liberalism' in a world armed with nuclear weapons is risky. Despite some partial failures in its application to the real world, liberalism does provide a framework of conduct that advocates that the US should exercise its power and formulate its policies in a multilateral framework that will enable it to make its disproportionate power more legitimate and acceptable to others. By discussing both realist and liberalist approach to issue of American's exercise of power, it is safe to conclude that the merger between liberalism and realism will be the best approach in interpreting American's present and future role. The crux of the "merged" approach will be to view America's power as hegemony with liberal features. It does not deny realist approach of states acting in national interest and in turn extends it to the idea that national interest may coincide or overlap with world interest and American's national interest is special because it offers the closet match to world interest. Hence it is crucial that America act in its national interest because it spreads ideas of liberty along with it; free trade, rule of law, safety and security and the protection of property. In particular, this approach also brings in the liberalist approach that there are possible ways of political process of learning and of redefining national interests in a framework of multilateral institutions and regimes. Therefore, transnational and interstate interactions and norms lead to new definitions of interests as well as to new coalition possibilities for different interests within states. American hegemony is essentially a liberal hegemony if it understands that its exercise of power operates within an institutionalized political process and is capable of "strategic restraint". In return its partners agree to be willing participants within the hegemonic order. In this respect, the concept of American's power today is relative; it is only legitimate and respected if other states accept it. Hence in reality, America is a controlled hegemon; its power is not exercised in a vacuum but in relation and response to external factors and internal restraints. In conclusion, an integrated approach using both liberalism and realism will also be crucial to the longevity of American power. When great power defines its national interests broadly to include global interests, some degree of unilateralism is more likely to be acceptable. It will facilitate the establishment of a durable and mutually acceptable order among states with huge power asymmetries. 