The nature of the essay title alludes to the nature of the issue for discussion; its vagueness and ambiguity leave room for discussions that have ushered in a wide array of diverse and enlightened work over the years. Many thinkers and empirical social scientists have devoted their time in assessing capital punishment in its totality however it is clearly out of a question to even attempt a comprehensive treatment of it on that extensive scale here. Instead, the essay will present a coherent and convincing argument for capital punishment to be reinstated in abolitionist states and maintained in retentionist states in four parts. The first part of the essay will evaluate capital punishment on its own terms and justify it from a combination of three theoretical perspectives in the order of the retributivist approach, the deterrence aspect and finally the reformist or moral education school of thought. Following on, the next section will examine two practical features of the capital punishment - its fallibility and its finality - which, firmly justify the need to retain the death penalty, contrary to belief that both are arguments for its abolition. The next part of the essay will evaluate capital punishment in its respective societal context and judicial/criminal system. This holistic approach will advocate some safeguards and limitations to "perfect" capital punishment in an imperfect world. Lastly, the essay will conclude that capital punishment is not only justified in its own right and in the justified circumstances, the state is the only justified authority with the means to implement it. <heading>Justifying Capital Punishment on the Basis of Punishment</heading>As Hugo Adam Bedau rightly stated, "understanding and justifying capital punishment needs to proceed from within a larger framework..." which is derived fundamentally from the justification of criminal punishment. To begin with, punishment is understood as "the infliction of pain or penalties or the deprivation of privileges, by an authorized person or persons on a person or persons believed to be guilty of having broken the law or more generally of having done wrong". Punishment in this sense and throughout the essay will primarily refer to criminal punishment and ignore formal or informal aspects of punishment imposed by other institutions or agencies. In this manner, punishment is justified as they are penalties imposed on "public wrongs"; to redress the "wrongs that flout values that are essential to the community's identity..." <fnote>Hugo Adam Bedau, "Capital Punishment", in Hugh LaFollette, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics (Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2003), p. 705. </fnote><fnote>Don Locke, "The Many Faces of Punishment ", Mind, New Series, 72 (1963), p. 568. </fnote><fnote>R.A. Duff, "Punishment", in Hugh LaFollette, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics (Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2003), p. 331. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.333. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.333. </fnote>From here, capital punishment is a further extension of the notion of punishment; it exacts a higher penalty on a greater wrong that has been committed or could alternatively be seen as the highest penalty exacted on the greatest wrongs committed in a society. The higher penalty will be the penalty of death for the commission of a specific crime as compared to the deprivation of freedom or material possessions one has. <heading>Part I: Justifying Capital Punishment on its Own Merits</heading>Upon establishing that capital punishment is fundamentally justified upon the justification of punishment, this section will extend from that argument to defend capital punishment on its own merits by examining the retributivist, deterrence and finally the reformist approaches in this chronological order. In essence, these three theories are not as clearly defined as they seem and the combination of these three theories into a consistent and coherent argument is perhaps the strongest justification for capital punishment.  <fnote>Michael Philips, "The Justification of Punishment and the Justification of Political Authority", Law and Philosophy, 5 (1986), p. 410. </fnote><heading>A. Retributivist Approach - The Right to Inflict </heading>Put simply, retributivism is the idea that that the guilty deserve punishment. It is differentiated from vengeance as it is a rational belief in a system of law to punish any member that has acted unjustly and the "purpose of punishment is to restore the balance of justice within the community, not further to derange it". <fnote>Robert S. Gerstein, "Capital Punishment 'Cruel and Unusual'? A Retributivist Response", Ethics, 85 (1974), p.77. </fnote>The retributive line of thought is thus a good starting point to examine any theoretical justification for capital punishment. In other words, this is the justification for capital punishment as a moral good in itself prior to further reflection on the extrinsic advantages of the act of punishing. It is indeed "a plea for the proper understanding of retribution as the primary ground of punishment and as setting the limits within which social coercion can legitimately be exercised for the purposes of reformation and deterrence", two theories which will be examined later. <fnote>D. J. B. Hawkins, "Punishment and Moral Responsibility", The Modern Law Review, 7 (1944), p. 208. </fnote>Capital punishment is justified in itself based on a strand of proportional and negative retributivism that we should only punish the guilty and not more harshly than they deserve. This justification for imposing the death penalty on the worst crimes is the closest morality acceptable approximation to the lex talionis. It does not mean that we literally apply the golden rule of "an eye for an eye" on matching punishments with crimes by raping rapists; it just means that the society's worst punishment is associated with the society's worst penalty within a hierarchy of morally permissible punishments in the state. Hence the death penalty should be kept as a viable option for states to adopt for the worst crimes. The Archbishop of Canterbury also reiterated this view when he stated that by reserving the death penalty for murder, the criminal law stigmatizes the gravest crime by the gravest punishment; hence it helps to "to foster in the community a special abhorrence of murder as 'crime of crimes' so that the element of retribution merges into that of deterrence". <fnote>Duff, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 335. </fnote><fnote>Jeffrey H. Reiman, "Justice, Civilisation and the Death Penalty: Answering Van Den Haag", Philosophy and Public Affairs, 14 (1985), p. 129. </fnote><fnote>Royal Commission on Capital Punishment report 1949-53, "The Deterrent Value of Capital Punishment", in Gertrude Ezorsky, eds., Philosophical Perspectives on Punishment (State University of New York Press: Albany, 1972), p. 251. </fnote>In addition, by imposing punishment on the deserving based on retributivist lines, it ironically respects criminals as fellow human beings and restores dignity to them. A criminal as any other moral human being deserves punishment because he or she has a certain ultimate responsibility for his or her deliberate actions. This view is derived from both Hegelian and Kantian account of the "equality and rationality of persons"'. In this sense, equality suggests like fates for both criminal and victim and rationality implies that one's actions are held to authorize his fate. <fnote>Reiman, Philosophy and Public Affairs, p.125. </fnote>However justifying capital punishment on a retributivist account alone is insufficient to warrant a convincing argument. It grants us a justified account of the right to impose the death penalty however the argument will only be strengthened if we had a duty to impose it as well. Hence, any argument justifying capital punishment based on purely retributivist stand must look beyond that; we need to establish an ethnical basis for capital punishment not only in reference to the wrong act in the past but also to "seek it instead in the future effects of reformation and deterrence".  <fnote>Hawkins, The Modern Law Review, p. 205. </fnote><heading>B. Deterrence Approach - The Incentive to Impose </heading>Moving on from the retributivist approach, capital punishment is further justified on the utilitarian approach. Within this consequentialist approach, there are two distinct justifications posed: short term deterrence and long term deterrent effect, which is synonymous with the reformist or moral education approach examined in a separate section below. In any analysis of punishment, the question of deterrence is paramount; it seems inevitable that public policy will be derived from the assessment of capital punishment's deterrent effect. Utilitarian theorists would measure the worth of punishment based on the consequential effects it brings about. In this sense, the justification for capital punishment is most convincingly put forth by its short term deterrent effect. Based on the common sense knowledge of human nature and the efficacy of the punishment understood in terms of its capacity to produce fear or avoidance reactions, it is believed that capital punishment "brings about consequential goods that outweigh the harms it causes". Put simply, the death penalty because of its severity & finality is more feared than imprisonment and deters some prospective murderers not deterred by the threat of imprisonment. After all, no one goes to certain inevitable death except by force. Put the matter in another perspective; "was there ever yet a criminal who, when sentenced to death and brought out to die, would refuse the offer of a commutation of his sentence for the severest secondary punishment"? <fnote>Duff, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 335. </fnote><fnote>Royal Commission on Capital Punishment report 1949-53, Philosophical Perspectives on Punishment, p. 252. </fnote>Although many abolitionists argue against the capital punishment based on the lack of a statistical proof for its deterrent value, yet "statistics will only show that there is no statistical proof for the deterrent effect of the death penalty but they do not show that there is no deterrent effect". The inconspicuousness of the deterrent effect also leads to its justification as J S Mill; a classic utilitarian stated evidently that "we partly know who those are whom it has not deterred, but who is there who knows whom it has deterred or how many human beings it has saved who would lived to be murderers if that awful association had not been thrown round the idea of murder from their earliest infancy". It seems clear that many would like to think that capital punishment does not deter as it relieves us of the weight of a moral decision to impose it on others. However, that would simply be an act of moral cowardice as we put real, unnameable lives at stake instead of putting the guilty ones to a rightful death. <fnote>Ernest Van Den Haag, "On Deterrence and the Death Penalty", Ethics, 78 (1968), p. 286. </fnote><fnote>Tom Sorell, Moral Theory and Capital Punishment (Basil Blackwell Ltd: Oxford, 1987), p. 86. </fnote>Furthermore, as with any other social policy, implementing the death penalty is certainly a gamble. Ernest Van den Haag illustrated with his Bet Argument that if we bet against capital punishment, we would be betting against the innocent and for the murderer, while if we bet for it is to bet against the murderer and for the innocent. That is certainly a risk we have to take and if we value the lives of saving innocent lives more highly than the loss of the guilty, it would be rational to implement the death penalty in the name of justice. <fnote>Louis P. Pojman, "Why the Death Penalty is Morally Permissible", in Hugu Bedau and Paul Cassell, eds., Debating the Death Penalty: Should America have Capital Punishment? The Experts on Both Sides make their Case (Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2004), p.66. </fnote>In all, the argument for the death penalty on its absolute deterrent effects is sufficient in itself. However it must be noted that its relative deterrent effects also depends on the "certainty and celerity of its imposition" together with a high degree of certainty of arrest and conviction. Whilst a system of capital punishment must find its positive justification in its efficiency as a method of crime prevention, it must also be bound by certain non-consequentialist side constraints on the means by which it pursues that end. This gives rise to a justification theory for capital punishment that rests on a side-constrained consequentialist justification based on proportional and negative retributivsm. Hence while the retributivists assert the moral right to inflict proportionate and just punishment on the criminal, consequentialist theorists provide the former with the incentives to implement capital punishment. <fnote>Bedau, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 712 </fnote><fnote>Duff, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 335. </fnote><heading>C. Reformist Approach - The Duty to Implement</heading>Linked to the above argument, another justification for retaining capital punishment is based on the deterrent effect it will have in the long run as penal sanctions are useful in the long run for the formation of the internal restraints so necessary to control crime. The imposition of capital punishment which should be reinforced continually will serve a long term purpose of socializing people to accept the high price of murder and the high value of life. <fnote>Van den Haag, Harvard Law Review, p. 1666. </fnote>This is associated with the view that punishment is an expressive symbolic act and a language for teaching ethnical knowledge. The law aims to prevent crime; but "it must also aim at the realization of the understanding which can identify crime in the long run". Unless the law creates awareness in men of the social meaning and consequences of a type of action, it merely challenges the potential criminal to greater crimes. <fnote>Robert. E. Gahringer, "Punishment as Language", Ethics, 71(1960), p. 47. </fnote>It is on this understanding of punishment that capital punishment must be evaluated - an absolute offence requires an absolute negation and one will testify to the appropriateness of capital punishment as the only effective symbol of absolute negation for grave crimes. What else could express the enormity of murder? In so far as capital punishment gives "forceful and accurate expression to the meaning of a type of action, it assists in the realization of mind and thus serves a higher moral purpose than its alternative". <fnote>Gahringer, "Punishment as Language", p. 48. </fnote>A practical illustration of this will be a substantial number of countries that have retained the death penalty and have not yet enforced it. According to Amnesty International statistics, there are 34 countries that have not executed anyone for the last 10 years or more. Thus, the mere presence of the death penalty in many countries appears to have a far greater symbolic value than practical significance. Perhaps the enduring belief that the threat of death, even if not enforced, still has a certain extent of deterrent power and the death penalty should remain an option available for the truly exceptional case. <fnote>Roger Hood, The Death Penalty, a Worldwide Perspective (Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2002), p. 95. </fnote>Furthermore, the deterrent effect of the death penalty has a two part goal: moral education of the criminal and moral education of the rest of society. Even if it seems likely that punishing some criminals will not effect their moral growth and may not even deter them, the moral education of the community about the nature of their crimes can still be promoted by their punishment. The reaction to the death penalty by the community is equally important, if not, more important than the reaction of the criminal at stake. As J.S. Mill clearly asserted, "the influence of a punishment is not to be measured by its effect on hardened criminals... the efficacy of a punishment which acts principally through the imagination, is chiefly to be measured by the impression it makes on those who are still innocent; by the horror with which it surrounds the first promptings of guilt...". <fnote>Hampton J, "The Moral Education Theory of Punishment", Philosophy and Public Affairs, 13 (1984), p. 231. </fnote><fnote>Sorell, Moral Theory and Capital Punishment, p. 86. </fnote>Till this day, many have questioned the moral purpose of the death penalty as it contradicts the high value placed on human life. However the argument for death penalty is strengthened when we adopt the perspective that execution, far from degrading the executed convict, affirms his rationality and responsibility for his actions. Besides, by undermining the death penalty, we undermine the lives of those who have been murdered by criminals who were far more deserving to live than criminals who volunteered to assume the risk of receiving a legal punishment that he could have avoided by not commuting a crime.  <fnote>Van den Haag, Harvard Law Review, p. 1669. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.1668. </fnote>Combining all three arguments together, the retributivist view justifies the moral right of the society to impose capital punishment which reconciles with the deterrent view that society has a practical incentive to sentence them to death and lastly, society has an obligation and ought to implement capital punishment in the interests of upholding justice for the welfare of the future generations. <heading>Part II: Justifying Capital Punishment based on its Fundamental Features</heading><heading>A. Fallibility of the Capital Punishment</heading>This aspect is a crucial aspect of capital punishment that has been used against it however this section will examine arguments against it in order to establish arguments for it. The basis of the argument is that while the capital punishment system is admittedly fallible, the death penalty should not shoulder the burden of a fallible judicial system; instead this should lead to the reform of the judicial system more so than the abolishment of the death penalty. The most notable argument against the death penalty system is that any risk of executing the innocent is too large a risk to run. Against this view, proponents for the death penalty may concede that the death penalty may occasionally fall upon the innocent as every form of punishment meted out by the criminal justice system involves errors and mistakes in its administration. However since we tolerate the death of innocents in mines or highways as a cost of economic development, it cannot be convincingly contended that the risk of executing an innocent is still so great an evil as to outweigh all other considerations. Besides there must be a clear distinction drawn between an intentional murder and a wrongful death penalty; a deliberate intention to kill the innocent in a murder is unjust while there is no such wrongful intention to kill the innocent in the maladministration of the death penalty. Hence, one must evaluate capital punishment placed within a fallible judicial and criminal system and realize that the death penalty is hardly unique in suffering from such shortcoming. To abolish it is to address the symptom, not the root of the problem. <fnote>Reiman, Philosophy and Public Affairs, p.117. </fnote><fnote>Louis P. Pojman, "Why the Death Penalty is Morally Permissible", in Hugu Bedau and Paul Cassell, eds., Debating the Death Penalty: Should America have Capital Punishment? The Experts on Both Sides make their Case (Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2004), p.68. </fnote>Another argument is against the relative injustice in the capital punishment system as it only affects the disadvantaged. Of approximately 650 persons on death rows throughout the US, they are, almost without exception, poor, black or ignorant. This is definitely a cause for concern; however it is not a legitimate reason to abolish the death penalty. Imperfect practices in themselves do not entail that the principles engendering these practices are unjust. Also, if we have to abolish a rule or practice, unless we treated everyone equally by the same rules all the time, we would have to abolish traffic laws and laws against rape, theft even murder. Most would argue against the injustice of the system, however the fact is that justice is established whenever a poor, black or ignorant guilty man is put to death despite many others that may have escaped the system. <fnote>Pojman, Debating the Death Penalty: Should America have Capital Punishment? The Experts on Both Sides make their Case, p.71. </fnote>Besides, Ernest Van den Haag expressed an argument that "unequal justice is still justice". Hence, justice depends on what a guilty person deserves and not on how others are treated. There is no merit in the attempt to let all capital-crime defendants go free of the death penalty simply because some have wrongly escaped it than in the attempt to persuade courts "to let all burglars go because some have wrongly escaped imprisonment". To reiterate the main crux of the argument, the death penalty is morally justified even if it is discriminatorily applied to only some of the guilty as it does remain just in each case in which it is applied justly.  <fnote>Stephen Nathanson, "Does it Matter if the Death Penalty is Arbitrarily Administered?", Philosophy and Public Affairs, 14 (1985), p. 152. </fnote><fnote>Nathanson, Philosophy and Public Affairs, p. 161. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 151. </fnote>More importantly, as we are aware of the shortcomings of the system, there should be more safeguards put in place; ensuring fair trials, allowing sufficient time to prepare a defence, adequate legal representation, the right to appeal and the right to seek a pardon or commutation of service. The fact is that judicial punishments are always left in the hands of "uncontrolled discretion of judges or juries" and unless we reform the entire judicial system with its racially prejudiced judges and juries, abolishing the capital punishment system will not solve the problem, instead it would be a greater injustice to society. <fnote>Ibid., p. 160. </fnote><fnote>Bedau, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 724. </fnote><heading>B. Finality Aspect of the Capital Punishment</heading>While the fallibility of the system makes it seemingly unjust, the finality of the system makes it "cruel and unusual". Many abolitionists have instead proposed life imprisonment as a viable alternative punishment to the death penalty. However it is arguable that life imprisonment is not an alternative punishment and does not bring about the same desirable outcomes that the capital punishment system does. <fnote>Thomas A. Long, "Capital Punishment 'Cruel and Unusual'?", Ethics, 83 (1973), p. 216. </fnote>Firstly, J.S. Mill in his powerful speech in favour of retention of capital punishment in a British parliamentary debate of 1868 alluded to the uniqueness of the capital punishment as its strength. The final, irrevocable nature of the death penalty makes it the "most appropriate" and "most impressive"  morally permissible penalty to be exacted on "greatest crime known to the law". Hence life imprisonment is not an alternative punishment in terms of the severity and nature of the punishment; life imprisonment fits less "heinous kinds of murder"  while the death penalty is "rightly reserved for the worst crime".  <fnote>Sorell, Moral Theory and Capital Punishment, p. 81. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 82. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 82. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 83. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p. 83. </fnote>Moreover, it is not a better alternative to death, because abolitionists fail to acknowledge that a system that makes mistakes even under the rigorous review given to a death penalty case is even more prone to make mistakes that result in the early release of the guilty and dangerous. In stark comparison to life imprisonment, capital punishment is the most effective and efficient punishment for bringing about just outcomes. Using incapacitation as a punishment prevents any further crimes that could have been committed by offender, even if such harm is only slight, remote and infrequent. <heading>Part III: Justifying Capital Punishment in a Circumstantial Context</heading>Up to this stage, it has been fully established that capital punishment is justified on its own terms. To further strengthen the argument for capital punishment, there must be some further conditional and circumstantial justifications put in place before capital punishment can be a functional and just system in any inevitably fallible judicial structure. It is easy to assert that capital punishment is entirely wrong or right on theoretical grounds however one must not neglect the fact that it is a circumstantial issue and has to be justified based on the necessity, regulation and nature of it in the respective society it is implemented in. To begin with, it can only be enforced in the most extreme cases. According to Article 6 (2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the death penalty may only be imposed "for the most serious crime in accordance with the law in force at the time of the commission of the crime." To impose the death penalty on petty crimes such as theft will only diminish the respect for such a penalty that can be abused by certain states. As a general rule, humanity forbids such punishments to be applied to any but crimes of very great enormity and atrocity to individuals or state; if any crimes can be effectively suppressed by moderate means, these ought to be resorted to first. Hence, the death penalty will be more justified when applied to severe crimes like treason, murder, arson, rape, multiple homicides. Beyond these and some others, it is extremely questionable whether there is any necessity or expediency of applying so great a severity to every crime.  <fnote>Hood, The Death Penalty, A Worldwide Perspective, p.75. </fnote><fnote>John C Hogan, "Joseph Story on Capital Punishment", California Law Review, 43 (1955), p. 80. </fnote><fnote>John C Hogan, "Joseph Story on Capital Punishment", California Law Review, 43 (1955), p. 80. </fnote>Furthermore, history has illustrated that capital punishment has been abused in totalitarian states during Hitler's and Mussolini's regimes; hence capital punishment is only further justified by a just judicial system in a just state. There must be a security system put in place that will ensure a high degree of arrest and conviction of the guilty which will then proceed on to a fair judicial system with a just appeal system to give every accused the benefit of the doubt before proven guilty. Moreover, the effectiveness of capital punishment would be enhanced if a system of penalties were adopted in conjunction with a moral education system in the state. Hence, the capital punishment system is further justified in a state that aims to reduce crime by cultivating a social inculcation system in its totality by having gun control laws or crime prevention awareness campaigns along with the penalties it exacts. Additionally, capital punishment is imposed differently in different countries, thus there are other considerations that one has to consider in order to establish an argument for capital punishment in a specific state. Such considerations include: "the judicial safeguards put in place, method by which judicial executions are carried out, where and under what circumstances they take place, the role assigned to personnel in carrying them out as well as the conditions under which and the amount of time during which persons are kept under sentence of death prior to execution or until their fate is otherwise determined".  <fnote>Hood, The Death Penalty, A Worldwide Perspective, p.97. </fnote>With all that in mind, it is evident that the capital punishment can be justified on various grounds, and should not be abolished, although there is certainly room for reform in some countries that have retained the death penalty, especially in those that violates international standards of permissible and humane punishment. At the very least, the solution should be to remedy the defect, not abolish the system. <fnote>Bedau, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 726. </fnote><heading>Part IV: Justifying State-imposed Capital Punishment</heading>Thus far, we have established that the murdered victim has the right to exact punishment & there are beneficial consequences of imposing the death penalty, this section will follow on to defend the rightful authority of the state to impose a just capital punishment system for the welfare of the individuals of the state. The basis of this argument rests on the rights to life and liberty justification espoused by John Locke who accepted incarceration and execution in response to violation of right to life and liberty. In a similar fashion, J.S. Mill defends the sanctity of human life by asserting the rights of dead victims to impose punishment on responsible wrongdoers. Ultimately, Mills stated rightly that "he who violates that right in another forfeits it in himself"  and if the murderer forfeits his right to life by violating the right of another to life, then society is justified in imposing the worst (morally permissible) type of punishments on the murderer. Therefore, by breaking the law, offenders forfeit their normal rights or moral standings as rightful citizens and hence justice has to be restored by imposing a penalty on them in order to "prevent future crimes and perhaps to restore them to law-abiding citizenship".  <fnote>Sorell, Moral Theory and Capital Punishment, p. 91. </fnote><fnote>Duff, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 339. </fnote>Extending from the rights of the individual to exact punishment from the criminal, a legitimate state also has a right to seek redress on behalf of capital crimes victims. The right to individual self preservation transforms into a societal interest when men enter society; the right to protect themselves from injury to redress wrong is transferred generally from individuals to community. The state has the obligation to define a minimal set of duties and rules which a human being in that community must adhere to in his or her dealings with other in order to ensure that an unacceptable level of violence and harm can be prevented. Most importantly, the death penalty should remain within the jurisdiction of a state. While international moral codes of conduct will help to establish a more uniform and just capital system over time, the death penalty is part of the criminal judicial system that is inherently within the jurisdiction of the national state. This point has been driven across by political resistances by Muslim states that regard the death penalty as a matter of national sovereignty that reflects their cultural and religious values. After all, on what grounds do we judge a state that reinforces capital punishment out of principle over another state that abolishes it due to public pressure? Surely, it remains the "sovereign right of states to determine the legal measures and penalties which are appropriate in their societies to combat serious crimes effectively."  <fnote>Hood, The Death Penalty, A Worldwide Perspective, p.18. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.19. </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>In a nutshell, the real question is whether an ideal account of capital punishment as it ought to be, can justify actual systems that fall far short of that ideal, so long as we adopt constructive efforts to reform them. The reply to this question will depend on how radically unjust we think our present practices are, the prospects for reform and other alternatives we can envisage in place of the prior system. Stringing all the various points listed above, there are a few final knots to tie before concluding that the capital punishment is theoretically justified on its own merit and can only be practically justified in some circumstances. To reiterate the first important point, non-utilitarian abolitionists would argue for its abolition based on the injustice of the death penalty system. However radically unjust we think our present practices are, the maladministration of the death penalty is not an argument for its abolition to the same extent that the fallibility of any criminal penalty system is not an argument for the absolutist abolition of the system of punishment itself. Like any other criminal penalty system, the fallibility of the capital punishment system ironically becomes a justification for its existence when we implement the capital punishment system with full awareness of human fallibility and strive to perfect the system to the best that we can achieve. With that, it opens up room for practical reform. The capital punishment system will have to be reinforced by legitimate safeguards inherent in any judicial system; rights to appeal, worthy judges and juries, just death row conditions and many others. As Joseph M. Giarratano emphasized accurately, "our system of criminal justice is far from perfect, yet imperfections not withstanding, it is a system of which we can be proud of, provided we recognize and maintain a realistic sense of our own fallible nature".  <fnote>Joseph M. Giarratano, "To the Best of Our Knowledge, We Have Never Been Wrong: Fallibility vs. Finality in Capital Punishment", The Yale Law Journal, 100 (1991), p. 1006. </fnote>Even in a practical world, it is arguable that the benefits of implementing a capital punishment system outweigh the costs. As it has been reiterated before, the capital punishment system can be justified on its own merits via the combination of three approaches: retributivist, deterrence and reformist. Furthermore, it has been justified that there is no other alternative punishment that can match up to the appropriateness, efficiency and effectiveness of a capital punishment system in relation to grave capital crimes. What is needed is the realization that different principles or justifications may be relevant at different points in imposing the death penalty in different cases. Beyond the belief that capital punishment has merit in itself, the capital punishment system must also be justified by other practical variables within the state it is implemented in. Simply put, the death penalty could be more justified in some cases and in some countries more so than others. It is a circumstantial concept of which we should assess it not merely on "its internal workings but on the wider socio-political context in which it is set". Hence it is crucial that abolitionists' countries adopt a soft approach to a hard penal treatment and be less judgmental on their abolitionist stance. Instead there should be a higher tolerance and understanding of countries that have retained the death penalty driven by practical necessity and out of pure belief in the value of the system. On this note, the death penalty is further justified in practice when it is imposed by a legitimate state which applies the penalty justly and selectively against the worst crimes fully secured in a just judicial system with the rights to appeal. <fnote>Duff, The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics, p. 353. </fnote>To conclude, the capital punishment system is justified theoretically to a great extent on its own merit. While we do not always assume that the actualities will be close to that ideal, the capital punishment system is justified practically like any other fallible penalty system that is capable of reform to near perfection. 