Before we embark on the foundational basis that grounds political obligation, it is crucial that we adopt a critical analysis of this ideologically loaded notion, examining not only its contextual origins, theoretical nature, justifications for its existence as well as the inherent flaws and limitations in the justifications he posed, establishing whether he grounds political obligation legitimately and sufficiently. According to Hobbes, political obligation is taken to be the absolute obedience to the sovereign in all circumstances except when demands are inimical to one's inalienable right to self-preservation, i.e. "to do those actions, which the said man or council (sovereignty in question) shall command them to do and to do no action which he or they shall forbid". <fnote>Tuck, R. (1991) Hobbes Leviathan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 95 - 97 </fnote>Political obligations derive themselves from a contractual system that Hobbes envisage, would logically emerge from a state of anarchy. By contracting with each other to enforce commands issued by a non-contracting party against others, they create a situation in which it is generally irrational, given their interests, not to do what the sovereign commands. In essence, "obey even when there isn't a policeman, because this contributes to peace; only provided that there are enough policemen around to give you more security that you would get in a free-for-all."  <fnote>Sorrell, T. (1986) Hobbes. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, p. 50 </fnote>With the contextual origins established above, the nature of political obligation is as such that it is a voluntary undertaking since "there being no obligation on any man, which ariseth not from some act of his own; for all men equally, are by nature free." Obligations are also owned to certain other parties due to the grant of a right to another of which we derive protection from. Lastly, another key characteristic is that Hobbes defines the renouncement or violation of the political obligation to be "injustice". When a subject authorizes his sovereign to act on his behalf, the subject is obliged not to withdraw, and is also obliged to "perform no act incompatible with his authorization of this sovereign" as "such hindrance is injustice and injury". <fnote>Tuck, Hobbes Leviathan. p. 92 </fnote><fnote>Tuck, Hobbes Leviathan. p. 93 </fnote>With the above, the framework for political obligation is sufficiently structured and we will now examine Hobbes's justifications for its existence. This can be neatly summarized into two arguments, firstly the Consequentialist Argument and secondly, the Procedural Justification reasoning. The Consequentialist Argument is largely outcome-based. It is in our interests to abide by the political obligation for the ends of sovereignty or political society or the sovereign are good ends. Hobbes points out that it is in our interest to being under such an obligation to get out of the state of nature. The state of nature as defined by Hobbes is one where there is perpetual conflict, driven by competition, diffidence and glory. In Hobbes most famous words, Man's life in the state of nature would be but "solitary, poore, nasty, brutish and short". Hence, since men's greatest fear is death, our justification to obey is based on the delivery of the government which we expected when we covenanted, i.e. peace and protection from violent death which is provided by the sovereign. This in itself is enough to compel all rational human beings to undertake such an obligation because in violating it, by e.g. deposing the sovereign through resistance, they will be returned back into the undesirable state of nature. <fnote>Tuck, Hobbes Leviathan. p. 89 </fnote>Procedural Justification for political obligation, according to Hobbes, is binding because of its logic and rationality. Political obligation is justified because the act of obliging being voluntary, citizens have consented to the transfer of rights willingly. Thus it would be an absurdity to go against the sovereign; resisting the sovereign is tantamount to resisting themselves which makes no sense. Hobbes calls it "an absurdity to contradict what one maintained in the beginning...to undo that which from the beginning he had voluntarily done". He emphasizes this again, writing that "he that complaineth of injury from his Soveraigne, complainth of that whereof he himselfe is Author; and...to do injury to one selfe, is impossible" . <fnote>Tuck, Hobbes Leviathan. p. 93 </fnote><fnote>Tuck, Hobbes Leviathan. p. 93 </fnote>In addition, Hobbes's political obligation is grounded in moral terms as well. Political obligation arises from the surrender of a right and is a moral obligation in precisely the same way as obligations to keep a promise freely given. Hobbes morality is then viewed as a kind of long term, enlightened self interest to obey covenants, hence in the course of explaining his political theory, he has also given us a moral theory that he did not intend to. This model of political obligation has come under many criticisms and it is valid to question the justifications Hobbes has laid forth. The contextual grounding of political obligation which is the state of nature as a state of conflict may be inaccurate as throughout history, men has live through conflicts after conflicts and empirical evidence has shown that rational humans have found it to be more beneficial to cooperate than compete, hence giving rise to the introduction of world governance i.e. international institutions like the UN and EU without a world government. Besides, the state of nature is a highly hypothetical circumstance - it is a condition which emerges whenever political authority fails. Hobbes claims that society would fall back into the anarchic state of society as soon as a sovereign ceases to exist; but surely history has disputed that with relatively peaceful transition periods between monarchical successions or implementation of new governments etc. <fnote>Hampsher-Monk, I. (2001) A History of Modern Political Thought. United Kingdom: Blackwell Publishers, p. 26 </fnote>With regards to the procedural justification he proposes to legitimize political obligation, there are considerable loopholes as well. Procedural justification is based on Hobbes' assumption that Man's greatest fear is that of violent death. In reality, it will be extremely myopic to limit it as such. There have been widely documented cases of self sacrifice i.e. the recent waves of suicide bombings. In addition, the paralyzed or terminally-ill patients fear suffering rather than death. Hence, the fear of death is not as strong a motivator as Hobbes would have us believe and our prudential obligation to abide by the covenant correspondingly decreases as well. Another problem that surfaces with this justification is with its assumption that people are rational and will consent to the covenant because the giving up of one's liberty is preferred to being in the natural state of war. Firstly, people may not be rational; secondly, they may not dread living in the state of nature as much as other fears i.e. intolerable living under a tyrannical dictator etc. Furthermore, he failed to incorporate the element of desire into such obedience; the obligation to obey should not be limited to logical necessity. The obligation to keep a promise is an inter-personal tie, a bond with another person and this makes it distinctive but Hobbes omits this personal, vital factor because of his egoistic account of motives. Since his line of argument derives itself from the basis of self-interests, he neglects the fact that there are duties such as gratitude and forgiveness of injuries which are not solely dependent on self interest but involve the consideration of an inter-personal tie with others, just as the duty of promise keeping does. <fnote>Raphael, DD. (1977) Hobbes: Morals and Politics. Great Britain: Alden Press, p. 70 </fnote>Kavka also points out that there may dichotomy between theoretical hypothesis and reality. <quote>There is no guarantee that decisions made in counterfactual i.e. non actual circumstances will be identical to those made in real life. People may not be appropriately informed and there may be external factors that will lead them to different conclusions. Thus, though people may undertake political obligation in theory, we cannot assume that they will do likewise in reality.</quote><fnote>Kavka, G.S. (1986) Hobbesian Moral and Political Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press, p. 385 </fnote>In the light of his assumptions, it would be rational for human beings to commit to the political obligation of relinquishing their natural right. However, if these assumptions are proven to be questionable, the first justification stands on shaky grounds. Hobbes' second claim for political obligation has its limitations as well. The most important argument against the consequentialist argument is that the ends of sovereignty are not always good ends. The Hampton criticism states that if the sovereign has the power to issue death penalties then the same fear that was in the state of nature would also exist in the social contract, hence in practice, humans will never leave the state of nature. Moreover, Hobbes fear of anarchy and conception of the state of nature caused him to downplay the weaknesses of absolutism. Locke was a major critic of this as he was later to comment, "This is to think that men are so foolish as that they take care to avoid what mischiefs may be done them by pole cats or foxes, but are content, nay think it safely, to be devoured by lions." In the light of tyrannical regimes with Hitler, Pol Pot and Stalin, a despotic authoritarian sovereign may not be a legitimate or desired result. <fnote>Locke, 1947, p. 46 </fnote>To conclude, if we agree to all the premises and assumptions that Hobbes proposes, i.e. that Man is rational, that the state of nature is one of perpetual conflict and that Man's greatest fear is that of returning to the state of nature which threatens violent death, his first claim that political obligation is justified because it is in human beings' interest to do so may be accepted. However, Hobbes himself indirectly admits that political obligation is not perfectly justified by conceding that the citizens would be obedient only due to force and not due to recognition of the obligation. Thus If Hobbes had successfully justified political obligation, he would expect citizens to automatically be compliant to the sovereign's will without need for policing. The very fact that Hobbes saw the need of compulsion to ensure subservience shows that the theory of political obligation is not perfectly justified. Therefore, the Hobbesian notion of political obligation stands on shaky grounds and he has only justified political obligation to a small extent, albeit on his own terms and whether his arguments are successful or not depends on the extent we agree to his initial premises and assumptions. 