Greenpeace is probably the most widely recognized environmental pressure group in the world and, consequently, the beˆte noire of many companies. Due to the complexity and geographical spread of this global organization, the first part of the essay will focus on its subsidiary; Greenpeace organization that is operating in United Kingdom. Despite the narrower operational scope, the mission of Greenpeace UK is consistent with that of the parent organization, with emphasis on "...non-violent, creative confrontation to expose global environmental problems, and force solutions for a green and peaceful future..." with the core aim "...to ensure the ability of the Earth to nurture life in all its diversity." An examination of the organization's website,  URL  will reveal this consistency in aims with that of the parent organization. <fnote>Eden, S. (2004) "Greenpeace", New Political Economy Vol. 9: pp. 595 </fnote><fnote> URL . Accessed 9th April 2005 </fnote>In general, the web site itself is an outreach device that aims to promote and advance its cause to different audience with diverse interests. Not only are regular "news" updates to key campaigns posted, visuals are also available for download and circulation, supporters can be recruited, letter campaigns organized and documents archived and searched, daily diaries are posted by activists to share their experiences of major events with their international audience in a very personalized way. Specifically, the web site showcases an extent of issues and provides diverse information with specific aims. On the welcome page, there is a general overview of the main features of the site and the introductory links stream you towards the direction you may be heading for. The web site is segmented into a few core sections. Firstly, there is a section titled "About Greenpeace" which consist of general facts and information that is catered to the general public. The unique features include the visual tours of Greenpeace ships with interesting diary extracts of live experiences. There is also substantial coverage on the research and development aspect of this pressure group, as there are extensive links on the new technologies, laboratories, the scientific team and the impact of science on its campaigns and policies. Next, there is also a section covering the past and current activities of this pressure group that is titled "Campaigns" and "Special campaign projects" respectively as well as an outreach section catered towards interested volunteers or donors, activists and potential job seekers in this field. Lastly, it has research and journal articles that are targeted at journalists, researchers or students. If one is looking for educational resources, the coverage of topics is not extensive but there is more focus on depth on three core topics on the Amazon, GM food and Nature power which is substantiated with teaching materials. In addition, there is an online "media centre" which has an advanced media search engine that can search for documents by media type, campaign or dates which is very useful for one to navigate through the extensive archive of press releases, media briefings, reports and images and latest campaign news. In all, the usefulness and relevance of the website depends on what your search agenda is and the information that you are trying to retrieve. The coverage and scope of this pressure group's website can be labeled accurately as extensive enough for its agenda and whether you are a researcher, journalist, student, teacher or activist, there is definitely a piece of information relevant and useful to a certain extent. Moreover, the effectiveness and usefulness is enhanced by the layout and organization of content of the website. The links facilitate the retrieval of information as it does not take many links to get to something useful. An added advantage is that the site is user friendly; the headings are all on the left column, the special commands are clear and help information is readily available as there is a help section as well as a site map. Besides, there is an internal search engine that can retrieve information efficiently though the effective aspect can be improved on. Lastly, there is also a QNA section which answers your queries directly without having to navigate through the site. There are also additional features which enhance its effectiveness and attractiveness. It seeks to publicize its activities and policy positions by adopting a personal touch. There are E Cards for spreading messages to loved ones, an online catalogue as well as an E Bulletin which is an efficient way of publicity and awareness that is delivered straight to the inbox. Moreover, one can personalize the webpage; there's a section called "My Greenpeace" that allows one to personalize the Greenpeace website according to the Greenpeace campaigns, information and types of documents that might interest oneself, then the latest news and updates in those areas will automatically be flagged up on the homepage every time one enters the site. Therefore, personalization can help you access the information that you need with ease. Despite the seemingly perfect features, there are some improvements which can be made. These improvements that are proposed are based on a comparative approach; comparing the layout and content information of Greenpeace's website with the websites of World Wide Fund (WWF) and Friends of the Earth (FOE) as they are the two pressure groups that are most similar in outlook and agenda. Unlike WWF, Greenpeace's web site lacks an annual review or an assessment chart to track the progress of the organization and success as a pressure group. Hence, perhaps it should have an overall report available in PDF format that highlights its financial statements, latest or upcoming events and future developments. Furthermore, if you are trying to find out the structural organization of its workings as a subsidiary, there is insufficient information on this aspect. There is a section on the history and evolution of Greenpeace that has a general timeline but it is only updated till year 2002. Hence, it should have more current updates on the operational aspect of the pressure group. In addition, the search engine should be more specific like WWF's which can generate new search results within some options like within results, all of WWF.org.uk, or WWFlearning.org.uk. It would also be helpful if the website was accessible in other languages. Lastly, the currency of the website is questionable as it was last edited on 14 th October 2004 though the press releases and articles are all up to date. Hence, from the website alone, it is possible to deduce that Greenpeace is truly an independent, campaigning organization that sought to fulfill its mission though its real effectiveness cannot be simply inferred from the website as it depends on both internal and external factors. Its effectiveness will be based on assessing Greenpeace as an entity not in terms of its subsidiaries as the goals and activities of its subsidiaries should parallel that of the parent organization as well. In particular, the extent of effectiveness really depends on the measurement criterion of effectiveness and as we examine the various main factors that make it more or less effective, we are able to get the overall extent of its effectiveness or ineffectiveness over time. The main factors that measure the effectiveness of Greenpeace and other pressure groups are as follows; the nature of membership, resources, access to media and politics and lastly the tactical approach or strategies that it adopts. By examining each factor in specific, we will be able to derive the effectiveness of Greenpeace in each separate sphere. To begin with, the size and quality of membership is a crucial factor that will determine the success of a cause group, in particular environmental groups like Greenpeace. It is important that Greenpeace is able to retain its members as well as attract new members. Its membership mobilization capabilities can be a direct reflection of its viability and sustainability as a credible and effective pressure group. Table 1 illustrates that Greenpeace's membership peaked in 1991 and then steadily declined. This could be due to a shift in global sentiments worldwide as public environmental awareness receded globally and with it the membership of many environmental groups. Thus far, Greenpeace has maintained its membership numbers despite the decline in the 1990s and this is a reflection of its effectiveness at retaining membership more than attracting new membership. <fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 598 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 598 </fnote>Another important factor that will affect the effectiveness of the pressure group is the availability and organization of its resources; structural organization, financial resources and staffing resources. In terms of internal group structure such as decision making, conflict reduction mechanism and leadership, Greenpeace is very much differentiated from other environmental pressure groups. The very nature of Greenpeace's global membership and worldwide operations requires a centralized leadership that will be able to take into account of the different interests and viewpoints of their members while being able to develop effective policies and to respond to changing events. This helps to explain why Greenpeace has opted for hierarchical structures with little democratic control over the direction of their campaigns. Such an operational structure has its advantages but a central problem is the management of internal interest diversity which is worsened by power struggles between individuals and branches. The ineffectiveness is exacerbated by the highly publicized exits of members and the formation of breakaway organizations which can be detrimental to its reputation. <fnote>Grant, W. (2000) Pressure groups and British Politics. Great Britain: Macmillan Press Ltd, p. 199-200 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 600 </fnote>The control and availability of its financial resources is also an indirect measure of its effectiveness as the success of its campaign and outreach activities are limited by financial resources. In 1999 Greenpeace received €126 million from donations, which rose to €157.7 million in 2002. Despite the rise in donations, Greenpeace is much smaller financially than the companies and governments it usually targets, with a global income of only about €165 million in 2002 (Tables 2 and 3). It is also notable that expenditure on fund-raising has risen substantially (up 124 per cent) within the organization worldwide in five years, brought about mainly through the national offices seeking to maintain and increase their supporter base. The success of this is shown in the large increases in income from grants, donations, merchandising and licensing. <fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 601 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 601 - 602 </fnote>Furthermore, the size of bureaucracy of an organization is an important determinant of group effectiveness. It operates with a "top-down" approach, where the mass membership of ordinary individuals is predominantly passive, with limited capacity to act locally beyond fund-raising, thereby ensuring that only professional staffs at the national and international offices are the main activists. This hierarchy is maintained by hiring professional and full time staff to organize and plan campaigns, hence Greenpeace is often portrayed as a corporation and its name is often marketed as a brand.  <fnote>Grant, Pressure groups and British Politics. p.203 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 599 </fnote>In addition, the access to media and politics is crucial in creating and reinforcing public opinion which will affect the success of a pressure group. In particular, Greenpeace has displayed considerable professionalism and sophistication at utilizing the media to attract members and to publicize its cause. Some of the more notable examples include the success to mobilize public opinion and force a major transnational corporation to make a complete 180-degree U-turn despite having full support from the British government Furthermore, on 4th February 2004, the UK's Independent newspaper published a three-page account with full-colour photographs of Greenpeace's patrolling of fishing trawlers in the English Channel in the cause of dolphin protection. Greenpeace can provide camera-ready events and, in some cases, ready-cut video footage to television stations to increase the chance that such footage will be used by producers. Hence, Greenpeace media operations are very effective and operate on a 24-hour basis to accommodate the deadlines of media organizations around the world. <fnote>Grant, Pressure groups and British Politics. p.128 </fnote><fnote>Simpson, D. (1999) Pressure groups. Great Britain: Hodder & Stoughton Educational, p. 82 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 603 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 603 </fnote><fnote>Grant, Pressure groups and British Politics. p.128-129 </fnote>In conjunction, the way in which Greenpeace is able to exert influence is substantially affected by the structure of the policy process and ability to influence political institutions to adopt the policies and measures they advocate. After all, a decreased ability to influence the content of the political agenda may reveal a weakening of a group's position hence an access to politics is a crucial determinant of their effectiveness. On this aspect, Greenpeace is influential to a great extent as it is one of the seven environmental groups in Brussels that come together in the Group of Seven which "is an informal arrangement btw NGOs which enables them to coordinate their activities and act sometimes as a single lobby within the European environmental area (Webster, 1998, pg 184).  <fnote>Grant, Pressure groups and British Politics. p.101 </fnote>The last factor that will affect its effectiveness is the choice of strategies that it has adopted in campaigning, raising awareness and research. Its effectiveness largely stems from its brand name; the image of Greenpeace commandos harassing whaling vessels and warships in inflatable powerboats is indeed inspiring. Besides, an American firm of management consultants recently estimated the worldwide value of the Greenpeace brand at about $410million. Hence, stamped on various eco-friendly products, its brand name could lend a cachet that might become de vigeur in trendy green circles.  <fnote>"The Limits to Growth", The Economist, 30th July 1998 </fnote>In terms of campaigning style, Greenpeace was once the vanguard of radical environmentalism and direct action in the 1970s but it has professionalized over time and has become more strategically managed, hence it has adopted other styles of campaigning. Over the years, Greenpeace has shifted towards more dialogue with government and business while maintaining the direct action activities that attract the donations which sustain the organization. This change of approach was exemplified when Greenpeace held its first business conference in 1996. Perhaps because of this diversity of approach, Greenpeace is still often issue-oriented rather than strategic. Campaigning choices are sometimes opportunistic as well as highly dynamic and, although strategy is coordinated globally, it is very much shaped by national interests. It is also effective in raising awareness and conducting research in various fields. Like other NGOS, it is also a producer and distributor of information. Its ships gather data, e.g. on dolphin populations. It also has a dedicated facility in the Greenpeace Research Laboratories, originally set up at Queen Mary College in London in 1986 by a postdoctoral researcher in human cancer and relocated to the School of Biological Sciences, University of Exeter, UK, in 1992. The Greenpeace Environmental Trust was also established in 1982 to focus upon research and education. Less publicly, Greenpeace has also sought to cooperate with and influence business. For example, Greenpeace UK and Friends of the Earth UK jointly instituted The Power Line newsletters to reach financial investors in 1987 in the run-up to electricity privatization in the UK because of the government's proposed emphasis on nuclear power. The newsletter later turned into The City Line and then Greenpeace Business (currently £99 annual subscription) in a continued attempt to engage business people on environmental issues. <fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 604 </fnote>Up to this point, it is evident that Greenpeace is far more effective in some functional areas than others; hence we should now examine its effectiveness or ineffectiveness over time to get an overview of its success so far. In the 1960s and 1970s, the rise in environmental interest among the public generated a strong support for Greenpeace's activities. It used boats and bodily intervention in remote areas, took non-violent direct action against big opponents and worked explicitly across international borders and generated intense media interest. From 1973 onwards, Greenpeace continued its anti-nuclear campaigning and began to diversify its approach; applying the anti-nuclear techniques to an anti-whaling campaign by using inflatable dinghies at the point of contact with whaling ships and targeting the US, French, Soviet and Japanese governments.  <fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 596 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 596 </fnote>By 1983, 10 campaigns against toxics and pollution that began in the mid 1970s were consolidated. And by 1990, the scope had extended to campaigns against acid rain, air pollution, ozone depletion and global warming. From the late 1980s, public awareness of environmental issues was again on the increase globally. Greenpeace benefited as global membership soared to over 3 million to support its developing campaigns. 'Green consumerism' became another important strategy, made possible by public interest and commercial production of 'green' products. This wave of interest ran into the 1992 'Earth Summit' (United Nations Conference on Environment and Development - UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, which signaled the globalization of the environmental agenda.  <fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 596 </fnote><fnote>Eden, New Political Economy p. 597 </fnote>However, by 21 st century, one of the main problems in the environmental arena is that the market is becoming saturated. Tighter regulations have successfully reduced most of the worst forms of local pollution throughout the industrialized world. Though emissions of greenhouse gases (which trap heat in the atmosphere and are therefore prime suspects in any global warming that might be happening) continue to grow, it is now relatively rare to encounter cities in rich countries whose air is visibly clogged with soot, or whose rivers are choked with chemicals. Furthermore, another limiting factor is that many multinationals have begun or at least say they have - to take environmental issues more seriously. Firms such as BP and Royal Dutch/Shell frequently consult campaign groups over their green policies and these recent moves have reduced the need for pressure groups.  <fnote>"The Limits to Growth", The Economist, 30th July 1998 </fnote><fnote>"The Limits to Growth", The Economist, 30th July 1998 </fnote>Therefore, judging from the above assessment, it is extremely difficult to fully assess and explain the effectiveness of pressure groups holistically due to the methodological problems that arise. First and forth most, it is difficult to devise a set of fixed criterion for measuring their effectiveness due to the diversity of strategies they adopt and aims they would like to achieve. For example, how do you measure the strength or effectiveness of protests? Is the promotion of cause effective enough?  <fnote>Grant, Pressure groups and British Politics. p.192 </fnote>Moreover, it is difficult to assess effectiveness at a point in time as environmental changes usually have to be monitored over time. It requires a steadier and long term engagement at the international level. Furthermore, the use of the media may mislead public sympathizers into thinking that policy has already been changed. In addition, the effectiveness arises not only from how they operate but also with what they are able to achieve. This brings on another dilemma as pressure groups usually have multiple objectives and one objective may be achieved at the expense of another hence it leads on to the problem of measuring the degree of success attained. On top of that, it is difficult to determine the causal factors in their effectiveness, hence it is also difficult to assess whether policy changes are a result of their real effectiveness or simply because government policy changes in a way that makes them of central importance and in turn give them new opportunities to exert influence. After all, just because a particular policy change happens to correspond with pressure-group demands does not necessarily mean that it was the activities of the pressure groups that led to the change in policy.  <fnote>Grant, Pressure groups and British Politics. p.192 </fnote><fnote>Simpson, Pressure groups. p.82 </fnote>Above all, Greenpeace has evolved from a small radical pressure group into a multi-million-pound organization, globally organized and centrally coordinated. It is now endowed with the capability to influence beyond its measured resources, comparative with the better endowed multinational corporations which are often its targets. However, despite the influential role it plays in global environmental governance, it exerts different forms of influence to varying degrees matched by increasing challenges. There is an increase rise in business corporations who are using negative campaigning to propose environmental solutions through new commercial technologies and activities, to promote environmental self regulation and voluntarism (instead of regulation) and to shape the language of environmentalism according to their interests. In turn, governments have also been influenced by corporate interests. Hence, even though Greenpeace has increased in stature, it now operates in a more challenging global environment. Therefore, it is difficult to measure such intangible concepts of power and influence realistically and it is probably easier to say why groups are ineffective or to mark the apparent increases or declines in influences than to estimate the extent of influence or success a particular group has on policy outcomes. <table/><table/><table/>