As early as the 5 th century BC, the discipline of international relations was already the scene of a heated battle between contending theories of state interactions. Resting on fundamentally opposed assumptions about the nature of the international system, Realist, Liberalist and Marxist world views continue to divide political thinkers today. As a student of world politics, I evaluate the efficacy of these ideologies based on the validity of their assumptions and on their historic ability to predict world events. This approach reveals that Realism, Liberalism and Marxism may not be mutually exclusive, but rather complementary. Furthermore, the fluctuating popularity of the three world views in recent study of international relations may suggest that no single theory is superior to the others; rather, all are historically contingent and, in the words of Machiavelli, provide only "situation-bound knowledge". It remains to be seen which stream of thought retains greatest relevance in the new world order of the twenty-first century. <fnote>Dunne, Tim, and Schmidt, Brian C. "Realism" in Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics: An introduction to international relations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005 (2nd edition)). p.162 </fnote><fnote>Dunne, Tim and Schmidt, Brian C. "Realism". p.163 </fnote>One can gain a basic understanding of Realism, Liberalism and Marxism by contrasting the 'essential elements' of these ideologies. Thus, the Realist world view rests on the assumption that states are the most important actors in an international system devoid of central authority. The additional beliefs that human nature is fundamentally war-like and that all states are potentially dangerous means that states will strive to gain power relative to each-other; this creates an unpredictable international environment that Kenneth Waltz has called a 'self-help system'. Whereas Realism therefore "paints a rather grim picture of world politics", Liberal notions convey a significantly more optimistic view. The numerous strands of Liberalism hold that human nature is basically good, and that the interest of the state is bound up with that of its people; furthermore, states are capable of cooperation in a system where international institutions are essential actors. Unlike Realism which considers only relative gains in world politics, Liberalism stresses the importance of interdependence as a means of achieving gains in absolute terms. Finally, the Marxist representation of the international system is one dominated not by states but by classes, where capitalist modes of production and class struggle shape political outcomes. Economics plays a crucial part in this system, as the tensions between capitalists and workers catalyse social transformation. Realism, Liberalism and Marxism therefore promote highly contrasted views of international relations. <fnote>Dunne, Tim and Schmidt, Brian C. "Realism". P.172 </fnote><fnote>Dunne, Tim and Schmidt, Brian C. "Realism". p.175 </fnote><fnote>Mearsheimer, John J. "The False Promise of International Institutions". International Security, Vol.19, No.3 (1994). Internet. Accessed on 5th November 2005. p.9 </fnote><fnote>Dunne, Tim. "Liberalism" in Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. The Globalization of World Politics: An introduction to international relations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005 (2nd edition)). p.187 </fnote><fnote>In Marxist terminology, respectively relations and means of production </fnote><fnote>Hobden, Stephen and Jones, Richard Wyn. "Marxist Theories of International Relations". p.229 </fnote>As a student of world politics seeking a straightforward understanding of the international system, I can begin to evaluate these rival ideologies in a purely pragmatic manner by comparing the relative parsimony of each world view. Realism offers an attractively simple conception of international relations that may explain its ongoing popularity in political analysis: it maintains that states are unitary, rational, and self-interested actors which will behave in the interests of national survival. By contrast, Liberalism encompasses numerous sub-state and non-state actors into its analysis, and argues that moral and humanitarian factors also influence state behaviour, which creates a more complex and possibly more normative view of the international system. Marxism, on the other hand, facilitates one's comprehension of international relations by relying on a concise representation of international relations dynamics: the materialistic base-superstructure model. According to this model, societal transformation originates from the tension between means and relations of production (respectively, the proletariat and the bourgeoise); this forms an economic base, which in turn determines a superstructure of legal, political and cultural institutions. However, the Frankfurt School's attempts to analyse the social world as a totality by considering notions such as culture and philosophy has complicated later strands of Marxist analysis. Thus, in evaluating Realism, Liberalism and Marxism simply in the interest of parsimony, I may privilege the uncomplicated Realist explanation of international relations. <fnote>Dunne, Tim and Schmidt, Brian C. "Realism". p.142 </fnote><fnote>Hobden, Stephen and Jones, Richard Wyn. "Marxist Theories of International Relations". p.236 </fnote><fnote>Hobden, Stephen and Jones, Richard Wyn. "Marxist Theories of International Relations". p.240 </fnote>However, there is an evident trade-off between the a model's simplicity and the depth of analysis that it provides. In evaluating these theories, I must therefore also consider the possibility that these ideologies rely on unviable assumptions. While its simplicity is appealing, Realism has been criticised for offering a "one-dimensional" interpretation of state behaviour: it rejects the influence of non-power motivations or of non-state actors in the decision-making process. Furthermore, by defining power solely in terms of resources, this world view ignores the significance of power capabilities and of ideological power, which Waltz and Hobbes both see as a substantial omission. While less clearly simplistic, the assumptions of Liberalism may also misrepresent the international system through a utopian belief in man's possibilities of intellectual, moral, and social improvement. Liberal institutionalism, in particular, sees a 'natural order' underlying human society, a notion that even the Idealist strand considers unlikely. Certain Marxist conjectures appear similarly implausible. Particularly, Marxism relies on the existence of an ongoing tension between capitalist and working classes. According to Herbert Marcuse, however, the masses may no longer be capable of undertaking emancipatory revolution, as "one-dimensional man" has been integrated into the capitalist system and is now unable to envisage an alternative to this status-quo. Due to the inaccuracy of their key assumptions, therefore, Realism, Liberalism and Marxism do not provide entirely viable explanations of international relations. <fnote>Dunne, Tim and Schmidt, Brian C. "Realism". p.173 </fnote><fnote>Dunne, Tim and Schmidt, Brian C. "Realism". p.175 </fnote><fnote>Dunne, Tim. "Liberalism". p.192 In Marxist terminology, respectively relations and means of production </fnote><fnote>Hobden, Stephen and Jones, Richard Wyn. "Marxist Theories of International Relations". p.240 </fnote>Nevertheless, these world views may still offer insightful explanations of past state interactions; an alternative approach to evaluating them is to investigate the degree to which each ideology succeeds in explaining historical occurrences. According to Mearsheimer, numerous political episodes coincide with a Realist understanding of state behaviour. For example, Realist relative-gains considerations were central to determining Cold War foreign policy tactics. Mearsheimer also uses the historical record to attack Liberal ideology: based on the failure of the League of Nations in maintaining peace after 1914, he undermines the claim that international institutions can maintain collective security. However, I do not believe that these examples necessarily demonstrate Realism's supremacy over the other world views: more recent developments, such as NATO's 1999 intervention in Kosovo on a humanitarian basis, are better explained from a Liberal than a Realist perspective. The historical accuracy of Marxist theories is also open to debate. Gramsci's theory of hegemony offers a convincing explanation of the failure of the Second International by arguing that leaders of post-1918 revolutions did not foster a sufficiently close relationship with the classes they represented. On the other hand, the fact that Marx's forecast of the fall of capitalism was followed by an era of Neo-Liberalism does not testify to the accuracy of Marxism in predicting international relations. When judged on the basis of their historical record, Realism, Marxism and Liberalism have not consistently enabled scholars to explain and predict world events. <fnote>Mearsheimer, John J. "The False Promise of International Institutions". International Security, Vol.19, No.3 (1994). Internet. Accessed on 5th November 2005. p.23 </fnote><fnote>Mearsheimer, John J. "The False Promise of International Institutions". p.34 </fnote><fnote>Baylis, John and Smith, Steve. "Liberal IR Theory and the 1999 Kosovo Crisis". Baylis and Smith Companion Website. Internet. Accessed on 5th November 2005. Available at:  URL  </fnote><fnote>An organization created in 1889 by socialist parties wishing to work together for international socialism; this dissolved during World War 1, as the different constituent nations failed to maintain a unified front against the war. Source: Wikipedia, "The Second International". Internet. Accessed at:  URL . </fnote><fnote>Piccone, Paul. "Gramsci's Hegelian Marxism". Political Theory, Vol.2, No.1 (1974). Internet. Accessed on 8th November 2005. </fnote>The apparent inability of any single theory to adequately explain the workings of the international system may suggest that, rather than exploring world politics in the light of an individual ideology, we should do so by relying on a synthesis of the world views. By balancing each other's lapses, Realism and Liberalism may appear complementary. Realism effectively explains and predicts patterns of state interaction, but its simplistic assumptions concerning state motivations cause it to ignore the question of how states define their interests. Liberalism, on the other hand, considers these decision-making processes in detail, focusing on the role of interest groups and domestic actors in determining foreign policy. This example leads Joseph Nye to argue that "Liberal theory provide[s] a useful supplement to Realism". While it seems difficult to include Marxism in this synthesis, the gradual reconciling of Realism and Liberalism in their Neo-Realist and Neo-Liberal forms illustrates the possibilities of a more dialectic, cross-theory approach to the study of international relations. <fnote>Nye, Joseph S. "Neorealism and Neoliberalism". World Politics, Vol.40, No.2 (1998). Internet. Accessed on 6 th November 2005. p. 239 </fnote>It may indeed be that no single theory of international relations attains analytic or predictive superiority over the others. The fact that different time periods have privileged different world views suggests that these ideologies may simply be historically contingent: the relevance of the analysis that they provide depends upon a changing historical context. Thus, Nye explains the international system's multiple oscillations between Liberal and Realist policy from 1918 until the end of the Cold War as "merely the latest instance of a recurring dialectic". This draws attention to a last question for the student attempting to evaluate these three world views: if these ideologies are historically contingent, which one is most relevant today? In our rapidly-evolving world order, it may be that Realism, with its heavy emphasis on maintaining the status-quo and on continuity over change, is slightly outdated. Liberalism, and particularly neo-liberal economics, certainly has more potential in this globalizing and liberalising international system. However, I personally disagree with the modern hegemony of the United States' ideology in state interactions. Rather, as I have a personal interest in development, I see certain strains of Marxism as conveying the most lucid or beneficial understanding of the current world order. In particular, Wallerstein's world-system theory whereby the core's exploitation of the periphery continues from colonial times in the insidious form of free trade seems an accurate reflection of the ongoing relationships between the developed and the developing worlds. Furthermore, the Gramscian notion that the hegemony maintains its supremacy by dispersing its ideologies in society until they become firmly engrained into the population's 'common sense' seems to me a fitting account of US foreign policy today. In this way, by evaluating the theories of international relations in terms of their applicability to the current international system, I demonstrate a slight preference for Marxism over Realism and Liberalism. <fnote>Nye, Joseph S. "Neorealism and Neoliberalism". p. 238 </fnote><fnote>Hobden, Stephen and Jones, Richard Wyn. "Marxist Theories of International Relations". p.236 </fnote>In conclusion, the three dominant theories of international relations can be contrasted in terms of their theoretical basis, their ability to explain the political past, and their possible relevance in the contemporary world order. However, no single ideology emerges from this analysis as dominantly efficacious for the student of world politics. While Realism appeals to me through its simplicity, the reductionism of its assumptions undermine its analytical power; each world view has both strengths and weaknesses in terms of the historical record; and my choice of Marxism as the most accurate portrayal of the current international system remains a largely subjective one. We may achieve a more enlightening understanding of the international system not by viewing it not in the framework of a single world view, but rather through a synthesis of these three complementary and historically contingent ideologies. 