Today's world is one of rapidly growing inequality. In 1960, the average income of the world population's richest 20% was 30 times higher than that of the poorest 20%; by 1995, this had risen to 82 times. What causes such tremendous disparities? Why are the neoclassical predictions of the Solow model - which foretells long-term income convergence - collapsing? Economic historians attribute this "divergence big time" to differences in economies' total factor productivity, which is affected primarily by countries' institutional quality and geography. Institutions and geographical endowments are often unchangeable, however, or at least extremely difficult to improve rapidly. Will convergence and international equality therefore remain unobtainable even throughout the 21 st Century? Perhaps not: other indications of living standards, such as poverty levels or Human Development Indices, are converging. This suggests that, while the assumptions guiding neoclassical predictions are seriously flawed, global convergence remains achievable. The extent to which developing countries' institutions and social infrastructures are bettered in coming decades will determine whether the 21 st Century can escape the predicament of "divergence big time". <fnote>Vanaik, Achin. "Unequal Gains". Telegraph, December 2005. Accessed at:  URL  </fnote>In the 1980s neoclassicalists such as Robert Solow and Robert Lucas predicted the natural convergence of world income. The Solow model claims that when an economy's labour force is low, its per-capita savings are high, increasing its output, but that this rise eventually converges to a situation of 'steady state growth' as per-capita savings are superseded by a growing population. In the long run, therefore, all economies will grow at the same rate. Correspondingly, Robert Lucas argues that later-starting countries will have faster initial growth ('β-convergence'), and then experience growth proportional to their income gap with the world's leading country, until this gap diminishes to zero ('σ-convergence') . Lucas bases this convergence on cross-border equalizations of capital-to-labour ratios and total factor productivity, attributed to globalisation's 'spillovers'. Human capital spillover should provide developing countries with imitable models of Western countries' more efficient institutions. Financial liberalization should grant poor nations access to richer ones' savings, enabling them to invest beyond domestic savings constraints. Lastly, high wages in successful economies should generate capital flows to weaker economies, increasing the latter's income levels. Like the Solow model, Lucas's model predicts that "sooner or later . . . all economies will grow at the rate common to the wealthiest economies, and differences in income levels will disappear". Expectations of international income convergence form the core of neoclassical growth theory. <fnote>Jones, Hywel G. An Introduction to Modern Theories of Economic Growth. London, Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1975. Pg. 84. </fnote><fnote>Lucas, Robert. "Some macroeconomics for the 21st century". Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol.14, Issue 1. Pg. 160. </fnote><fnote>Lucas, Robert. "Some macroeconomics for the 21st century". Journal of Economic Perspectives. Pg. 165. </fnote><fnote>Lucas, Robert. "Some macroeconomics for the 21st century". Journal of Economic Perspectives. Pg. 170. </fnote>Empirical investigations contradict these predictions, however. Since the Industrial Revolution the West has far outgrown of the rest of the world in per-capita income. Whilst in 1970 the per-capita GDP gap between the world's richest country and its poorest was of 88:1, in 2000 it had widened to 267:1. Lucas's predictions of faster catch-up growth by 'late-starters' have collapsed, as most developing countries continue to grow much slower than the West (Africa's per capita income has thus dropped from 9.4% of US levels in 1950 to 5.2% in 2000, indicating significantly lagging growth). 20 th Century "divergence big time" drastically contradicts the neoclassical forecast of convergence - as put by Fagerberg, "it is rare to see a prediction that is so completely rejected by the evidence as this one is". <fnote>Vanaik, Achin. "Unequal Gains". Telegraph, December 2005. Accessed at:  URL  </fnote><fnote>Maddison, Angus. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. 2003. Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development. Pg. 500. </fnote><fnote>Jones, Hywel. An Introduction to Modern Theories of Economic Growth. Thomas Nelson & Sons, Pg. 86. </fnote>What explains this divergence? Many economists attribute economic growth primarily to the productivity of a country's labour force. Output per worker varies widely across countries: the USA's 1988levels were 35 times higher than Niger's, meaning that ten days' worth of American worker's production was only matched by a Nigerian after a year. Hall and Jones relate such disparities to the level of countries' human capital inputs, such as education investment (a lack of the latter may explain France's and the UK's lag on the USA) and, in poorer countries, to economies' total factor productivity - which reflects both the state of their technology and how efficiently their capital and labour are utilized. Hall and Jones claim that TFP and human capital inputs are "fundamentally related to differences in [economies'] social infrastructures", or to the institutions and policies that determine the economic environment of individual and firm actions. As social infrastructures can provide incentives for productivity just as they can inhibit innovation by encouraging inefficiency and corruption, they heavily impact economic growth. Indeed, policy modifications in China (which greatly reformed its agricultural incentive structures since 1978) and India coincide with much stronger TFP growth in Asia than in Africa. Countering the Solow model's assumption of constant TFP growth worldwide, Hall and Jones demonstrate that today's divergence is largely impacted by TFP disparities and by the quality of countries' social infrastructures. <fnote>Hall, R.E. and Jones, C.I.. "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker Than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114. Pg. 84. Accessed at:  URL :80/direct.asp?ArticleID=7T7Y3XPNAEJUW3LJ3C8W </fnote><fnote>Hall, R.E. and Jones, C.I.. "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker Than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114. Pg. 82. </fnote><fnote>Hall, R.E. and Jones, C.I.. "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker Than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114. Pg. 84. Accessed at:  URL :80/direct.asp?ArticleID=7T7Y3XPNAEJUW3LJ3C8W </fnote><fnote>Deng, K.G. (2000), "A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History", Economic History Review, 53. Pg. 11. </fnote><fnote>Bosworth, B.P. and Collins, S.M. "The Empirics of Growth: An Update". Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Washington: 2003 Iss.2; pg.116. </fnote>What determines such "social capability"? New Institutional Economic Historians claim that institutions play a vital role in structuring social growth incentives. In particular, the strength of institutions in limiting government power and in enforcing contracts determines the appropriability of an economy's returns, and therefore its investment levels. Acemoglu and Johnson demonstrate that institutional efficiency differs greatly across countries, depending particularly on the antiquity of an economy's state, on its government's democratic accountability, and, in former colonies, on the legal systems inherited from colonizers. These variations significantly impact economic growth. An economy's adherence to the rule of law (or the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by society's rules and institutions) for instance strongly correlates with productivity - Africa's and Latin America's low productivity levels thus coincide with poor RoL scores (-0.81 and -0.41 respectively). By contrast, accession countries having undergone institutional reform under EU conditionality boast high RoL scores and improving growth rates. Such evidence suggests that variations in institutional quality highly influence economic growth, and may explain much of 20 th Century divergence. <fnote>Bardhan, Pranab. "Institutions matter, but which ones?" Economics of Transition, Volume 13, No. 3. July 2005. Pg. 501. </fnote><fnote>Kaufman, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2003. "Governance Matters III: Governance Indicators for 1996-2002." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3106. Pg. 4. </fnote><fnote>Crafts, Nicholas & Kaiser, Kai, 2004. "Long-term growth prospects in transition economies: a reappraisal." Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, Vol. 15(1), Pg. 110. </fnote>This implies that countries with inadequate institutions may be doomed to perpetual underdevelopment and divergence, as institutional change is extremely difficult to achieve. Douglass North argues that inefficient institutions persist because they rest on vested interests in society which oppose changes to the status quo; furthermore, institutions develop from and reinforce informal social rules which "cause [a] society to evolve along a particular trajectory and in the long run explain distinct economic performances". Institutions are therefore subject to path-dependency: whilst efficient ones trigger growth, inefficient ones can trap their users in detrimental habits. Being impermeable to top-down reform, informal institutions (such as trust or cultural values) are particularly problematic in this respect. These nonetheless remain vital to economic growth - Knack and Keefer suggest that a 10% increase in a country's trust can raise its growth rate by 0.8%. Trust levels, like the stability of formal institutions, vary highly internationally; weak institutions in countries may therefore not only explain their current income discrepancies, but may also obstruct future convergence. <fnote>North, D.G. and Weingast, B.R. (1989), "Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England", Journal of Economic History. Pg. 13. </fnote><fnote>Knack, S, and Keefer, P. (1997) "Does social capital have an economic payoff?" Quarterly Journal of Economics. Pg. 53. </fnote>Outside of institutional frameworks, economic historians also focus on geography's impact on economic growth incentives. For Jeffrey Sachs, oil- and mineral-exporting countries face a "natural resource curse", as their production of primary resources entails the neglect of other economic sectors (the so-called 'Dutch disease') and discourages modernization, as elites profiting from the resources develop vested interests in the economy's status quo. The corruption and mistrust often bred by such lucrative resources cripple countries' institutions and exacerbate income inequalities - whilst Nigerian oil exports for instance totaled $350 billion between 1965 and 2000, in this period the proportion of Nigerians living on less than $1 a day grew from 36% to 70%. Geographical location may also explain 20 th Century divergence: Redding and Venables argue that, the further a country is from the locus of global economic activity, the higher its transport and importation costs are and the less competitive its exports become. They thus attribute two-thirds of cross-country income variations to distance from markets, arguing that moving a country 50% closer to its trading partners would raise its income by 25%. As Nicholas Crafts concludes, "the world economy is not quite the level playing field of neoclassical economics": if countries possess poor geographical or institutional structures, their chances of catch-up growth and convergence may be permanently jeopardized. <fnote>Sachs, J.D. and Warner, A.M. 1995. "Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth". Harvard Institute for International Development. Pg. 71. </fnote><fnote>Sachs, J.D. and Warner, A.M. 1995. "Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth". Harvard Institute for International Development. Pg. 76. </fnote><fnote>Redding, Stephen and Venables, Anthony. 2002. "The economics of isolation and distance". Nordic Journal of Political Economy, (Conference Issue), 28. Pg. 96. </fnote><fnote>Crafts, Nicholas & Kaiser, Kai, 2004. "Long-term growth prospects in transition economies: a reappraisal." Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, Vol. 15(1), Pg. 109. </fnote>Is such pessimism justified? Is world income convergence truly vital to equalizing global living standards? Economic theorists increasingly argue that per-capita income does not accurately measure quality of life. Despite income divergence over the past century, non-income determinants of living standards such as poverty and literacy levels are effectively converging. Life expectancy is equalizing with countries' facilitated access to health-care technologies, and improvements in developing nations' educational standards has pushed global literacy up from 52% to 81% between 1950 and 1999. In these years the coefficients for global life expectancy and literacy variations have dropped from 0.26 to 0.11 and from 0.73 to 0.22 respectively, and the UN's Human Development Index has also shown convergence. These figures imply that underdevelopment results more from a lack of basic capabilities than from insufficient income, and that, whilst prospects of income convergence remain bleak for this century, potential for development may be at its highest. In terms of income, the 20 th Century has been one of "divergence big time", resulting from variations in countries' institutional frameworks as well as from their cultural and geographical differences. In terms of living standards, however, the gap between the West and developing countries is shrinking. What, therefore, are the prospects for equality in coming years? Lucas claims that "the restoration of inter-society income equality will be one of the major economic events of th[is] century", and that, despite their past failures, neoclassical predictions of convergence will ultimately prevail. 20 th Century divergence nonetheless challenges the Solow model's applicability to today's world. This model's assumptions of perfectly mobile factors of production and of universal total factor productivity are flawed; capital-to-labour ratios and income will not naturally converge while countries remain bound to inappropriate institutional frameworks. Institutional change may however be possible: Alexander Gerschenkron recommends that developing countries cultivate 'substitutes for prerequisites for growth' - that they develop institutions based not on Western models, but on more culturally-specific criteria. If North's institutional 'lock-in' problem can be mitigated by nurturing such 'substitutes' or through concerted international efforts, convergence may still be possible in the 21 st Century. <fnote>Lucas, Robert. "Some macroeconomics for the 21st century". Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol.14, Issue 1. Pg. 166. </fnote><fnote>Crafts, Nicholas & Kaiser, Kai, 2004. "Long-term growth prospects in transition economies: a reappraisal." Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, Vol. 15(1). </fnote>