Crime rates, poverty rates, unemployment rates- data that come from the government- are official statistics. There is a natural tendency to treat these figures as straightforward facts that cannot be questioned. 'This ignores the way statistics are produced. All statistics, even the most authoritative, are created by people' (Gilbert, 2001). This does not mean that they are inevitably flawed or wrong, but it does mean that we ought to ask ourselves just how the statistics we encounter were created. Not recently, official statistics have been questioned as to the degree of their validity, reliability and objectivity and whether these are in fact essential. When considering whether sociologists should use official statistics one has to consider whether the limitations outweigh the advantages to using them in accordance with the researcher's theoretical perspective. Many sociologists believe there is an exaggerated suspicion of social measurement and an excessive distrust of officially produced numerical data. Most researchers that are positivist in nature need to examine the social world in an objective and scientific way and those who produce these statistics make every effort to follow the scientific canons to ensure the reliability and validity of their work. Precise measurement and accuracy are considered to be possible in this kind of survey experiment with statistics. Objectivity is ensured because researchers are following a set process and maintaining a standard known by those using the statistics. Reliable quantified statistics are converted into data without much problem, involving minimal time and costs, thus ensuring accurate measurement requirements. (Manheim et al, 2002) While positivists feel that any problems with official statistics can be improved with improved measurement and data collection procedures it is argued that there are some complex problems in addition to positivist concerns of error and bias. First, as Bulmer points out there are the difficulties associated with 'social measurement' as compared to the measurement of monetary units or spatial distance (Bulmer, 1984). This line of reasoning lends to the fact that measuring certain key sociological variables is especially difficult. While certain data such as income and housing are not overly problematic there are drawbacks to categorisation. Surveys asking ethnic group, for example, often leave out basic differences; while there may be different categories for 'Indian', 'Pakistani' or the more broad 'Asian', the term 'White' ends up incorporating everyone whether American or East European. Converting social realities into numbers is not an easy task and often context and culture based specific differences exist making categorisation difficult. With regard to suicide Durkheim generalised these problems as unproblematic, however, making sense of realities is only possible when one is present in that reality (regardless of a positivist or anti-positivist perspective). Arguably there is 'no logical reason why awareness of possible serious sources of error in official data should lead to their rejection for research purposes.' Bulmer makes the point that it could as well point to the need for methodological work to 'secure their improvement' (Bulmer 1984). Criticism regarding unknown reliability of data is still a very relevant point; referring to the replicability of the measurement process, errors may have to do with question wording, interviewer bias or recording data. Research conducted by Mayhew, Elliot and Dowds shows the decision to report a crime depends upon a whole range of factors, such as the place where it was perpetrated, the identity of the offender, and, whether it is thought appropriate for the police (Elsmore, 1998). Bulmer argues, though, that this often stems from a general rejection of empirical data 'rather than representing a considered view' (Ratcliffe, 2005). He goes on to explain that <quote>'the more substantial point that needs to be emphasised in response to those acutely aware and rightly so of the manifold deficiencies of official statistics, is that people whose job it is to compile such data are often aware of possible sources of error and devote much attention to estimation of error and attempt to reduce or eliminate error' (Bulmer, 1984).</quote>In effect he argues that awareness of error and doubts about the validity and reliability of official statistics need not necessarily lead to rejecting their use for research purposes. During the 19 th century statistics- numeric statements about social life- became an authoritative way to describe social problems. There was a growing respect for science and statistics offered a way to bring the authority of science to debates about social policy. In fact, this had been the main goal of the first statisticians- they wanted to study society through counting and use the resulting numbers to influence social policy. Today, many critical social scientists feel that beginning in the 19 th century and continuing through today, official statistics have had two purposes, one public, the other often hidden. Their public purpose is to give an accurate, true description of society. But people also use statistics to support particular views about social problems. Numbers are often created and repeated because they supply ammunition for political struggles, and this political purpose is often hidden behind assertions that numbers, simply because they are numbers, must be correct. People use statistics to support particular points of view, and it may be considered naïve simply to accept numbers as accurate without examining who is using them and why. Not to imply that all official statistics are like the documents published in Stalin's Russia, or the war reports issued in Nazi Germany; they are not propaganda. But they are produced on the basis of certain ideas, theories or commonly accepted, taken-for-granted principles, which means that while they are perfectly correct given certain socially accepted norms their objectivity is questionable (Best, 2001). Marxists criticise the use of official statistics with an emphasis on their questionable objectivity as they reflect a political bias. From this perspective the appearance does not reflect reality and one must go beyond the surface to the essence which involves analysis and interpretation of appearances. This implies a search for validity over reliability. From this perspective official statistics are seen more in a sense as 'knowledge to aid social control'. Feminists on the other hand look at the male bias in methods of collecting statistics that reflect a view where women's realities and experiences are largely unrepresented. Looking at history in particular it is evident that the stories of women are completely left out as numerous studies by Ann Oakley have proven. From both perspectives there is the common view that official statistics are the production of people in power and are organised and presented in such a way where the interests of the people in power remains most unaffected. These statistics are used for formulating policies which can perpetuate these power relations and thus accepting them as objective and reliable is impossible (Irvine et al, 1979). A further look into Bulmer's work, though to a certain degree, contradicts these well known criticisms of official statistics. Over-determinist claims for the theory-laden status of sociological knowledge, or over-simple political analyses which purport to show that 'official statistics form part of the process of maintaining and reproducing the dominant ideologies of capitalist society' (Irvine et al, 1979) sidetrack the potential sociological contribution to social statistics. He goes on to explain that theoretical and conceptual analysis are independent of political position proved by the study of social-class and health and wealth distribution that 'has probably done more to bring about a degree of social change than it has to bolster social policies'. There is a more general critique of official statistics some of which is explained before. May especially has had an important voice in recognising the failings of official statistics ranging from problems of definition to detection. For example, with relation to official criminal records he correctly points out that the definition of criminal is not static but will change over time. The decision to report a crime also depends upon a whole range of factors, such as the place where it was perpetrated, the identity of the offender, and, whether it is thought appropriate for the police (May, 2001). Similar to the Institutionalists this view of official records has even been shown clearly in the case of suicide verdicts (Atkinson, 1978 cited in Elsmore, 1998), which cannot tell us exactly how many people killed themselves, but only how many were socially defined as having done do in accordance with the array of social rules and practices used by coroners and police to arrive at a socially acceptable judgment. Some have argued that there is not much of a gulf between sociological constructs and the common sense assumptions that social statisticians make. 'Even if such categorisations are to some degree arbitrary and inevitably conceal as well as reveal differences, they form a basic building block for sociological analysis... There is a sufficiently close match between official statistician's 'common-sense' understandings of the meaning of occupation and sociological uses of the concept, for the relationship between the two to be relatively unproblematic'. (Bulmer, 1984) Thus the gulf between the common-sense assumptions of statisticians and the theoretical constructs of sociology may not be quite as wide as it is sometimes supposed. One problem associated with the use of official statistics especially is the deficient coverage of key social variables. As the official statistics were not necessarily produced with the studies sociologists carry out, often certain aspects of a study may be left out that we are unaware of as we were not present. Once there it is possible to record parts of reality that are otherwise not imagined, probably leading to a rearrangement of the researchers focus with regard to their social interactions in the reality in which they are. These other dimensions are absent in official statistics though in some cases one cannot but help use them. The basic problem then is that statistics are collected for some other purpose and it is not possible to explore any other areas except the 'facts' already presented. This limitation is obviously avoided when the sociologist is performing his or her own study and is a strong argument in favour of sociologists not relying on official statistics but seeking to generate their own. While in some cases it proves better for sociologists to generate their own data, in some cases it is not possible and official statistics are essential, for example, when dealing with the past, because we have no other information to help us. One obstacle though is the social change processes which can create major difficulties in using official statistics as a source of longitudinal data (Ratcliffe, 2005). They are, though, also vital in some studies where sole individuals are not able to cope with the financial burden of a large study as, essentially, governments have more resources than individual researchers. On the other hand, official statistics can be used as ammunition as numbers that will draw attention to a problem that needs addressing. This is possible as statistics often seem to prove that the problem is indeed a big one. They can even be used to help gain funding for further research on the matter. While some of the criticisms cited above, (including unreliability and the deficient coverage and measurement of social variables,) are largely from an anti-positivist stance, today, using the method of pluralistic triangulation, I feel that reliability and validity can be largely ensured. <quote>'Official information, imperfect and badly adapted for sociological purposes as it often is, generally suffices to show the magnitude, nature and locality of a problem; common knowledge, obtainable by conversation with those who have live in close contact with tits circumstances, will place it is fair perspective, while a rapid investigation by sample will give an approximation to detailed measurements' (Bowley, 1915 cited in Best, 2001). </quote>We need statistics to talk sensibly about social problems. The solution, then, is not to give up on statistics, but to become better judges of the numbers we encounter, encouraging sociologists to use official statistics being aware of their drawbacks and together with other methods used to support the study. 