Survey research and observational studies are research methods each with their own advantages and limitations. However, as my answer will be directed specifically toward the ethical problems of observational studies as compared with survey research, I have started my essay by defining and explaining both techniques, following which I explore the arguments made for the ethical concerns of the former in relation to the latter. Survey research is one of the best known and most widely used approaches to investigation in the social sciences. It is normally associated with the questionnaire, the most common technique for data collection used by surveys. A defining feature of the survey is that it is a structured method of data collection. While surveys are used to collect information on individuals, groups and organisations [for example, schools], most often is it is individuals who provide information about themselves. As a research design each survey should contain a statement of it purpose. The goals of survey research may be simply descriptive or may be explanatory. While the potential subject matter of surveys can be quite diverse, the survey is more appropriate to some topics of research than others. It lends itself to the collection of data on demographic characteristics and routine behaviour and to reporting opinions. One of the most significant criticisms of survey research is that it provides only a very shallow level of information that is not always particularly valid. In this respect many researchers opt for other forms of research techniques, one being observational studies. In social research there are two parameters along which observation can be categorised as a research tool. The more familiar typology is based on the degree of participation by the researcher in what is being studied; the other is structured around the level of awareness subjects have of being observed. In the first case the normal contrast is between unobtrusive and participant observation, in the latter, covert and overt observation, and the two sets of distinctions are related. With sociology's focus on naturally occurring behaviour, where subjects tend not to be placed in experimental situations, unobtrusive observation tends to be mostly covert and it is here that the majority of ethical problems are faced. One of the earliest and most obvious ethical problems researchers encounter in the course of their work involves people being deceived, often as the researcher fails to obtain their informed consent. To gain the most valid and 'truthful' information sociologists may pretend to be someone they are not for the sake of the investigation. Roy Wallis notes: 'It felt like spying and a little dishonest. In general, I tried to shift my situation to an "open" interaction context as quickly as possible. As early as was conveniently possible I generally conveyed that I was a sociologist...and that, while I was interested in what my informant had to say, my personal interest was tempered and directed by wider sociological concerns.' Similarly, Goffman explains, 'I like a story such that if they find out what you are doing, the story you presented could not be an absolute lie. If they don't find out what you're doing, the story you presented doesn't get in your way.' While for survey research, sociologists will find out only as much as they are told, in many situations of observation, they would not be able to gain the knowledge of events and actions unless they guaranteed secrecy to the group in one form or the other. An example is Whyte who spent a considerable amount of time with the 'street gang', aiming to present a realistic account of life in a poor Italian 'slum' ('Cornerville') from the perspective of local gang members. Thus another problem which arises is that of confidentiality. Tony Eardley sums up the conflict well, in his writing on juvenile prostitution, when he states that 'We often tend to talk somewhat blithely about confidentiality in social research and take it as given that this will always be preserved. However, research of the kind discussed here frequently throws up potential limits of absolute confidentiality.' One of the first issues he raises in this context to this is what a researcher should do if he or she discovers that respondents to whom access has been gained only by emphasising the confidential nature of the study are involved in activities that place them at severe risk of exploitation. He questions that while confidentiality may be in accordance with the research obligation, if this results in harm to the interviewee which could have been anticipated and avoided by action of the part of the researcher, is this really an ethical approach? Age also becomes an issue where one must consider if there is a point at which respondents can be expected to face the consequences of confidentiality, and thus, 'by implication, a "paternalism threshold" below which intervention may be required for their own good.' Another problem raised is that of the dilemma for the researcher when confronted with evidence of wrong-doing, on the part of the interviewee, of a kind for which he or she has less political sympathy or understanding. And thus the question is raised of how far one can be personally or politically upfront, while carrying out research in an objective and professional manner. An example of such a situation is the discovery of major tax evasion or that some benefit fraudsters are involved in organised crime. This leads onto a further point about breaching the dignity of the subjects. The research itself almost always involves incursion into areas of life which some of those involved are likely to construe as belonging to a private domain. The publication of the results of research almost always contains a potential threat to the public rhetoric of the private self image of those who have been studied. Wallis explains more in depth that 'if components of that rhetoric or self-image are matters of public dispute, or debate, the work of the sociologist will inevitably be mobilised or criticised in justification or support of one or another contending party.' Again this ethical problem would not arise for survey research as the information used would be directly from the individuals and organisation concerned and so respondents are likely to know that the findings will be viewed publicly. This is true unless the researcher promises anonymity of the answers in which case respondents may not be directly affected by public knowledge of such results and if so are at least aware that their answers were used to draw such a conclusion. While the publishing of results may put the subjects at risk, one less obvious ethical problem is that of responsibility to that particular field so that it may be studied again if a researcher would so wish. Wallis explains in 'The Moral Career of a Research Project' that while conducting the research, many of the leaders and officials he approached with his work were hostile and even aggressive to his being there, 'should they not approve of the undertaking, there was possibility that I would even invite overt hostility. The "Scientologists" had investigated before.' A community, organisation or individual who have been studied before are likely to be more wary and hostile to researchers the next time around, which makes it difficult for any further research to be carried out on them ever again. Also there is the problem of bringing damage to the discipline as a whole should deceit be shown to be involved. One other major ethical concern involves harm to the researcher. Survey research can never really go into such depths as to completely change conceptions of a particular group of people, or uncover major illegal activity for example, previously unknown about. However, with observational research, once the work has ended and the researcher's findings are published, often his or her life may be put in danger. An example would be James Patrick in 'A Glasgow Gang Observed' who left 'the field' after being faced with activities he didn't want to do and thereafter changed his name to remain anonymous. Most often survey research is in keeping with the moral and ethical traditions of openness, truthfulness and confidentiality [if required]. However, most survey research does not go as in depth as many observational studies have and so the ethical problems facing researchers using the former are far more limited. Howard Becker said in 1964 that 'A study that purports to deal with social structure...inevitably will reveal that the organisation or community is not all it claims to be, not all it would like to be able to feel itself to be. A good study therefore will make somebody angry.' In this respect, thus, I would agree that as compared with survey research, ethical problems are especially acute in observational studies, though, and importantly, depending on the different moral guidelines a researcher may start out with, the specific things promised to the subjects and finally, the depth of the research itself. 