<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>The brief was to produce a report on the company, identify the issues the company faces and provide recommendations for PCD Maltron. The main issues are Marketing, IPR, Finance and Innovation. The marketing focus should be more towards securing distribution channels and advertising using real data that proves the effectiveness of the products. The interests of the company should be protected by getting a patent. The company needs modernisation, both in the manufacturing methods and business strategy. This should be achieved by getting financial and business help from a Venture Capitalist company. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>This report contains an analysis on the current market that PCD Maltron is in and what the company can do to better its position within this market. The nature of the report is a detailed review of the market followed by a look at the main issues the company faces and recommendations to address the issues. A lot of the market research conducted uses data from the US but most likely reflects similar situations in other well developed countries. <heading>Review of the market</heading>In 2000 the total keyboard market was $2.2 billion (Venture Development Corporation) and ergonomic keyboards are a growing share of this. 21.7% of keyboards for North America were of the ergonomic type in 1999. This percentage is expected to increase to 27% by 2004 indicating string growth in the market. Furthermore, there was an increase in the percentage of ergonomic keyboards shipped to OEM's (Original Equipment Manufacturer, the commonest distribution channel) from 1.2% in 1995 to 9.7% in 2000. There is not a single main competitor in this market as it is quite fragmented. Most of these ergonomic keyboard producers are small and private firms all with different strategies. The main competitors are Kinesis ($230, contoured design), Datahand ($1295, split armature attached to chair) and Microsoft ($40, Natural keyboard). The larger companies such as Microsoft opt for standardised products and mass production with their input devices. This is why there is room for smaller companies like Datahand serving niche segments; hopefully PCD Maltron can find a similar niche. As the automation of all work tasks increases, more workers are exposed to the hazards of RSI. There is data to show that RSI has increased steadily over the last ten years. Data processing product applications (data entry) had 57% of the total application market in 1995 and are forecast to grow at 11.6%. The combination of increased growth rate here and increased RSI should attract more competitors to the ergonomic keyboard market meaning PCD Maltron will have to compete with more alternative products. The basis for competition is as follows: Ease of use: Innovation aims to reduce the risk of RSI while increasing comfort and efficiency. This has lead to many different types of ergonomic keyboard - vertical, split, cordless, Datahand, command chair etc. Quality and Reliability: Keyboards are usually used for the whole of the working day so most manufacturers of keyboards offers some form of money back guarantee to attract potential customers. Utility: Function and benefit for the price - Microsoft Natural is $40 and the Datahand is $1295 because they approach the problem of RSI from different directions and with different prospects in mind. If two products have a similar function then price is usually the most important non-product factor involved in the decision to buy. The barriers to entry are lower than they could be, largely due to the fragmented nature of the market. The technological barrier to entry is quite low because of the rigid QWERTY key layout and the fact that ergonomic design is not necessarily dependant on technology but rather on research. Other barriers to entry are Product Awareness and Distribution Channels. These are low too because there is no significant public awareness for a particular model or manufacturer of ergonomic keyboard and the distribution is much the same as any other accessory type product; preferred vendor lists, mail order, online etc. Trends in the market support the prediction of market growth, but also suggest higher barriers to entry are to come. This will be caused by more regulations and guidelines from governments for companies and their employee's needs. As awareness for RSI increases, companies spending on ergonomics increases as they turn their attention to the matter. More employees will then begin to realize their right to request ergonomic products in the workplace and so the target customer segment widens. This, however, will inevitably make it harder to define a product as "ergonomic" which means the barriers to entry will be higher. The customer (businesses where end-user's work) needs are different to the end-user's (data entry users and graphic designers etc) needs. For the end-user primary needs regarding keyboards, the following were identified in a study by Key-Bowl: <list> Elimination of wrist fatigue (44%) Built in wrist rest (22%) Key feel (22%)</list>For the businesses, RSI causes considerable cost due to workers compensation (an average of $29,000 per claim according to the National Council on Compensation Insurance (NCCI in the US), disability claims, lawsuits, medical costs and reduced productivity, among others. Indeed, there was 308,000 injuries in 1995 resulting from repetitive motion (General Accounting Office (GAO), US), which accounts for 60% of work-related illness and 32% of injuries that result in days away from work. On average this is 18 days away from work as a result of injury from repetitive motion (1995, Bureau of Labor Statistics, US). Injuries due to typing are of course a certain fraction of all these numbers, but the number still remains large. The total cost of RSI's to business is estimated to be $20 billion annually (august 1997, GAO). The decision to purchase a new piece of ergonomic equipment is typically as follows. An employee who is experiencing a discomfort states the request for a new keyboard to the purchasing department or the business management. The employee receives a list of approved vendors or recommended ergonomic products or catalogues from the preferred vendors (who usually have set up some deal with the business to arrange discounts). As an ergonomic keyboard manufacturer the aim should be to get on the approved product or preferred vendor lists as well as improving general employee awareness as to the alternative keyboards available to the standard £15 ones that come with PC's. A small piece of market research comes from page 2, paragraph 2 of the PCD Maltron case study supplied for this report. It states that two thirds of sales are for the single left or right hand only type keyboards. This indicates a large possible market gap, twice as big as for the standard RSI reducing model. I was unable to find any other information about keyboards for the disabled apart from Voice Recognition which when the technology has developed significantly enough may pose a very serious threat to the ergonomic keyboard market. <heading>ISSUES</heading><heading>IPR</heading>PCD Maltron has a range of products but because the owner has never really marketed the products there is little IPR. However, this is largely due to the fact that the main Maltron keyboard is not a patented design. Without a patent there is no possibility of licensing to firms with existing complimentary assets. It is especially important to get a patent for an ergonomic keyboard as it is fairly easy to reverse engineer due to the relatively low amount of technology involved. There is IPR available for the company which was effectively free. This is the rewards the companies products have won and been ranked as a "millennium product" by the Design Council in this country. <heading>FINANCE</heading>PCD Maltron needs some considerable investment capital to get at that global market and supply it. This could be done by using a lower cost assembler company enhancing distribution, both of which will cost more money. The options available to PCD Maltron for sources if finance are Bank Loans, Venture Capitalism and Business Angels. Each of these sources of finance has advantages and disadvantages and I shall now try to explain them in relation to PCD Maltron's position. Borrowing from banks has an advantage which would seem important to the owner in that there is no effect on control/ownership of the company. However, since I estimate the amount that would have to be borrowed to be greater than £50k, security will affect the price of the loan. In PCD Maltron's case this is bad news; as the company is not very well established the security they can offer is quite low and so the interest charged on the loan would probably not justify taking the loan out. Also, the loan can be called in at any time which would be bad if something went wrong and the company was going through a bad patch at that time. From PCD Maltron's point of view getting finance from Venture Capitalists is probably the most likely source of finance but also provides moderate concern as to the issue of control/ownership of the company since dilution is more or less inevitable. There is an attractive advantage of using Venture Capitalism for finance; although the problem of control/ownership cannot be helped the extra management team brought in will mean the company will be more professionally managed. This professionalism would help the company to become more focused and improve their business strategy as well as gaining access to business experience and networks. Other advantages include the fact that the funds last for ten years and the given credibility value of working with a Venture Capitalist company. The problem of dilution is because the Venture Capitalist Company will try to get the majority of the stock/equity and also may try to get the majority of the company ownership if things go well. Business Angels tend to invest a smaller amount, typically only 24% of investments are greater than £100k, so this may or may not affect PCD Maltron. The best thing about going down the Business Angel route to finance is the "injection" of capital the company would receive. There are, however, a few problems with this option too. Mainly the simple fact that no Business Angels would want to invest in PCD Maltron because they usually invest in early stage or start up stage companies. Now, one could argue that due to the low level of development in PCD Maltron the company is still in early stage, but I think Business Angels would just see this as a sign that the company does not have the motivation required to make good use of the invested capital. Since Business Angels are typically interested in returns of more than 20% this fact may put them off quickly. <heading>MARKETING</heading>PCD Maltron is near to the market in respect to the customers they currently sell to, but has little real market power globally. This is coupled by the relatively slow up take on the distribution side of things. The company has 11 British distributors and 8 abroad (import agents in N. America, Australia, New Zealand and four European markets). In total 500 units are sold per year, 25% of which go for overseas sales. So on average there is only 125÷8 15 units sold per year per overseas outlet which is not very impressive. The establishment of distribution channels is required to achieve market share and product sales. Although I think advertising in healthcare journals is a good idea, considering it costs £20k a year and the profit is not much more I don't think the cost is really justified. Were the company bigger, and hopefully it will be, then by all means spend £20k per year advertising in healthcare magazines as PART of the ongoing advertising campaign. <heading>INNOVATION</heading>There is a problem in PCD Maltron regarding innovation which is typical of small businesses: the team is small and there is cross functionality, but staff with formal qualifications are nowhere to be seen. The simple fact that the keyboards are made and assembled by friends and family of the owner at various locations demonstrates this. Hence, there is limited scope for innovation in the current set up. Indeed, the only advances in the design of the keyboard have been a resting area for the user's palms (one of the three most important end-user primary needs in the Key-Bowl study) and a trackball to control the mouse cursor. <heading>RECOMMENDATIONS</heading><heading>IPR</heading>Patenting the design will prevent others from copying or attempting to imitate the Maltron keyboard, as already unfortunately happened with Fentek. As the company has previously tried to get a patent and failed there is the possibility of getting a patent in the US where there is a known high problem of RSI and more is seen to be done about it. The awards the company has won and association with the Design Council should appear with the company logo, except there is no company logo. So the company needs to get one, a good one which will hopefully help to give the company a better image as most respected companies have a decent logo. <heading>FINANCE</heading>Venture Capitalists may be looking for lower returns than Business Angels but either would result in dilution eventually. Seeing as it is more likely that PCD Maltron would be accepted by Venture Capitalists than Business Angels I recommend them to try Venture Capitalists to fund their expansion. Financially the owner of the company will be better off with a smaller share of the company if it does really well than he is now owning all of it. For the owner's concerns over loss of control of the company I can only say this: If the company does do well and more people are helped as a result of it then surely that is reason enough for the owner to go for expansion through a Venture Capitalist. The reason why Venture Capitalism is the most likely source of finance is because to a Venture Capitalist company PCD Maltron is an attractive company to work with. Venture Capitalist companies are looking to work with companies with the potential to be leaders in their market sectors. PCD Maltron has the potential to do this, if they are backed financially and gain some management experience. Also, the lead time should be relatively short (less than two years) since the company already exists but just isn't very well developed; this makes PCD Maltron attractive to Venture Capitalists who will be looking for a return on their investment. There is also a clear exit route available, which the Venture Capitalist company will need to be able to see, and that it is to do a merger (trade sale) with the low cost assembler. <heading>MARKETING</heading>The market strategy needs to exploit the awards it has won for its products and the recognition it has achieved. Backing up claims of reducing RSI with associated resultant cost reductions for particular cases will attract businesses to invest in PCD Maltron's products. Also the web site idea is very good and should definitely be updated as well as having the option for on-line buying. To get the right kind of people to the web site there needs to be more advertising on other web sites that have content on healthcare, RSI, disability communities for example. Distribution is a big part of marketing as this is how the product will actually reach the end-user. As described earlier it is desirable to get the company's products on businesses preferred vendor or approved ergonomic products lists. There is, however, another way to reach the masses and it is through the OEM's. For example a Computer Manufacturer (Dell, IBM etc) could incorporate a Maltron keyboard as part of a standard PC package. Similarly with Office Furniture Manufacturer (for example, Herman Miller), the Maltron keyboard could be sold as part of a whole ergonomic workstation solution. The main advantage of selling through an OEM like this is that a far greater number of both customers (businesses) and end-users are reached. The greater the number of customers reached, the greater the chance the product ends up on the approved product list or preferred vendor lists of other businesses. The more end-users who use the product, the greater the awareness for the product will be generally and hence the more likely employees will be to choose it from those lists. <heading>INNOVATION</heading>The products need more incremental innovations/improvements to stay as market leaders once entry to the market on a more global scale has been achieved. One thing that struck me as alarming was that it said 99% of user's reject the keyboard because it is not QWERTY key layout. If it was QWERTY key layout but still the design eliminated wrist fatigue perhaps the number of sales would increase 100 fold. This would need to be investigated further. Perhaps this may seem as a backward step in innovation but maybe if people had the choice more sales would result. I have also noted from the images of the company's products that the designs are not the most aesthetically pleasing. Granted, this does not actually effect how ergonomic the product is but to some people it may be a consideration when comparing similar function and priced products. <heading>CONCLUSIONS</heading>The report has used the data found from the extensive market research to relate to PCD Maltron's situation and identify issues that the company needs to address to move into a stronger position in this market. PCD Maltron needs to modernise the products appearance and possibly consider giving customers the option of having the traditional QWERTY key layout. They should attempt to secure distribution channels by selling through OEM's which will also help to raise the awareness of the products and their benefits to both customers and end-users. Real data proving that the keyboards really do save businesses money in the long run must be presented as a selling point. To finance the expansion of the company by using a low cost assembler and pushing the advertising side of things the company should look to using Venture Capitalism as a source of finance. The key product elements should be patented to protect them. 