<heading>Possible Claim #1: Angela, for the hospital failing to read the medical notes about Penicillin </heading>For this she wouldn't have a claim against David for the extra 3 weeks, even though due to causation he caused it eventually. This is since the contribution by the junior doctor's mistake was significantly large and he was not a competent doctor. In Cheshire, R v [1991] here the chain of causation was not broken by the hospitals negligence since <quote>"Only in the most extraordinary and unusual case would treatment, whether right or wrong, given in good faith by a generally competent doctor, be regarded as independent of the original injury." </quote>In Angela's claim the doctor was a junior doctor and so this does not apply. Therefore the junior doctor's negligent act is independent of her initial accident and does break the chain of causation. Angela may make a claim for damages as a result of negligence on the part of the junior doctor. <heading>Duty of care:</heading>It is reasonably foreseeable that if someone is prescribed drugs that they are allergic to there will be severe side effects. The proximity between patient and doctor is very close since the patient effectively trusts their life with the doctor. It is fair, just and reasonable to impose such a duty of care on the junior doctor here mainly because of the doctor-patient trust that is assumed to exist in hospitals. <heading>Breach of duty:</heading>The reasonable man test in this possible claim involves comparing the junior doctor to all competent doctors. This is acceptable as it was in Nettleship v Weston [1971] where the difference in standards of driving between a learner driver and fully qualified driver did not remove the liability of the driver in an accident. Here it is the same for doctors, there should be no difference allowed in the level of care for a junior doctor. Therefore, by failing to read the medical notes the junior doctor fell below the standard expected of a reasonable man in this position. The reasonable man should be able to see harmful consequences of his inaction and so therefore he is negligent in failing to read the medical notes. The likelihood of harm resulting from not reading the medical notes is quite high and could potentially be fatal; therefore Angela was exposed to a very great risk when the junior doctor failed to read the medical notes. The cost for the junior doctor to have read the notes would have been nothing and so he does not escape liability by the cost of preventing damage been too large. So it is decided that the junior doctor, and hence his employers, were in breach of their duty of care to Angela. <heading>Causation:</heading>Here it is already stated in the question to this essay that the negligence of the doctor caused her to suffer anaphylactic shock. This statement in the question also shows that there must be available proof that the doctor's negligence caused the shock. Multiple causation does not apply here since we are looking at the doctor's actions or omissions only. The chain of causation for holding David liable for the extra 3 weeks in hospital is broken by the doctor's omission (his failing to read the medical notes). By failing to read the medical notes the type of harm foreseeable would include severe consequences. Therefore the damage is not too remote to be recoverable and the claim for negligence on the part of the doctor would be successful. <heading>Possible Claim #2: John, for nervous shock from witnessing accident and narrowly missing accident</heading>John claiming damages for nervous shock from witnessing the accident is classed as a 'secondary victim'. However, since he narrowly escaped injury and was involved immediately as a participant in the events he is therefore also classed as a 'primary victim'. In both points of view the defendant is the Taxi Company / Driver (David) so there is in fact only one case for negligence to claim here. <heading>Duty of care:</heading>From the primary victim point of view it was reasonably foreseeable that if the taxi driver drove negligently (drove fast, racing etc) he may have a near-miss with a pedestrian. Since personal injury to John was therefore foreseeable the taxi driver is liable for psychiatric injury due to his own negligent driving. As laid down by the House of Lords, this is irrespective of whether psychiatric injury was foreseeable as a result of the defendant's negligence. In Page v Smith it was held that "provided some physical damage is foreseeable than the full extent of the claimants damage is recoverable." From the secondary point of view, in Page v Smith we find, as per Lord Lloyd, that a duty of care is owed if psychiatric injury is reasonably foreseeable in a person of normal fortitude due to the defendant's negligence. That is, it was reasonably foreseeable that racing another taxi may cause mounting of the pavement resulting in hitting a pedestrian and causing a witness to suffer a psychiatric injury from viewing this. Therefore a duty of care is owed based on reasonable foreseeability. Since he 'has a clear view of the accident' he has perceived the accident with his own unaided senses and this led to suffering from nervous shock. Proximity to the person in danger, Angela, in this possible claim, is considered on the following two issues as in Jones v Wright. In relationship terms there is close proximity as she is his wife and in geographical terms there is also proximity since he was standing right next to her at the time. Foreseeability of injury by shock is the test for liability for shock, it is required that John be demonstrated to be a normal person and is not likely to have suffered the shock as a result of some uncommon psychiatric reaction. In McFarlane v EE Caledonia Ltd [1994] it was held that "where a person reasonably (objectively) thinks they are in danger due to event then a duty is owed", however, this must be proved. It is highly likely that the courts would consider it fair, reasonable and just to impose duty on the taxi driver in this claim of negligence. It is fair, reasonable and just to impose such a duty since the nervous shock was suffered as a result of seeing and hearing the accident and its immediate aftermath. <heading>Breach of duty:</heading>A reasonable man would be able to comprehend that by driving dangerously to a location where people are guaranteed to be close to the kerb (the taxi rank) that they may just miss someone who could then be expected to suffer nervous shock especially when others next to them were killed or injured badly. So David clearly fell below the standard of care expected by a reasonable man who would have been able to see a harmful consequence of these actions and so he is negligent of failing to take precautions. The likeliness of someone suffering nervous shock from been very close to a taxi killing someone and injuring his wife is very high indeed. As before the cost of preventing this, by driving more carefully, is nothing and so does not affect the fact that David was in breach of his duty of care to John. <heading>Causation</heading>Clearly in this case the 'but for test' shows that he would have not suffered nervous shock but for David's negligence. As long as John can prove he does not suffer, or has not ever suffered, from any mental illness that may make him more susceptible to nervous shock from such an incident the witnesses at the scene of the accident will be enough to prove that he was indeed narrowly missed by the taxi. Multiple causation here could be said to apply since he witnessed his wife been injured, someone else been killed and he himself was injured; all three probably happened in very quick succession. The cumulative effect of all these may have contributed to the severity of the nervous shock condition suffered as a result. However, since all three were caused by the negligence of David there is no special consideration to account for and the claim would be successful mostly because John is both a primary victim and a secondary victim. <heading>Possible Claim #3: Debbie for suffering personality change and nervous shock. </heading><heading>ASSUMPTIONS FOR POSSIBLE CLAIM #3:</heading>'her friends' refers to Angela and John (or Mike) The news bulletin she saw on television named the victims as Angela and John and all it said was they were taken to hospital <heading>Duty of care:</heading>In McLoughlin v O'Brian [1982] it was shown that when negligence on the roads causes nervous shock the liability is tested only on reasonable foreseeability. This is without any limit on time, distance or relationship of claimant to victim. So it has to be addressed whether it was reasonably foreseeable that a normal person of sound mind would have been affected as Debbie was and suffer nervous shock as a result. In Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1991] the situation was different, and not on the roads. From this case it was held that in order for the claimant to satisfy the test of reasonable foreseeability they need to be sufficiently close in time and space to the accident. Also they need to have had a sufficiently close relationship with the victim(s) that news of them been injured or killed was reasonably foreseeable to have caused them nervous shock. The claimant should also have heard or seen the accident themselves, television or other third parties not been deemed in this case to have enabled true shock to the nervous system to occur. In relationship terms there is relatively close proximity as they are friends, hearing of their accident caused her to suffer nervous shock so it can be assumed that the relationship was indeed very close. In geographical terms there is some proximity since she had just been at the location (space) a short while (time) ago. Remembering that this was effectively a road traffic accident, it is therefore fair, reasonable and just to impose a duty of care since although the nervous shock is suffered as a result of hearing the accident through television the relationship and proximity is sufficiently close. <heading>Breach of duty:</heading>Although it has been established that there was a duty of care owed in this possible claim, the reasonable man could not be expected to have foreseen it. How could anyone seriously have guessed that by racing another taxi it could result in the friend of a victim suffering mentally? After all, Debbie wasn't actually there and since she found out about it through television the reasonable man would not expect it to affect her so badly. The standard of care of a reasonable man in this case is difficult to decide since the resultant suffering of Debbie is from a long chain of causation. A reasonable man would most likely not have foreseen the full length of this chain of events, however, this would be decided by the particular judge. The risk that Debbie would develop nervous shock from viewing the news report on television is very small since this is not even normally considered to be reasonably foreseeable as it is not true shock. Obviously if David had taken greater care to avoid hitting pedestrians, at no extra cost to himself, then of course Debbie would not have suffered. However, since there has been established a duty of care it has either been breached or it hasn't and in this case it clearly has if she developed nervous shock, not just suffered grief for example. <heading>Causation:</heading>Clearly from the question it states that as a result of hearing about the accident Debbie suffered nervous shock and so the 'but for test' shows that she would not have suffered this nervous shock but for the taxi drivers negligence. The proof of this cause will be difficult to prove and this is why she will not win because it will be impossible to show that a normal person would have suffered in the same way. The result in Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963] was that if harm is foreseeable but occurs in an unforeseeable way there may still be liability. Despite this all the evidence and severity of the suffering of Debbie I think the damage too remote to allow the driver of the first taxi, David, to be held fully liable. Therefore I would expect this claim to be unsuccessful. <heading>Possible Claim #4: Owner of car that Colin drove his taxi into. For damages caused by negligence &Possible Claim #5: Owner (council) of lamppost that Colin drove his taxi into. </heading><heading>Duty of care:</heading>It is reasonably foreseeable that if the taxi driver drives fast in a built up area there may be an accident involving collision with any property on or near the road. Therefore it was foreseeable that collision with a lamppost and/or a parked car may occur due to negligent driving. The proximity between Colin and the owners of the lamppost (the local council authority) and the parked car do not have any relationship other than that created by Colin since he is now known to them as the person who damaged their property. Although there is effectively no proximity it is fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care on the driver of the second taxi as he is definitely liable to the claimants through his negligent driving as this is a road traffic accident <heading>Breach of duty:</heading>The reasonable man in this case would not have raced in a built up area where there will obviously be property that he could hit. So Colin fell below the standard of care expected from a reasonable man and failed to see the harmful consequence and he is therefore negligent because he failed to drive more carefully. The chance of damage occurring to the property in question, the parked car and lamppost was quite high given that racing was taking place. Once again the cost of avoiding this would have been nothing and so Colin was in breach of his duty owed to the owner of the parked car and the owner of the lamppost. <heading>Causation:</heading>Clearly, but for Colin's negligence the parked car and lamppost would not have been physically damaged. This will be proved by the fact that when police arrive on the scene they would have seen a taxi wrapped around a lamppost and also smashed into a car. The remoteness of damage does not come into consideration for these two possible claims since the damaging of physical property as result of dangerous driving is reasonably foreseeable. So Colin, and therefore the taxi company he works for, is liable for all recoverable damages by the owners of the damaged property and both claims would be successful. <heading>Possible Claim #6: Mikes family, negligence against David for breaching his duty of care not to kill him</heading><heading>Duty of care:</heading>If Mike had a family/spouse then they may claim for damages relating to the loss of income from Mike due to his death caused by David's negligence. It is reasonably foreseeable that driving dangerously may kill someone and rob his family of their services and income. The proximity between David and the claimants would be remote since they would never have met or come close before or during the accident. It is therefore not fair, just and reasonable to impose such a duty on David and this claim would therefore most likely be unsuccessful. <heading>Breach of duty:</heading>A reasonable man should be aware that road traffic laws that prevent or discourage racing on the streets exist for the reason of safety for not only the drivers but also for the protection of the general public, mainly pedestrians. The standard expected from a reasonable man would be in this case (especially since the destination was a location where people could be expected to be near the kerb) to drive more carefully and not compromise the safety of pedestrians. The harm was foreseeable as a consequence of dangerous driving and so Colin is negligent in failing to drive more carefully. In vehicle accidents a great many victims die on impact and so it was quite likely that if David was driving dangerously enough to hit someone they could die. The cost of preventing this does not save them Colin breaching duty as said before it would have cost nothing, or at most slowing down and losing the race so the other taxi got the fare, and so the value of the fare would have been the cost which is negligible when compared with the value of human life. <heading>Causation:</heading>The 'but for test' here shows that Mikes family would not have lost him but for the drivers negligence. This will be proved by the fact that witnesses saw the taxi hit him, ambulance crews (etc.) will be able to confirm he died from a road accident. David, and therefore the taxi company he works for, is liable for the damage caused. I think that this claim would likely be successful as road traffic accidents and their consequences are heavily punished but the individuals affected can get compensation this way too. <heading>Possible Claim #7: Angela, for suffering the accident (broken leg and internal bleeding)</heading><heading>Duty of care:</heading>The fact that she suffered a broken leg would mean that her ability to work and carry out normal every day tasks would be impeded at least for a while. Therefore there is a potential claim for the damages caused here. It is reasonably foreseeable that if the taxi driver drove fast, racing to get to a taxi rank, that he may hit a person. This is because as it is a taxi rank there would most likely be people there waiting for taxis. The proximity between Angela and David was very close only at the time of the accident when he actually hit her with his taxi by his negligent actions. It was close enough that he should owe her a duty of care to not cause physical damage through negligence. Hence, it is fair, reasonable and just to impose a duty of care on David that he should have taken more care to avoid injuring pedestrians in the taxi rank. However, since the act of hitting a pedestrian in a vehicle is also a criminal one there may be other sources of compensation available to Angela such as the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme and so the courts will decide that in fact there is no duty of care existing at all. <heading>Second part of assignment</heading>If Mike had previously been exposed to lethal doses of radiation then he would either have already been dead and not killed in the accident (as lethal implies enough to kill) so someone would have been standing in his place in the queue and could have been injured or killed. There are many possibilities to consider. So it is possible that John and/or Debbie would not suffer nervous shock, if Mike or no-one else was killed or injured. If it was someone else hit by the taxi they might have survived like Angela. Or Mike could have been said to be more likely to die from the accident anyway because he had been previously exposed to radiation. In Paris v Stepney borough council the magnitude of risk was far greater. It is different here, however, since the taxi driver could never have been aware of Mike's recent exposure to radiation it is impossible for him to have taken any extra precautions to account for this. The 'but for test' would not apply in this case since Mike may have died later as a result of cancer regardless of whether the taxi hit him. The courts would ignore this as in Smith v Leech Brain & Co [1961] showed that wrong doers must take their victims as they find them and therefore in this case the fact that Mike was more likely to die in a crash as a result of his earlier exposure to lethal levels of radiation may mean nothing in reducing David's liability. The accident was reasonably foreseeable if the taxi company allowed their drivers to race competing firms. Therefore, they are still liable for claims for all the damage. 