<heading>Introduction</heading>After the module of "Content of Business", the group 25 handed in a business plan for Fantastic Fitness Club by using the basic business knowledge to practice. This assignment is an overall evaluation and analyze of the plan based on more academic reading and understanding foundation. It reviews the whole plan from business description, business environment, marketing plan, infrastructure and support system and finance aspects. The author analyzed the good factors of the plan and also points out the fault consideration of it. <heading>1. Business Description</heading>Fantastic Fitness Club is a club for healthy and fitness in service industry. It is founded on the trend of UK's civil need for healthy life style. It is focus on the comprehensive healthy habit, which is not only by exercise, and also with salubrious food in usual life. <heading>1.1 Mission</heading>According to (Nigel, Stuart, Robert, 2004), the company founder need to consider the following aspects when setting up mission: values, environment, customers, profitable and public image. Under these considerations, the club defined the mission that to make profit by supplying competitive and unique service to help customers living in healthy lifestyle. Through an overall approach, the professional and practical dietetic treatment combined with corresponding fitness exercises will be offered to customers. In a word, we'll try our best to help customers to be used to healthy habit effectively and enjoyably. <heading>1.2 Objectives</heading>The objectives based on two orientations. The customer based objective is that satisfy customers with excellent service. The company based one are as follow: <list>Found our brand through successful operations. Grows to a leading company based on the chain stores model.Gain net margin at 10% of turnover and recover the investment in 5 years.</list><heading>1.3 Evaluation about Brand and company name</heading>In the basic study (Leonard and Berry, 1991) points that service company's brand is a significant role for customer's determining product's value. It's the reason that customer care more about the company's name rather than the product's name in service industry. We emphasize on founding our brand in objectives because we realize the important of brand value. It can decide customer's behavior through following process: <figure/>To promote our brand, we need to consider every aspect which can express it to customers, such as gym facilities, signs, print post, advertisement media, delivery truck and staff uniforms. We must to do our best to provide best service and brand strategy at the beginning of our business. In service industry, customers extremely believe their experience to value the company. A wonderful brand strategy can make good service better, but it can't recover a bad service impression in customer's brain. Our company's name can't highlight competitive advantage of our service. According to (Leonard and Berry, 1991), the principle role of brand is that giving the company advantage by building up the company's service in a method, which is different, important and attractive to customers. The name is the key and power of service brand and it should satisfy the following four perspectives: Particularity: the name should obviously tell the difference between our company and competitors. Pertinence: the name includes the kind and advantage of the service. Easily memorize: it should be understand, called and remember easily. Flexibility: the company's strategy may be adjusted in the future. The name should be suitable for the changes also. The name" Fantastic" can't tell the advantage and relevant content of our service and is too abstract. We should start with market research in the form of executive interview, customer focus group interviews, and understand the company's unique. The name should be both appreciate and advantageous for company. <heading>2. Business Environment</heading><heading>2.1 Marketplace</heading><heading>2.1.1 SWOT analysis</heading>The SWOT analysis is the first step to analyze company internal and external environment. In this case, the SWOT helps the company to realize general marketplace. <table/><heading>2.1.2 PESTEL analysis</heading>Compared to SWOT, PESTEL focus more on the external environment and its impact to the company. <heading>Political:</heading>The United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy country with strong legal system. The long established history provides the UK correct policy which established by different parties. The UK has totally freedom and democracy for small business and gives investors very good condition and tax policy in the beginning year. In the UK, there will be at least two general elections over the next 10 years - with resultant changes in economic and industrial policy. Political change and new legislation will be an important driver of change. At a regional level, Advantage West Midlands (the Regional Development Agency) provides the framework for regional economic development and allocates funding to support development. <heading>Economics:</heading>The City of Birmingham is the regional capital of the UK's West Midlands. It is the UK's most populous local authority district, has approximately one million residents and lies at the centre of a conurbation of over two million people. The value of goods and services produced in Birmingham is currently around £14.5 billion. This is likely to grow to around £18 billion by 2015. Birmingham currently contributes around 19% of West Midlands Regional output and 2% of national output. Birmingham's economy is likely to grow by 11% over the next five years but has the potential to grow by as much as 14%. Economic Growth will generally be faster over the next five years, compared to 2010 to 2015. Services output growth more than 2.5 over the next 10 years, whilst employment will expand by around 8.5%. In 2002 research shows that Birmingham became the fourth most popular UK City destination for international tourists. From above statistic data may find there is a very good economic opportunity for Fantastic Fitness Club. <heading>Social:</heading>In recent years, the UK government encourage citizens to join in the "civil fitness exercise" plan. Parts of the plan funds come from sport lottery fund and other bonus, although the government need to afford at least 25% of it. Citizens always have two ways to exercise: go to the gym or do it at home. <heading>Technology:</heading>The development of methods to exercise and fitness changes fast. The club decided to set up a technology department including R&D group. They will follow the trend and catch the latest scientific research for updating the clubs products and services. <heading>Environment:</heading>The marketing research form Allegra Strategies Company indicated that the fitness market increases continuously under the affection of the policy. There are about 5000 fitness centres or club in UK and the memberships go to do exercise average 2 or 3 times weekly. According to the company's prediction, the fitness market will rise 23% this year and about 5 million people (8.3% of the national population) will take part in local fitness clubs. <heading>Law:</heading>Although Fantastic Fitness Club is a small service company, but it still has to face lot of legislation. Except the environment law, the company should concentrate on other laws. Because the club supply sport facilities to customers, the sport safety security law is the most important issue. Meanwhile, the club provides drink and food, so the hygiene certificate is also needed. Otherwise, the labour law is important to the club and the club also needs to provide clean environment to consumer without any pollution. <heading>3. Marketing Plan</heading>(Robert, Barry, Roberta, 1990) pointed out that at present, the marketing matrix has involved into seven elements based on four Ps: product, place, price, promotion, physical evidence, participation and process. <heading>3.1 Product</heading>The product in service is related to the types and depth of service in particular area. It includes the services which match the target markets, service level, after-sales service and warranties. When the club started to design the products and service, the first step is identify the customer's needs which are to be responsible by marketing department. After informal process or formal marketing research study, the department got a definition of the needed service. The description of the need service is usually called performance specification and illustrates what the demand and requirement the customers need. In this case, marketing staff found that customers need convenient meal which can keep the effect of exercises after doing exercises. Then the product or service designers transfer it to design specification, which indicates the services will meet the need. In result, the designers invent the patterns which combine the exercise and food together. The important issue of this process is that performance specification should include plenteous information to assure the design specification can product the correct service to match customers need by kind of competitive advantage. The flow of the process as follow: <figure/><heading>3.2 Place</heading>Place in marketing refer to the location and distribution channels of service. Location is absolutely the most important element in service industry because the accessibility decide whether the business success. The club considered the following criteria (Robert, Barry, Roberta, 1990) before making decision that set it in the city centre of Birmingham. <list>Labor availability and costs, land cost and construction, cost of livingEducation centersElectric powerTransportation networksHealth and welfare systemClimate and weatherState business environment and climate, taxesSuppliers and supporting service companiesPopulation and population trendCommunication system</list>Meanwhile, the club avoided to make mistake of selecting location, such as pay too much attention to land cost. Because high land cost indicates strong desirable area and high customer volume. <heading>3.3 Price</heading>When making pricing decision, marketer should consider different steps from company strategy to price level. From (Bart, Roland, Paul, 1998) study, the steps include six aspects: <figure/>The pricing decision is not an isolate decision from other marketing three Ps. It under the company's objective and marketing strategy and used as a tool for marketing strategy. The objectives of pricing are not always making maximum profit. There are several other objectives which impact the pricing, for instance, expanding market share, being the price leader, reclaiming investment, maxing long-term profit. The objective has to be agile and practical. The nowadays market situation will influence it. Pricing strategy involves the way that price to be set. Three main methods are used in business generally. Cost based pricing: marketer set the prices based on the cost of products or service. It includes the fix cost, material cost and expected profit. Mark-up pricing and target return pricing are the most regular way. Marketer should consider not only the cost of products or service, but also the added value of them. Customer based pricing: it is decided by market. The price just keep in line with the value which the products or service deliver to customers. According to (Berry, yadav, 1996) research, there strategies can measure the value of products or service: satisfaction based pricing, relationship based pricing, and efficiency based pricing. Competition based pricing: it is entirely based on the company's practical or expected competitive marketplace. Four strategies are used to achieving that marketplace: experience curve pricing, going-rate pricing, pricing signaling and price leadership. In this case, the marketer use an integration of the above three pricing strategies to set price. The cost of product or service decides the price bottom line while the customer expected value determines the up limit of price. The competition pricing gives the marketer a guide to make balance of the cost and value pricing. The detail price decision needs to be considered with whole marketing strategy. Since the club is just founded, the objectives of marketing strategy is expanding marketing share. Therefore, the price should be a relatively lower than competitors. <heading>3.4 Promotion</heading>The promotion for service industry has particularity because the nature of service - intangibility and simultaneity. (Bart, Roland, Paul, 1998) concluded a useful framework to draw up a promotion plan as follow: <figure/>First of all, setting up objectives is really crucial of the whole process. The purpose of promotion can be concluded in several aspects, such as founding brand, transmitting products information, and enhancing customer loyalty or satisfaction. The actual products advantage which is expressed to customers depend on the intension of promotion, target groups and market segmentation. Promotion should recover the gap between customer desired products features and practical products features. The objectives are always long-term plan and target at making good image for company. Secondly, determining audiences is relating to select target group, which may contain end customers, reference groups or members of the distribution. The club is interested in promoting among plentiful audiences for widest effecting. Because of the important of audiences is not the same, the club need to select the consequence of them. Two kinds are absolutely important: the media and the company employees because of their work as an intermediate to other target groups. Then selecting channel should in line with the objectives and target groups. Detail timetables need to be designed for execution. After that, budget is the key issue. The usually method called objective and target is applied in this case. It needs accurate objectives and specific target groups before calculating the budget. Finally, there are two way called directly and indirectly to measure effectiveness of promotion. The directly way evaluate the promotion itself, such as the amount of target groups saw the promotion, whether they got the stress information from it, and whether they understand it. The indirectly way focus on the potential brand level and company level, such as the customers attitude to the brand, company image and purchase intension. The result of this promotion will be considered into next one with customer and marketing research. Following the above steps, the club design several ways to promote as the group work indicated. <heading>3.5 Physical Evidence</heading>Physical evidence is important in service industry because service is intangible and interactive. Customer will evaluate the quality of service by staff's attitude and physical image. It's also a useful way to express club's brand. Therefore, marketers should pay more attention to the design, planning and control of such physical evidence. <heading>3.6 Participants</heading>Participants involve all people who play a role in service process. Since the attitude and action from employees will affect the evaluation of customers directly, the club needs to provide excellent training to all staffs. <heading>3.7 Process</heading>A good design of service process will determine the quality of service. It includes staff job allocation and service flow. The process reflects how the whole seven marketing matrix are coordinated to satisfy customers. The marketing departments pay more attention to the design of it. <heading>3.8 Marketing segmentation</heading>(Lamb, Hair, McDaniel, 2000) gave a clear definition of marketing segmentation: <quote>"The process of dividing a market into meaningful, relatively similar, and identifiable segments or groups" </quote>Marketing segmentation plays a crucial role in the marketing strategy because it helps to divide customer needs and wants more precisely. The decision maker can allocate resources better under clear marketing segmentation. Generally, there are six steps to segmenting a market: <figure/>Following the above steps, the club segmented the market into 3 target markets: <list>Over weight peopleKids and old peopleFemale who want to lose weight and shape bodyHealth people who just do regular exercise</list><heading>4. Operation Management </heading><heading>4.1 Layout</heading>It is widely accepted that the transforming resources in operation management are facilities and staff. Layout of operation is emphasis on the physical location of these recourses according to (Nigel, Stuart, Robert, 2004). It determines the company's appearance and the way to place all facilities, equipments and staff in operation. Meanwhile it also affects the flow process of transformed resources, such as material, information and customers. The design quality of layout will influences the flow, cost and efficiency of company operation. We design our layout by the steps that selecting process type and then basic layout. <figure/>The fixed position layout is defined as the transformed (materials, information, customers) resources do not move between the transforming (facilities, staff) resources. Compared with process layout, which focus on the process with similar needs placed together for the convenience of transforming resources, cell layout is where the transforming resources placed for the pre-selected transformed resources need. The product layout is placed the transforming resources totally for the expediency of transformed resources. The club's layout uses different basic layout types in different parts of operation. For instance, the ground floor is arranged in a process layout. Customers go to different rooms for variety activities such as gym, spa. The restaurant use fixed position layout. The customers sit down on the chairs and the waiters supply food to their tables. We analyzed the flow of each part of operation and design the best layout for effective and efficient services. <heading>4.2 Staffing</heading>Staffing is absolutely crucial factor in service environment. From the hard study of (Bart, Roland, Paul, 1998), the service process is an interactive flow between employees and customers. That employees experience during their work is communicated to customers unselfconsciously. The company should satisfy their employees firstly if they want to achieve high level of service quality and customers satisfaction. Therefore, the company realized that employees are not only regarded as cost, but also asset. HRM (Human Resource Management) can be valued as useful tools for staffing. It is defined here as: all management determination and activities which influence the relationship between company and employees. A study from (Beer, Spector, Lawrence, et al, 1984) revealed that it has four policy areas: Human resource flows: it is focus on the flow of people in, through and out the organization. Detail action includes recruitment and selection, staffing, development, performance evaluation, promotion and demission. Reward system: it is emphasis on the reserving and tempting valuable employees by wage system, motivation and benefits. Employee influence. How to design the power and job duty of employees. Work system. It is refers to the method that work is allocated and task arrangement to accomplish the maximum profitable result. When the theory applies in the practical case, the club needs to hire staff that are suitable and meet the expectation and needs of market, rather than the best staff. After the above four policy set up, the club should stress three tendencies in the future: noticing the ability and improvement development, setting up collaborative relationship and finally warranting service employees. <heading>5. Infrastructure and support systems</heading>The definition of Information-based technology (IT) is wildly accepted as all equipments which gather, dispose, store or distribute information. In the club case, we will use distribution processing model to organize the support systems. Different parts of operation have small personal computer which under direct control of the staff who would use them. It is cheaper and flexible compared with centralize workstation. (Nigel, Stuart, Robert, 2004) gave the basic types of IT systems as following: Local area networks (LANs). It is the network which connects distributed processing power and keeps the obvious advantage of centralized computing. Meanwhile, it also can maintain the control and communication benefit of centralize computing. LANs is an intercommunion network which used in restricted distance such as an operation organization. Kinds of equipments are linked to the network, ensuring information which includes data, message and video could be exchanged. The equipments consist of personal computers, printers and minicomputers. The benefit of the network can be concluded to four aspects. Firstly, new equipment can be added to the network easily and fast. Secondly, the workstation and equipments can be located where needed and relocated flexible and without disruption of operation. Finally, self control of the hardware and software by the staff who use them. Internet: it is the most significant development of telecommunication and information technology. World Wide Web (www): The club needs to design a homepage for better communication and interaction with customers. Extranets: it indicates that using internet technology under safe networks to connect companies. It is usually applied to every factors of supply chain management. Compared to other business trading networks, it is affordable and easily to establish and maintain. Kinds of operations can use it such as orders details from suppliers and customers, payments to suppliers and from customers. E-business: This technology is based on internet. The club can use it as a tool of purchasing because its features-reach widely and abundant resources. At the same time, it saves cost. Management Information System (MIS): It concerns about the flow of information collected, exchanged, operated and used for management. Planning and control activities always use this system. Such as demand forecasting, inventory management, order processing and quality management. In this case, the club adopts ERP system for the whole organization. Automatic Identification Technology (Auto ID): the club considers using Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) for the product control during the operations of manufactory, distribution, storage, sales. The strongpoint of this technology is that it helps the company check exactly where every products in the supply chain. <heading>6. Finance</heading><heading>6.1 Basic Cash Flow Forecast</heading>Cash flow is vital for every company. The club had 700,000 pounds to start the business. They can forecast the cash flow by the evaluation of cost and earning. <table/><heading>6.2 Source of funds </heading>At the beginning, the club collects money from investors. After successful operation and development to big scale, they can come into the market and collect money from stockholders. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>The business plan of Fantastic Fitness Club considered basic elements of overall operations. But still too general and need more research or study to fulfill it. The purpose of this plan is to use theoretical knowledge and tools to practical business environment. Actually, the company needs to consider more carefully in real world. 