<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>We propose to study the signalling processes involved in the normal formation of the immunological synapse. The immunological synapse forms between a T lymphocyte and an antigen-presenting cell. This facilitates the activation of the T cell by extending the duration of contact between it and the APC. It has been shown that the shape of the immunological synapse is essential to correct activation of the T cell. We will compare the intracellular contents of T cells able to form an immunological synapse with those artificially prevented from doing so. These comparisons will be used to elucidate the signalling pathway and to construct a mathematical model there-of. Improved understanding of the immune system can help in many medical areas. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The white blood cells are a primary line of defense in the human body. White blood cells travel through the bloodstream and into tissues, searching for and attaching to micro-organisms and other invaders. Some white blood cells, B lymphocytes, recognize invaders directly. Others, T lymphocytes or T cells, need help from other cells of the immune system. These cells, called antigen-presenting cells (APCs), ingest an invader and break it into fragments. Antigen fragments from the invader are then presented in a way that T cells can recognize. T cells bind to APCs through an antigen specific receptor. Intracellular processes then form a complex intercellular structure, the immunological synapse, which holds the APC and the T cell together. After a significant period this allows the T cell to fully activate. According to a recent paper published in Science[1], it was found that the shape of the IS, rather than the growing number of receptors, was critical in triggering a strong T cell activation and response. We will study how the intracellular signalling of the T cell works to stimulate appropriate formation of the IS. Furthermore we will then construct a reasonable mathematical model to simulate the corresponding network. <heading>Proposed Research</heading>It is our intention to study the signalling process governing the formation of the IS. Each T cell receptor (TCR) must migrate through the bilayer of the T cell to assume an appropriate position within the IS. The process by which each TCR finds this position is the area to be investigated. Initially we will compare differences between T cells able to form an IS and those that are prevented from doing so. It is possible to create an artificial antigen-presenting bilayer (AAPB) on a silica substrate. Further by patterning the silica with chromium barriers of suitable height prior to application of the bilayer it is possible to restrict the movement of the antigen and TCR complexes. [1] A series of grids restricting motion of the TCRs to increasing degrees will be used to degrade formation of the IS. Cells will then be lysed at regular intervals and their intracellular contents analysed. Affymetrix microarrays will be used to determine which genes are differentially regulated while the IS is forming and when the IS is not able to form. It is thought that if the IS is unable to form signals promoting the formation of the IS will persist. By determining which genes are upregulated in T cells which are unable to form an IS it will be possible to identify genes related to the signalling process. Statistical techniques will be used to determine the significance of this differential regulation and thus determine which genes are most likely to be involved in the signalling process. It is also possible that a signal is sent when the IS is formed, this will also be observable through this technique. A series of probes will be placed in the AAPB. By breaching the cell locally in a technique analogous to patch clamping it will be possible to collect proteins involved in the signalling process. The sequences of these proteins will then be determined. This local information will allow the refinement of the list of genes to subject to further examination. Proteins which are complexed or phosphorylated are of particular interest. This information provides insight into the mechanics of the signalling process. These experiments will produce a list of genes which are likely to be involved in the signals controlling the formation of the IS. Using this information a series of mutants will be produced which are unable to express these genes. If a particular mutant is unable to form an IS this will suggest that the inactivated gene is significant for this process. This will allow the list of genes involved in this process to be further refined. The proteins transcribed from the genes in this restricted list will be used to construct a mathematical model of the signalling process. Details of the mechanics of the signalling process derived in earlier experiments will be used here. The resulting model will provide a greater understanding of the signalling process. It may be possible to test this model by blocking specific elements of the system, prevention of phosporylation of a protein for example. <heading>Justification</heading>For many organisms T cells act as a primary line of defense against infection. They are critical in regulating the immune response that attacks virus-infected cells, foreign cells, and cancer cells. Understanding the mechanisms through which T cells become activated could provide a first step to being able to control immune response. By discovering the signalling pathways through which T cells activate it could be possible to specifically deactivate those signalling pathways that result in harm to the body. This would obviate the need to deactivate the entire immune response. One example for the potential of the research is that rheumatoid arthritis, where T cells attack the body's own cartilage cells, could be treated by selectively switching off the signalling pathway that triggers this activity. <heading>Appraisal of Costs</heading>Staff: 1 postdoctoral position (@ £15000pa) and 1 PhD student (@ £12000pa) for 3 years. Office space, equipment and access to university resources will be £3000pa for each student. A professor will take a supervisory role over the duration of the project, equivalent to one month full time (£2500pa). Biological Equipment: T cells and Antigens necessary for the experimentation will be bought from a reputable manufacturer, with estimated cost for adequate supplies of £6500. Chips with restraints will also be purchased at a cost of £3250. Microarray analysis, protein sequencing, gel electrophoresis and other standard biological processing will be performed in the laboratories of the University. This will incur the standard fee of £850pa per person. Travel Plans: Staff will be expected to keep abreast of current developments within immunological research. To facilitate this the project will fund staff to attend the annual International Conference on Immunology and similar ad hoc events/seminars. For this, £1000pa is set aside for each member of staff (including supervisor). Throughout this project, the research will be carried out with close cooperation with colleagues at Birkley, University of California. It is expected that an annual trip by one member of staff will be needed to discuss progress in person. This will be in addition to the hosting of reciprocal visits from our colleagues to our research facility. This will total around £1200pa. <table/>[1] Mossman, Kaspar D. et al., Science 310, 2005 