<heading>A. Introduction</heading>CFS faces an increasingly competitive and sophisticated market place. Pressure has been growing to reduce prices in order to maintain market share but this has affected profit margins. To overcome these pressures and to remain competitive the Operations Director has proposed further restructuring of the company. This report has been instigated by the Board of Directors to investigate the proposals outlined by the Operations Director. The report will provide a thorough analysis of these proposals and outline how the project will be implemented, controlled and reviewed. Recommendations will be suggested at the end with more detailed justification provided in the main body of text. <heading>B. Project Stakeholders</heading>Stakeholders are those who have an interest in a project. They may be few (e.g. a University assignment) or numerous (e.g. building a new hospital). Good management of project stakeholders is important because "if stakeholder management is undertaken successfully, the project will run more smoothly". The expectations of different stakeholders may vary but will also change with time. <fnote>There are many stakeholders in this project: local community, MPs, society, hospital employees, building contractors to name just a few </fnote><fnote>Orr, Alan. D, (2004), Advanced Project Management, Kogan Page </fnote>The stakeholder groups in this project are as follows. High Street Agents who would welcome a "much closer working relationship" and "more effective service". Trade Unions, who will want to protect the interest of the workers, e.g. pay v work load. Thirdly, external customers who would like a "more personal and effective service". IT Employees - Responsible for implementing new IT services. CFS Insurance Shareholders who will want to see a positive return on the project. Operations Department Employees - directly affected by the reorganisation. The Operations Director - Has overall responsibility for the department. HR Department Employees - Responsible for training of employees. Wider society should be considered as they will benefit from increased taxes on potentially greater profits made by CFS, should the project be a success. <fnote>Although shareholders have no direct stake in the project, they have a stake in the company and so would wish for it to succeed </fnote>For effective management of each of the stakeholder groups, their interest / stake and influence on the project must be ascertained. This will enable the suitable method of communication with that stakeholder group to be used. Figure 1 illustrates the grouping of the stakeholders by their interest and influence. From this is can be determined how best to communication with them. High street agents, trade unions, shareholders and IT employees all have low stakes in the project and have little influence. To best manage this group, informing is required. External customers have high influence (they can shop elsewhere for insurance) as do HR as they will perform the training. Fully informing is appropriate here. The operations department employees have a high stake in the project and because their power is low it is best to consult with them. Finally the operations director has both high interest and influence in the project so should be invited to participate. There is no need to communicate explicitly with society on this project. <table/><heading>C. Aim, Objectives and Evaluation</heading><quote>"One of the most common causes of unsuccessful projects is a failure to define properly the purposes and nature of the project". </quote><fnote>Wheeler, Richard. J, (2005), page 17 </fnote>It must be clear what the project is going to do, how it is going to do it and how the outcome of the project will be measured. After the implementation the project should also be evaluated to see if what was promised in the beginning was actually delivered. The definition of the CFS Insurance project is 3 fold: aim, objectives and evaluation. The project aim defines what the project will do and why. The project aim is: <quote>"To bring savings in operational costs and to increase profits, by increasing employee flexibility, commitment to teamwork and improved customer service through the multipurpose teams and the implementation of internet connectivity"</quote>The objectives are a more detailed set of statements of what the project is going to deliver. The objectives should be SMART to ensure a focus on what is pertinent and facilitate a thorough evaluation of the project. Evaluation will allow for further improvement and also helps to ascertain if objectives set out at the beginning were indeed achieved. Figure 2 shows the objectives and evaluation criteria for the project. <fnote>Meaning specific, measurable, attainable, realistic, and time based. From Lock, D. (2000), Project Management Seventh Edition, Gower Publishing Ltd </fnote><table/>Each evaluation criteria has been chosen after considering the pros and cons. For example although there are drawbacks to using a mystery shopper for evaluating objective 8, it was felt that this was the most appropriate method for objectively evaluating how staff work. Using a focus group to evaluate objective 9 allows participants to interact and 'bounce ideas off each other', and also covers many staff quickly. However it was recognised that there are drawbacks to this technique; that individual views may get suppressed and skilful facilitation is required for the method to be successful. For objectives 5-7, the evaluation criteria are an objective measurement of the parameter. Therefore the conclusion drawn is founded on fact, and not opinion. Moving forward, the project scope should be considered to ensure that it is made clear what the project will and will not cover. The project will not allow selling through the internet, team leaders will not be responsible for setting sales targets for their team, insurance premiums will not automatically decrease as a result of the project, HSAs won't be forced to upgrade their computer systems and savings in operational costs won't automatically be used to increase pay / bonuses. <heading>D. Risks and Risk Management</heading>Inherent in every project is uncertainty and risk. To fully understand and manage risk one must first understand what underpins risk, uncertainty. Uncertainty relates to "possible variations in factors related directly or indirectly to a project that may affect project performance". Risk is the resultant deviation from the planned outcome of the project. Two methods that are useful for determining uncertainties are the Failure Mode and Effects Approach (FMEA) and the Cause-and-Effect Approach. The FMEA approach works from cause to effect which is naturally the way things occur whereas the Cause-and-Effect approach is places a stronger influence on the operating objectives and works from effect to cause. Because FMEA considers the effects on project outcome and overall organisation performance this is the most appropriate approach for this project. Using FMEA, the uncertainties and variations (risks) for implementation and operation can be described and a probability of occurrence and level of impact assessed. This is normally done on an arbitrary scale (e.g. 1-10). Figure 3 summarises this, where levels of impact and probability has been converted to a simple low, medium or high scale for ease of understanding. This all facilitates the rating of significance of the risk. <fnote>Wheeler, Richard. J, (2005), page 37 </fnote><fnote>Wheeler, Richard. J, (2005), page 38 </fnote>Having established the uncertainties inherent in the CFS insurance project, the next step is to classify the uncertainties which will facilitate the development of a strategy to deal with the risks to the projects success. Using the impact / probability matrix (Wheeler 2005, page 45) each uncertainty factor can be rated in terms of its significance to the project. For avoidance of doubt the levels of significance must be defined. Minor - Project cost and deadlines are not affected. Significant - If not dealt with project cost and deadline will be affected. Critical - Currently poses a threat to the project's overall success. Fatal - Immediate action required or project should be abandoned. This is all summarised in figure 3 below. <table/>Once the risks have been established and their significance to the project ascertained, a risk management strategy can be devised. Broadly speaking there are five strategies for managing risk. Avoidance - reject the project outright. Mitigate - put in place a strategy to reduce the risk to the project. Risk sharing - by way of a strategic alliance or through contractual terms. Allowing - accepting that the negative outcome may occur but preparing a contingency, setting aside extra resources. Ignorance - take no special action. <fnote>It must be noted that a focus on risks to the project and not to the company is taken. A large company may be able to undertake high risk projects but for a smaller firm the failure of a project may be fatal to the firm </fnote>To decide which strategy is appropriate the level of impact and the probability of occurrence must be taken into account. The level of impact / probability of occurrence matrix (Wheeler, 2005, page 46) may be used to devise a strategy to best manage each risk. The risk of savings in operational costs not being realised has a high impact because this is one of the key drivers for the project, and is a fundamental operational objective. It has a medium probability so a strategy of avoidance should be adopted. However as this is an integral part of the project this is not practical, so instead mitigation should be adopted. CFS must ensure that the HR department implements the necessary training, and introduce a feedback system whereby the employees can comment on their competency in a certain area. The risk of increased training costs (due to resistance to the project) has a medium impact because reducing costs is an important objective of the project. It has a medium probability, and as such mitigation or sharing strategy should be used. Involving employees in the project at an early point and allowing them to have their opinions heard may prevent this. However I also feel a strategy of allowing, and thereby setting aside some contingency funds for this eventuality is also appropriate. The risk of the project being delayed is due to several uncertainties and so mitigation and allowing is suitable here. If reorganisation and employee training takes longer, contingency time should be set aside. To combat complications with connecting PCs to CFS mainframe, tests should be carried out as early and possible and research should be carried out to understand the technicalities. The risk of a recession and a decrease in revenue demands aspects of allowing, by conducting sensitivity analysis to see how profit is affected by particular drops in sales, and ignoring as there is little that can be done by CFS to prevent a recession. Finally the risk of increased PC / software prices, and therefore cost to the project should be managed through allowing. Sensitivity analysis should be conducted to see how the project cost is affected by a certain increase in PC / software prices. A small contingency fund should also be set aside. <heading>E. Project Implementation Strategy</heading><heading>The pace of change</heading>With a higher pace of change the project has a better chance of being completed on time but there is a greater risk and less chance for consultation with key stakeholders during the realisation phase. Ultimately at a higher pace, the project may encounter resistance. However at a slower pace there is a higher probability of acceptance, as cultural shifts are often slow. As a shift in thinking is operations department staff, and thorough training is required a medium pace of change is suitable for the CFS project. This should enable it to complete on time, while still capturing "buy in" from key stakeholders. At a medium pace, 6 months is an achievable time span to complete the project. <heading> Necessity for an exploratory or "pilot" phase</heading>The introduction of a "pilot" phase may be beneficial to "allow the project, the project introduction process and the operational benefits to be thoroughly evaluated". Although a pilot mitigates some of risk of failure for the main implementation, there is an added cost to the project. As there is no implementation of cutting edge technology or a mass shift in culture the project cannot be considered high risk. It would seem prudent to conduct a pilot phase on one of the ten multitasking teams only. This should be done over a one-month period with fortnightly reviews and lessons learned taken forward to the main implementation. <fnote>Wheeler (2005), page 50 </fnote><heading>3. Overall pattern of activities</heading>The pattern of activities defines how the project will be conducted, more specifically how activities are implemented. The two options available are serial or parallel approach. A serial approach, where activities are carried out one after each other, would enable easier management of the project with clear points between activities for management to exercise control. However this approach often lengthens the time for completion. By contrast a parallel approach sees activities carried out at the same time, and hence the time taken for completion is shortened, and there is opportunity for interaction between activities. Although the project may be more difficult to manage with a parallel approach, this is the recommended approach for the CFS project as the reduced time taken is a clear benefit to CFS. <heading> Implementation pattern in the organisation</heading>This step is relevant to CFS as the project will implement change to a large part of the organisation, the Operations Department. A simultaneous pattern offers blanket coverage and thus requires greater resources to adopt. The next choice is between a horizontal (implementation at a limited number of levels across the organisation) and vertical (implementation spanning all levels but to a limited operational area) slice. For CFS it is recommended that a progressive pattern with a vertical slice is used because it will give better control for the project team and will involve all employees. This approach would follow the one-month pilot on one multipurpose team. <heading>Degree of empowerment</heading>This step is important when a project causes change for other people, and thus this is pertinent to CFS. The key decision is to decide how much freedom is extended to individuals in the implementation of the project and what changes it will enforce. In theory the greater the degree of empowerment offered to individuals the more committed to change they will be. However involving people properly takes time, and may lengthen the time taken to complete the project. The CFS project team should ensure that enough empowerment is given to individuals to capture their support and "buy in" for the project changes, whilst the ensuring that the company remains customer focused. <heading> Support for employees</heading>Linked with the step five is the provision of support for employees so that they are suitably trained and prepared to make decisions during the project. Fundamentally a high level of support will increase the chances of a successful change but with this comes greater costs both covering the cost of training and lost productivity. As a family oriented firm, there should be a good level of support for employees during the implementation of the project. <heading> Trade Union involvement</heading>Interaction with trade unions should be considered separate to dealings direct with employees and all four styles of interaction should be considered. Interaction must take into account the strong history between the two, and the active trade union membership of employees. It is recommended that on some issues CFS negotiates with trade unions (for example pay levels and working conditions) as this allows more bargaining into the process. On less important issues such as reorganising into ten multi-skilled teams, consulting or informing (a more one way process whilst retaining a degree of listening) is appropriate. <fnote>These are informing, consulting, participating and negotiating </fnote><heading>Contractor strategy</heading>For this step, it must be decided whether parts of the project are carried out "in house" or outsourced to external contractors. CFS should outsource activities which they do not have competencies in for example the IT training and implementing PCs for the reorganised teams. <heading> Project team</heading>The project team will be headed up by the project manager (appointed by the Operations Manager) who would ideally be already working as a Section Leader. Work will be divided using a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) with a work package manager responsible for each work package. The work packages for the project, with work package managers in brackets are: Office Reconfiguration (Human Resources Director), Team Reorganisation (HR - Personnel Manager), Employee Training (HR - Training Manager), Software Development and Installation (IT Department Manager). <heading>10. Strategic control</heading>The overall strategic control of the project will be the responsibility of the Operations Director management. As a parallel pattern of activities will be adopted it will make it harder to exert control of the project and thus strategic control should be exercised every four weeks by way of a meeting. <heading>F. Planning and Control of Progress</heading><quote>"Planning is the process of outguessing and outsmarting failure" </quote><fnote>Gilbreath, Robert. D, (1986), Wining at Project Management - What Works, What Fails and Why, Wiley and Sons </fnote>The four stage process is simple but if followed closely is effective. Plans should be prepared prior to execution, with agreed measurements of performance. During the execution progress should be monitored, followed by review of actual versus target performance. <fnote>These are prepare plans, monitor progress, review progress and make any corrective action </fnote>Planning and control will be exercised at three levels. At a strategic level control should come from the operations director who has the authority to allocate resources. At an operational level the project manager or operations manager assumes responsibility and with their team, provides more depth and detail than at a strategic level. At the day-to-day level detailed plans covering specific areas of work are laid out by those carrying out specific work, including HR staff, IT employees and the operations department employees. The nature of the review periods and the project work structure must be defined. It must be taken into account how much the project may drift from its course when setting the review periods. CFS should conduct operational reviews more frequently than strategic reviews as conducting frequent strategic reviews is more difficult because it is hard to get the key stakeholders together, as the demands on their time are often greater. The project should build in the option for the project manager to call review meetings as this will make the project team more flexible to changing circumstances. To make the project easier to control, the WBS outlined in section E.9, should be used. By breaking the larger project into smaller work packages, the management team can exercise greater control. Some packages will span the length of the project (e.g. Employee Training) whilst some will occur for a shorter period of time (e.g. Software Installation). Each work package should be reviewed at suitable intervals and after completion, so a comparison with the progress of the overall project can be made. <fnote>A work package is the smallest element of a WBS for allocating responsibility and resources. </fnote>To ensure effective planning CFS should use a combination of planning techniques. A Gantt chart although limited, provides a good visual overview of the activities contained in the project and is a starting point for resource planning. Activities are positioned on the chart with their duration (and sometimes resources required) running on the horizontal axis. This can provide a project manager with a brief snapshot of how long the project should take and what resources are required at any given moment in time. As Gantt charts become too large with many activities and do not show logical relationships the use of Network Analysis will provide a more detailed view of the project. Network Analysis illustrates the project activities as nodes interconnected by logical links. By working through a forward and backward schedule the project manager will be able to calculate the critical path. This is useful because it shows the manager which activities have zero slack and which activities have slack and can be delayed without delaying the overall project. The activities on the critical path must be controlled most carefully to ensure the project is not delayed. At a higher level CFS should also investigate the option of activity crashing. This involves allocating extra resource to reduce the duration of certain activities with the aim of reducing the critical path, and thus the overall project completion time. <fnote>An activity with zero slack is by definition one where the forward event time equals the back event time. </fnote><heading>G. Planning and Control of Expenditure</heading>As important as controlling the progress of the project is controlling the expenditure. Financial planning will enable CFS to calculate the total project cost, identify when cash is need during the project, decide who has the authority to spend funds and provide a framework for control. The first stage is to decide against what financial parameters the project will be measured. Commonly this will be cost and "earned value". Wheeler defines this as "the value of work actually completed". In some situations income may be generated during the execution phase (e.g. increased sales due to the better service offered by staff as a result of training) and future commitments in the project should also be considered (e.g. future orders for parts). Management must then establish when costs and income are recognised, and at what point in time commitments are made. <fnote>Wheeler (2005), page 182 </fnote>When dealing with the costs of the project CFS should be aware of what type of cost are relevant. As the project is internal and is serving an internal customer (reorganisation of the operations department), only the direct costs of the project need consideration. Overheads will be recovered through the service provided by CFS, by being passed onto external customers. As the project is broken down into work packages, it complements nicely to break the project budget into time periods, thus adopting a complex financial system of control. At the end of each period performance may be assessed and reviewed. Although a cost is incurred for setting up this type of system it will allows tighter financial control for the project manager. The project manager must also be aware of the structure of the costs. As overheads are to be ignored, the project manager must decide whether to treat the cost as one direct cost, or break it down further e.g. direct labour, direct materials or direct expenses. The more detailed the breakdown of costs the tighter control can be exerted but this will may prove longer and more costly. The final decision that the project manager must make regards whether the budget is fixed or revisable. Having a fixed budget allows the management to more accurately forecast the company's cash flow and better invest other funds. However having a revisable budget allows a company more flexibility in the event of cost changes. As there is some technology involved in the change at CFS it would be prudent for them to adopt a revisable budget structure should unforeseen circumstances arise. Having adopted a complex system of control the project manager must refine the details for planning and control. The projected expenditure on the project will be expressed at periodic intervals throughout the project and also for each work package. Budgetary control should be exercised by measuring cost to date and adding this to predicted future cost to provide a comparison with the project budget. The project manager should also measure the earned value and compare this with the actual cost to date. This is important because a project may look like it is running over budget but if the earned value equals the cost to date then the project will at least be running on schedule, that is what should have been achieved, has been achieved. Appraisal of the project should be carried out for each work package (ensuring tighter control) and at the end of the project. <fnote>This is what differentiates a complex system from a time-based system </fnote>The project manager must prepare a budget for the project and be aware of cashflow issues that may arise, so as to not bring the company into cashflow difficulties. The Gantt chart is useful for seeing the activities of the project, from which each activity must be assigned to a work package. Costs for each activity must be calculated once the direct and indirect costs are known, which will then allow the project manager to determine the cost of each work package for each period. The project manager can then establish the overall project cost. <heading>H. Conclusion</heading>This report makes the following recommendations to the board. Further reasoning is provided in the main body of text. The brief aim of the project is to bring savings in operational costs and to increase profits The estimated time for project completion is six months CFS must manage risks through strategies of mitigation, allowing and ignoring depending on the impact and probability of the risk The project should be implemented at a medium pace, using a two month initial pilot and a subsequent parallel approach A progressive pattern with a vertical slice should be used for implementation A Work Breakdown Structure should be used alongside a Gantt chart for a visual overview of the project and Network Analysis for more detailed control A Complex system for financial control should be adopted, using a revisable budget and periodically reviewing cost to date and earned value figures The impact of a successful project will be positive for the company and position it more competitively in the market. However it was assumed that should the project fail, the company would continue to operate as a going concern. <heading>I. Annex</heading>A successful project is one that involves not only on time and on budget implementation but also thorough review. Developing the process and improving project performance is fundamental to doing it better next time. This involves some reflection on the techniques adopted during the execution, and understanding mistakes made during the process. It would be naïve of a project manager to assume that all project management techniques will work successfully on every project. Thorough risk management is a fundamental part of project management. The risk strategies matrix is useful for determining which strategy is appropriate for the type of risk. However the tool is limited as for medium impact / probability of occurrence and high impact / probability of occurrence risks the suggested strategy is avoidance, and this is not always appropriate or indeed feasible. Limitations of this particular matrix are in many ways limitations of any simple decision matrix. When situations aren't 'black or white', or there is some ambiguity, the tool loses its' effectiveness. Planning and control is important to a projects' success. One method to aid this is the Critical Path Method (CPM) which has been described in the main body. This method has origins in decision (discrete) mathematics, and is one I have been familiar with since studying at A-Level. Its strengths are that is provides logical analysis that is lacking from a Gantt chart. Given estimates of activity duration, it allows a project manager to easily establish the time taken for the project, based on activity duration lengths. However despite its strengths CPM is by no means a perfection solution, and does not provide a good visual representation of the project. "Why should there be need for other methods for Project Management to replace or maybe enhance CPM? Self-evidently, CPM frequently does not work". Sainsbury's recent cancellation of a multi billion pound contract with Accenture shows that even companies who devote their profession to project management can get it wrong. This suggests "either the methods being used for project management or their application or both must be at fault" <fnote>Rand, (2000), page 175 </fnote><fnote>Maylor, Harvey, (2003), Project Management Third Edition, page 136 </fnote>There are several issues that demonstrate the problems with CPM. All goals are based on estimates, which by definition will contain uncertainties. Activities in network diagrams often display latest start times, and if for example cash flow pressure demand that projects start at the latest time, then there are more activities on the critical path. This decreases the likelihood of completing the project on time and may cause the project manager to lose focus. A differing approach which provides a possible solution to the problems of CPM is the Theory of Constraints (TOC). The crux of this, highlighted by Maylor is "A fundamental of this is to manage systems by focusing on the constraint". The TOC approach identifies a constraint (critical path, critical resources), exploits the constraint, subordinates everything else to the constraint, elevates the constraint and then repeats the process. Alongside this is a shift in estimating techniques which calculates on activity times only and emphasises that 50 per cent off activities will finish early and 50 per cent will finish late. Overall TOC constructs a critical chain (as opposed to a critical path) analogous to "a relay race - where the runners are lined up ready to receive the baton before continuing with their leg of the race". The benefits are that early finishes for activities are encouraged and the stigma of a late finish is removed. This also creates a more active role for the project manager. <fnote>Maylor, (2003), page 142 </fnote><fnote>Maylor, (2003), page 148 </fnote>Although an esteemed discipline in its own right, Project Management impacts on all organisations from hospitals to blue chip companies. One area that incorporates Project Management deeply in its thinking is Information Systems. Many principles of Project Management are transferable to techniques such as the Systems Development Lifecycle (SDLC). Piloting, risk management and the parallel implementation approach are fundamental to SDLC. With greater demands placed on managers whether in business, not for profit organisations or government institutions, project management is a skill that is quickly becoming a prerequisite for success. 