<heading>Introduction</heading>There is a vast amount of research that suggests that knowledge of letters is a strong predictor of phonological awareness within children. Research suggests that when children learn letters and are able to associate them to a sound, the first stages of phonological awareness will develop. Longitudinal studies are best able to test the existence of this relationship, this is due to the way that this form of non-experimental design can monitor a child's development of both letter knowledge and phonological awareness and measure the relationships between these constructs. Burgess and Lonigan (1998) carried out a one year longitudinal study on 4 to 5 year olds that looked at the relationship between phonological sensitivity and letter knowledge. The study showed that there was a reciprocal relationship between phonological sensitivity and letter knowledge; higher levels of letter knowledge led to higher levels of phonological sensitivity and visa versa. It was also shown that letter knowledge can be a strong predictor of overall phonological sensitivity. Whilst this study took place on pre-school children, a similar study by Wagner et al (1994) demonstrated similar findings in a three year longitudinal study on children from kindergarten through to 2nd grade. This study concluded that letter knowledge did have a causal influence on subsequent phonological processing abilities. Similar support and acknowledgement of the influential relationship between letter knowledge and phonological awareness can be found in a study by Stahl and Murray (1994) who found that children with low letter knowledge also had lower abilities in phonological sensitivity tasks. In this study only 1 child of the 113 sampled (who all had low letter knowledge) was able to complete the phonological sensitivity task. Support for the theory that letter knowledge has an influence on phonological awareness also comes from several intervention studies that have specifically controlled for letter knowledge (see Bradley and Bryant (1983). These studies contain specific instruction on letter knowledge and looked at the impact of this on phonological awareness. Carroll (2004) carried out a 4 week intervention study where nursery school children were given daily letter knowledge training in order to assess it's impact on the childrens' phoneme awareness skills. The children were assessed before and after the intervention using tasks that assessed phoneme segmentation (phoneme completion or isolation), phoneme invariance (phoneme matching) and phoneme deletion (an advanced manipulation task). It was seen that letter knowledge was related to phoneme awareness, particularly to the sub-skill of phoneme segmentation, it was also suggested in this study after analysis of the results that a child must also have letter-sound knowledge to achieve full phoneme awareness. One explanation of the relationship between letter-sound knowledge and letter knowledge and phonological awareness is that the knowledge provides children with the ability to link a letter to a particular sound (phonological representations) which can then be linked to orthographic units within words (Carroll, 2003; Blaiklock, 2004). In relation to this theory, many studies (see Mann, 2003; Carroll, 2004) have found that there are differences in the extent of influence that letter knowledge and letter-sound knowledge have on phoneme awareness. It has been seen that letter knowledge is more closely linked with phoneme completion whereas letter-sound knowledge is more strongly linked with phoneme manipulation, a task that requires a higher level of phoneme awareness. Blaiklock also suggests that letter knowledge and letter-sound knowledge develop at different rates within children, and gives a warning that studies on this subject should consider both types of knowledge due to their different relationships with phonological awareness. Despite all the evidence provided that demonstrates a relationship between phonological awareness and letter and letter-sound knowledge, Carroll (2003), during a study of the development of phonological awareness provided results that indicated that letter knowledge was not an important factor in the development of phonemic awareness. This one year longitudinal study of 67 pre-school children attending two separate nursery schools used a path analysis model to examine the influence of different aspects of language development and letter knowledge on phonological awareness. The results did not show a significant path between letter knowledge and phonological awareness, despite the author's expectations. It was suggested by the author that this finding of no relationship between letter knowledge and phonological awareness could be due to the significant growth in the childrens' knowledge of letters that occurred between the second and third points of testing. At Time 1 and Time 2, significant floor effects were seen when testing for letter knowledge, however an increase in knowledge was seen between Time 2 and Time 3 by which point only one child knew no letters at all. It was seen that by Time 3 there was a correlation between letter knowledge and the phoneme awareness tasks. This study aims to look at the finding within Carrolls' research that concludes that there is not a significant relationship between letter knowledge and phonological awareness despite research from others that contradicts this. It aims to investigate whether the results gained that show no relationship between letter knowledge and phonological awareness is indeed due to the large differences in the childrens' letter knowledge between the test Time 2 and Time 3 as hypothesised by the authors. In order to investigate this hypothesis it is necessary to almost completely replicate the study carried out by Carroll so as to discover whether the lack of significance in the path analysis was due to the substantial differences in letter awareness between Time 2 and Time 3. This study will concentrate on the 8 month period that occurred during Time 2 and Time 3 in the study carried out by Carroll. Due to the analysis that took place in the original study, it is necessary to carryout all the tests in the original study at each point of testing in this study. This allows a path analysis to be carried out using the measurement model that was created to interpret the original results. This 8 month longitudinal study will examine the influence of both language development and letter knowledge on phonological development. Due to the need to match the original study as accurately as possible the group would require an average age of 4 years 2 months at the start of testing and 4 years 9 months at the end of the 8 month testing period. This ensures that age does not become a confounding factor in the analysis. This study will look specifically at the role that letter knowledge plays in the development of phonological awareness. To examine whether in relation to language development, letter knowledge is not a significant factor in the development of phonological awareness as discovered by Carroll (2004), or whether the result found here was due to the large differences in letter knowledge between the points of testing. It is hypothesised that a relationship will be found showing that letter knowledge is a factor in phonological awareness as found in other studies (Burgess and Lonigan (1998)). <heading>Method </heading><heading>Participants</heading>For this study, a suitable sample size would be approximately 60 participants. This is not only a size appropriate for the survey but it is also equivalent to the sample size of the original study. The sample size needs to be sufficient enough to ensure that there is statistical reliability within the results, increasing the external validity of the study by increasing statistical regression to the mean. The participants would be tested at 5 points throughout the 8 months of the study. At Time 1 the average age of the participants would need to be 4 years 2 months, with testing points every 2 months to Time 5 where the participants would need to have an average age of 4 years 9 months. These ages are necessary to ensure that the study is comparable to the original Carroll study and that age does not become a confounding variable. There needs to be several testing points throughout the study as the concern in the original study was that the results were gained due to the vast growth of letter knowledge between their Time 2 and Time 3 measurement points. The sample needs to comprise of participants that will allow for generalisation to a larger population and not be affected by cohort effects. Whilst the size of the sample assists with this increase in external validity, it is also necessary to ensure that the sample comprises of different cohorts. This can be achieved through measures such as using more than one nursery school to find participants. <heading>Procedure</heading>All tests need to be administered to all participants under the same conditions to ensure that there are no biases created by differences in the environment. This environment needs to be quiet to avoid distractions ensuring that participants are concentrating solely on the task, this is especially important when working with children. All the tests must also be administered in the same way to all participants to ensure that there are no experimenter effects. They must also be administered to all participants in the same order as they were in the original study to ensure that practice effects are controlled. In order to ensure that this study is comparable to Carroll, the same tests must be used. Therefore at Times 1 to 4, letter knowledge, vocabulary, phonological matching, mispronunciation detection and articulation tasks should be given and at Time 5 the same tests must be given again plus an explicit phoneme awareness task. These tests are further described in Carroll (2004). The use of standardised tests is important to improve reliability; as it ensures that the tests used are measuring the constructs defined. The use of multiple measures of constructs is important as it reduces measurement error and improves reliability. <heading>Design</heading>Whilst a longitudinal study is a non-experimental design, its' use in this study can be justified as the study is looking at the development of letter knowledge and phonological awareness over time. It is necessary to assess the development of these constructs within the participants over time. The longitudinal design gives the ability to follow the development of skills over time. It allows the measurement of change within individuals over time. This design also allows the researchers to make predictions based on the results gained rather than just being able to make comparisons between the results. There are however problem areas that arise from using this design of study; the primary issue being that this is a non-experimental design therefore cause and effect cannot be identified. All that can be concluded from this design correlational relationships and potential predictive relationships. The design is also time consuming for the researcher, with many test points being needed over a long period of time, the time needed for the analysis of the large amount of data can also be time consuming. A large issue with longitudinal design is both finding and keeping participants in the study. In this study intact groups are used, which can be a threat to internal validity however the use of large numbers of participants and multiple cohorts minimises the risk of this becoming a confounding factor. The use of intact groups in this design also helps to identify large numbers of participants. Due to the same individuals being tested multiple times with the same tests, practice effects and novelty effects also need to be identified and controlled as these effects can become a threat to internal validity. 