<heading>Introduction</heading>There has been a drastic restructuring of employment patterns in UK organizations in the last twenty years. The destabilization of international markets, leading to raised levels of competition coupled with social, economic and technological changes in Britain's product and capital markets during the past quarter century have pushed employers towards the emerging idea of the 'flexible firm'(Kallenberg,2001)in the new century. Flexibility in labour use can be defined as reformation of work and employment structures with the aim of increasing efficiency and reducing costs. (Sheridan and Conway, 2001, 5) The purpose of this essay is to evaluate the importance of the employment of flexibility in labour use in terms of employer's objectives and benefits secured. It also analyses the possible internal and external constraints faced by organizations in the utilization of flexible labour practices. The first part of the essay enlists the various forms of flexibility, and focuses in detail on the interplay between numerical and functional flexibility using Atkinson's Core-Periphery model and evaluates its feasibility in practice. The second part explains the pressures for flexibility and the different objectives and advantages that employers aspire to attain through the employment of different forms of labour flexibility. The third part of the essay examines the constraints faced by employers in the practical implementation of flexible labour patterns in the UK and how the benefits of flexible labour utilization to employers (discussed in the second part) are eroded in the view of these constraints. <heading>1. Forms of Flexibility in Labour Use:</heading>The forms of flexibility in labour use depend on the employer's want of either: Variable labour inputs, in terms of numbers employed (Numerical Flexibility) or hours worked (Temporal Flexibility) or Change in the tasks and skills of employees for better and increased labour utilization (Functional Flexibility) (Week 5, Lecture notes) Each of these is illustrated as follows: <heading> Functional Flexibility:</heading>Functional Flexibility may be defined as a process of enhancing the "skill repertoire" of employees in such a manner that the employees are then capacitated to work across traditional job demarcating boundaries. (Mueller 1992, Friedrich and Kabst, 1998, p.506) It involves the implementation of on-the-job training and a redefinition of working time (Dyer, 1998, p.228).Functional flexibility is driven mainly by technological advancement (Lean production, Total Quality Management-TQM, Just-In-Time-JIT techniques) and pressure on overheads.(Storey,1997,p.7)It makes use of regular, full time standard employees.(Kallenberg,2001,480). The mechanisms aimed at securing functional flexibility in organizations comprise of high performance work systems implemented increasingly and recently via sophisticated HRM practices like employee involvement schemes, team working, morale and commitment boosting techniques (e.g.: Linking pay to company's/department's performance) (p.481).The most popular ones amidst these are multi-skilling and team working. These enable the development of a 'polyvalent employee' (Ackroyd and Procter, 1998, p.174) who can be efficiently deployed from one task to the other, as and when required. Functional flexibility provides the employers with the ability to vary the amount and the type of existing labour without having to recourse to an External Labour Market and the employees with an opportunity to diversify their skills, participate in decision making, achieve greater job involvement and higher employment security(especially in companies where partnership deals are signed with unions. The premise of such agreements is the provision of employment security in exchange of one or more forms of flexibility from the employees). An interview of an Administrative manager in a high-tech South-East-England company sums up the essence of the implementation of functional flexibility in the following quoted lines: <quote>"Within an organization they (employees) can be called on to do anything that they are capable of doing at any time. I don't think that there are any lines drawn up which say "That's your job, that's my job". We have an expression that says "If there is a ball on the ground, you pick it up and once you have got it, it's yours until you hand it over to somebody else or you solve the problem" (Storey, 1997, p.7)</quote>Functional flexibility employment may be further divided into: (a) Whole job substitution approach (Workers shift from one task to the other as and when required) (b) Boundary loosening approach (Parts of jobs are fused together so that task can be shifted fro person to person rather than shifting person to task) Planning is a pre-requisite in the former whereas the latter is more organic and evolutionary. (Riley and Lockwood, 1997, 417) <heading>Numerical Flexibility</heading>Numerical flexibility may be defined as the process of adjusting the level of labour inputs to meet fluctuations in output(Atkinson and Meager,1986,p.3-4,Storey,1997,p.2)It involves increasing use of flexible staffing arrangements or contingent, non-standard(Kallenberg,2001,p.482) workforce employed on fixed term contracts or on an as-needed basis. Numerical flexibility can be attained in organizations through the employment of part-time and temporary work, short-term contracts, self-employment, contracting out, homework and franchising. Of these, the most popular is the employment of part-time and temporary work in organizations. (Dyer, 1998, p.228) It provides employers to take advantage of the differentials between the minimum rates in the industry (Hunter et al, 1993, p.395) as the contingent workforce are remunerated lower and not entitled to the same benefits as the tenured workforce and employees with flexible working patterns, so that they can fit their hours around other activities. This is especially important for employees with parental, childcare and other domestic responsibilities. It is not surprising then that UK has the second highest proportion of women part-timers in the EU, the first being Netherlands. (Arrowsmith and Sisson, 2000, p.295).However there has also been a drastic rise in the proportion of men part-timers i.e.4.4% to 7.7% between 1985-1995( p. 295).Part-time working in the UK witnessed a boom in the advent of longer opening hours,7day opening and 24-hour trading systems(p.291) The increasing implementation of temporary work is accounted for by changing employment practices particularly in the public sector. According to the LFS, there are 1-in-10 temporary workers in the public sector which is almost twice the proportion of those in the private sector. The private sector usually makes use of temporary staff due to increased market uncertainties. (p.297) The proportion of part-timers in the UK is between 25-30% which is higher than most EU countries except Netherlands (40%) and there are 700000 agency workers on temporary assignments in the UK at any given time. (Marchington and Wilkinson, 2005, p.41) Thus we see that functional flexibility leads to internalization i.e. development of internal labour markets whereas numerical flexibility leads to externalization and the competitive advantage secured through use of External Labour market. <heading>1.3 Temporal Flexibility:</heading>Temporal flexibility implies variation in labour inputs through the hours worked in a period in contrast to the variation in the number of people employed in numerical flexibility. The main forms of temporal flexibility constitute Overtime, Annualised Hours and Flexi-Time (Arrowsmith and Sisson, 2000). Overtime is the purchase of additional hours from existing staff at premium rates. It is driven by demand fluctuations (product customization, tighter schedules, JIT processes) and labour market conditions (labour shortages, workforce earning preferences and low basic pay).Its appeal to employers lies in its ease of implementation since it is agreed on a voluntary basis and to employees in its offer of premium rates. It is cost effective as it eliminates the need for extra recruitment, training and layoff costs. (p.303).32% of men and 17% women in the UK work overtime. (NES) Annualised Hours involves the redefinition of working time on an annual basis instead of a weekly basis. It enables employers to gain operational flexibility with compulsory extra hours and implementation of shift working whereas employees benefit from a shorter basic week and unallocated reserve hours. However the coverage of annualized hours in the UK is very thin and no more than 4.5% of employees worked under such a system. (LFS data, 1997, p.299-300) Flexi-time is a relatively new form of temporal flexibility where the employee can vary daily or weekly working hours around a range, carrying over a certain amount of credit or deficit hours into the next period. It covers 1-in-10 employees and is concentrated specifically amidst white-collar employee groups. (p.299-300) Other forms of flexibility include outsourcing, compressed week, term-time working and tele-working. <heading>1.4 Interplay between numerical and functional flexibility-The Core-Periphery Model.(Atkinson,1984)</heading>This model recommends the simultaneous use of numerical and functional flexibility in the organization as complementary rather than alternative approaches. (Kallenberg, 2001, p.484)It suggests that in practice numerical and functional flexibility can be combined to achieve cost-efficiency by seeking functional flexibility from the 'core' part of the workforce which includes regular, permanent, full-time employees who possess high levels of skill, training, commitment and numerical flexibility from the 'periphery' part of the workforce which includes part-time, contingent or temporary employees who possess low levels of skill, training, commitment to the organization (Ackroyd and Procter,1998,p.173) as the non-standard peripheral workers would act as a potential buffer to protect the 'core' employees from market fluctuations.(Kallenberg,2001,p.484)Also it makes the job creation process much easier because decisions to hire new labour can be taken more swiftly if employees (peripheral) can be fired more flexibly during unfavorable conditions. This model is said to be particularly applicable in the UK due to lax labour regulations which enable employers to customize their employment contracts. However, only 10% of the UK organizations adhere to the core-periphery model. This model is hardly employed anywhere else besides the public sector. (Legge,1995, Storey, 1997, p.4-5). This model has been criticized widely on several grounds: (i)The model's segmentation of the workforce into core and peripheral divisions is too simplistic. In practice, the periphery itself is quite differentiated (Hunter et al, 1993, p.405) and in certain organizations part-timers are regarded as relatively permanent members depending on their function (Kallenberg, 2001, p.483) (ii)It neglects the fact that functional flexibility can be attained via the periphery and the core can provide numerical flexibility (Smith 2001, p.17-20, Kallenberg, 2001, p.482) The assumption that the periphery consists of low skilled workers is also untrue as the periphery is inclusive of highly skilled labour (consultants, payroll etc) as well. (p.483) (iii) It lacks empirical support. Studies have reported a negative or no relationship between functional and numerical flexibility within organizations. (WERS 1998)There is little evidence that the increase in numerical flexibility in the UK is a result of the managements concern to protect its permanent workforce. (p.486) We now discuss the pressures for flexibility and its employability in different organisations. <heading>2. Pressures for Flexibility and Employer Objectives:</heading><heading>2.1 Pressures for flexibility: Why does it matter? </heading>According to Armstrong, the four reasons that explain the need for flexibility are as follows: <list>(i)Need to achieve a competitive edge (ii)Need to be adaptive(iii)Impact of new technology(iv)New organizational structures</list>(Armstrong, 1995, p.227) We now analyse how each of these elements contributes to the drive for flexibility. <heading>(i) Need to achieve a competitive edge:</heading>The increasing globalization of markets brings with it a need to achieve a competitive edge in terms of cost and quality in the international market. Introduction of flexibility in labour use enables the organization to reduce the size of its labour complement and thus decrease its labour costs. <heading>(ii) Need to be adaptive:</heading>Organizations need to respond to the demand and supply market fluctuations efficiently. A flexible labour strategy allows the employer to tide through seasonal variations and other product market uncertainties. This leads mainly to the adoption of numerical flexibility. <heading>(iii) Impact of new technology:</heading>Introduction of new technology at the workplace calls for high performance work systems. These are implemented by enhancing employee skill and involvement. This leads mainly to the adoption of functional flexibility. <heading>(iv) New organizational structures:</heading>The recent downsizing trend in organizations and the need for streamlined structures also leads employers to pursue a flexible labour strategy with multi-skilling of employees and an easy hire-and-fire policy. <heading>2.2 Employer Objectives:</heading>Different organizations may seek different forms of flexibility in order to meet different goals. <heading>(i) Organization-Focused v/s Job-Focused organizations:</heading>Organization-focused companies for whom 'most of the employment relations are organization-based'(Kallenberg,2001,p.490) is more likely to employ functional flexibility(e.g.: IBM prior to 1990s with a 'no layoff' policy) than numerical flexibility as it has a large pool of permanent, skilled and committed labour force with whom it shares a long term relationship. Functional flexibility also depends on a high level of trust between the management and employees (p.494) and thus it will be sought by organization focused rather than job-focused companies. Job-focused companies use primarily job-focused relations and maintain organization-focused relations selectively only with a 'small core group of employees'. Job-focused relations are utilized for activities peripheral to the main organizational targets. (e.g.: maintenance, catering etc) (p.490).The employer here would go in for numerical flexibility in the form of subcontracting services to another organization in order to exploit the pay rates in the main business industries which would be much lower than the in-house rates. <heading>(ii) Innovative v/s Cost Cutting organizations:</heading>Organizations that seek innovation or differentiation in their products and services are more likely to adopt functional flexibility than organizations that are merely concerned with costs. For instance, organizations that aim at customer satisfaction through customization of products and services to meet customer needs and demands using TQM and JIT techniques would need to train its staff and thus enhance it with the process specific skills. Since it provides its staff with exclusive in-house training specific to the organization, such skills would be hard to find elsewhere in the market. Thus numerical flexibility cannot be applied here as the application of numerical flexibility pre-supposes the existence of trained labour in the market. On the other hand organizations that have taylorised work systems for all its employees and thus are merely concerned with reducing costs and not differentiation seek numerical flexibility. For instance, there is a significant rise in the part-time workforce in call centres (Arrowsmith and Sisson, 2000, p.290) as employment of part-timers results in wage cost savings. <heading>(iii) Sectoral Differences:</heading>Sectoral differences also play an important part in the implementation of flexibility. Skilled engineering workers are pre-dominantly male, seeking full-time secure employment and thus employment of part-timers or temporary agency workers does not come into consideration. However, the service sector constitutes a large proportion of people who are secondary earners in their household and who are only willing to work part-time due to other domestic responsibilities.(Arrowsmith and Sisson,2000, p.301-302) Thus the highest number of part-time workers(55%) are found in hotels, restaurants and other privatized services whereas the lowest are found in electricity, gas, construction, water (0%) and manufacturing and public administration (1%).(Cully et al, Table 2,1998,Arrowsmith and Sisson,p.296) The implementation of different forms of flexibility thus depends namely on the focus of the organization, nature of the organization and the operating sector it is located in. <heading>3. Constraints faced in the employment of flexibility in labour use: Gaps in Theory and Practice... </heading><heading>3.1 Functional Flexibility:</heading>The process of multi-skilling and team working aims at benefiting the employee via diversifying their skills through job enlargement and greater involvement and benefiting the employer to streamline the organization's hierarchical structure without having to recourse to the External Labour Market. However, in practice since these processes involve over utilization and underutilization of the employee's capacity at different points of time, it is said to have a negative impact on job satisfaction, commitment and motivation in the long run as both over utilisation and underutilization of capacity prove dysfunctional for the employees. Functional flexibility can also be capable of engendering territorial and role conflict and an increased tendency of social loafing since team working makes individual contributions less significant(Beukel and Molleman,2002,p.484).which proves to be detrimental to the overall well-being of the organization. <heading>3.2 Numerical Flexibility: Legal Regulation</heading>The biggest hurdle to the implementation of numerical flexibility in practice is the vast range of newly formed European Commission Regulations for the contingent workforce. The implementation of the Council Directive 96/34/EC (The Part-time Workers Directive) (McColgan, 2000, p.125) and the Fixed Term Work Directive 99/70/EC in 2002 (Slater, 2003, 15) in the UK law have undermined the demand for part-time and agency workers in the previously unregulated UK labour markets. The aims of the EC directives are as follows: (i)To eradicate all discrimination between part-time and full time workers concerning all Terms and Conditions of employment inclusive of the pension schemes and access to internal job vacancies (ii)To enable facilitation of part-time work on a voluntary basis and to bring about improvement in the quality of part-time work which would require employers to consider requests of transfers of employees from full-time to part-time work and provide measures for access to part-time work at all levels of the organization. (Jeffrey 1998, p.196-197) As discussed in sections 1 and 2, we observe that what makes numerical flexibility attractive to employers is the savings in wage costs that it provides since non-standard workers earn less than permanent workers are also not qualified for comparable benefits like pensions, overtime pay etc. However, in the light of the aims of the EC legislation, UK employers would evidently lose interest in employing contingent labour as it no longer provides them with any competitive advantage or benefit. Studies have reiterated that the incidence of part-time work is the lowest in countries with the strictest regulation and vice-versa. Due to this Netherlands and UK i.e. countries with the least amount of legal regulation for part-time work (until now) have had the highest proportional levels of such employees (Maxwell, 1995) The increase in regulation for the non-standard workforce would also ensure an increase in the administrative costs which the temporary agencies (pre-dominantly small firms) would tend to pass on to user enterprises (larger firms) in the form of higher fees. These fees are estimated in the range of € 239 m--€387 m per year. The cost to employers arising from additional applications to Employment Tribunals by part-time employees is estimated at 0.8m per year. Other unquantifiable costs would include the increased turnover of agency workers and crowding out of permanent job opportunities (DTI 2002) Thus inspite of the fact that these regulations underline the important place of non-standard labour in UK today, changes will however not prove beneficial to the employment of this labour force. <heading>3.3 Temporal Flexibility:</heading>Overtime is cost effective if occasional. However, routinisation of overtime leads to the 'long hours' culture which is a major cause of stress, absenteeism and poor productivity among employees and sloppy management among employers (Arrowsmith and Sisson, 2000, p.309).Annualised hours also prove complex in administration as it requires the establishment of a mutually acceptable system that comprises of the evident effects for wider pay and grading structures as well as for current practices. (p.301) Few other organization-based obstacles to flexibility can be categorized as follows: <heading>3.4 HRM strategy:</heading>Traditionally, organizations used to trade training and job security to secure commitment and loyalty of the workforce. However, the development of flexible labour markets and leaner organizations creates a loss of attachment among the workforce. Thus the HR is posed with the challenge of 'balancing the pillars' of flexible labour patterns on one hand and stability in commitment on the other. (Mallon and Duberley, 2000, p.34-35) <heading>3.5 Employee Acceptance</heading>In the light of the new legal framework, there would be rising tensions and insecurity between permanent and contingent labour force as the permanent employees may feel disadvantaged if they and the contingent employees share equal rates of pay. <quote>"Some people feel that they (the non-standard workforce) have got better jobs than we have got........they can have days off" (Interview with Manager, Airco, Storey, 1997, p.6)</quote><heading>3.6 Trade Union Resistance</heading>Trade Unions may resist the employment of temporary staff as they are more difficult to organize than permanent employees. However, now-a-days due to the self-revival strategies adopted by UK unions, they now demand a dual policy i.e. employment security for the core and comparable terms and conditions for part-timers. For e.g.: Partnership agreements at Rover and Co-operative Bank(IRS 1997,Arrowsmith and Sisson,2000,p.297).The TUC supports the EC directives and other legal regulation (TUC 2005) which is likely to dampen the use of flexible labour patterns in the UK. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>Flexibility in labour use in the UK thus occupies an important part of organizational change in the new century due to the varied benefits it can potentially offer employers in terms of competitive costs, efficiency and operational flexibility. We observe that organizational goals influence the adoption of a particular form of labour flexibility since the employment of different forms of flexibility can lead to different ends. Of all the constraints faced in the implementation of flexible labour patterns, the strongest constraint is the recent emergence of a vast pile of legal regulations for the non-standard workforce. It erodes the benefits that an employer seeks to accrue through the implementation of flexibility in labour use. It is indeed ironic to note that these regulations whilst working towards the increased welfare of temporary and part-time workers in turn jeopardize their opportunities to employment. If these regulations become firmly implemented and practiced in UK enterprises, then the future for the employment of flexible labour patterns appears obscure. 