<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>The company has been in a steady period of decline since period 4 and it's share price has slipped to 4 th in the industry. A modification to the Vodite brand VUCK is currently in development and will be available for re-launch in period 9 The brands SULI and SUCK are well established in their target segments and SULI is still particularly profitable and is currently 'propping-up' the company. The Vodite market represents the biggest opportunity for the company to grow as it is exhibiting excellent growth potential. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The purpose of this report is to detail the current situation and past performance of Team U within the Agora industry. Decisions made and strategic recommendations are under-pinned by a variety of conceptual frameworks. In addition to this, it will analyse the development of the company's product portfolio up to period 7 as well as proposing recommendations for the coming periods. After seeing an early increase in share price, Team U ultimately leveled out before a slight drop in value in the final periods. <figure/><heading>Situation Analysis</heading>At the end of period 7 the company's Share Price Index stands at 1159. Within the 'Agora' industry the company is placed fourth in terms of share price and has the lowest market share in both the Sonite and Vodite markets with 14.1% and 11% respectively. Appendix one and two shows Team U against the other firms in the industry in terms of market share. In the Sonite market there is no dominant firm, but E currently leads the market with over 25% market share. The Vodite market is quite different in that Firm E's product is completely dominant with nearly 80% of the market. With growth in the predicted to be 30.7% in the Sonite market and 194.5% in the Vodite market over the next 5 periods it is clear that a sustainable brand is needed particularly in the latter market. <heading>The Product Life Cycle Model</heading>This model is used to maximise revenue from the sale of products. The life cycle of any product cannot accurately be predicted, but the stages it goes through can be roughly shown using the product life cycle model below. The diagram also indicates the current position of Team U's brands. <figure/>SUCK is currently in the growth stage whereby sales are increasing but the emergence of competitors is evident. The product is primarily targeted at the singles market where its main competitors in terms of purchase intentions are SOFT and SIBI. Having failed to capitalise on the introductory stage by running out of products in the first period after it was introduced, it is of vital importance to invest in marketing. This is necessary in order to sustain growth in both retail sales and market share as brand awareness in the singles segment is only 27.1% compared with 59.6% for SIBI. The SULI product, whilst losing market share has still managed to maintain strong retail sales of between 140,000 and 160,000 units each period and is currently propping up the company. "A consistent and sustainable cash flow stream from product sales is key to any long-term investment, and the best way to attain a stable revenue stream is a 'cash cow' product, leading products that command a large market share in mature markets." From this it can be determined that SULI is in the maturity stage which must be maintained for as long as possible in order to give the firm time to build up market share from its other products. <fnote> URL  </fnote>It is apparent that VUCK is in a position of 'decline'. Stock ran out upon its launch into the Vodite market and the emergence of two more focused brands in the following period meant the product's growth and maturity stages were both short lived. Appendix Three shows the difference in advertising expenditure between VUCK and the dominant brand in the market - VEBA. When VUCK was launched 1,000,000 was spent followed by 2,500,000 in its second period. This is in contrast to Team E who spent 6,000,000 in the launch period and as such established complete dominance. VUCK is some way off the ideal characteristics for the Followers segment. A modification to this Vodite product is currently in development, known as PVUUU. At the end of period 6 the brand SUSI was pulled from the market after selling off the remaining stock in inventory. Despite making a positive contribution its existence could not be justified given the sales it was achieving in a segment with the lowest average retail price (Others). <heading>BCG Matrix</heading>This model is based on the product life cycle model and is best used to manage the product portfolio. The ideal portfolio contains both high growth products known as 'rising stars' which need cash inputs and low growth products which are used to generate cash flows. These are known as 'Cash cows'. The diagrams below show the positions of Team U's products on the BCG matrix. <figure/>SUCK is currently between the Rising star and Question Mark areas of the matrix. This means it is a high growth market but has only moderate 'relative market share'. The brand is already focused 100% towards Singles, as awareness and purchase intentions from other segments are practically non existent. <quote>"A frequently made strategy mistake is for Question Marks and Stars to get mediocre investment funds, and in this way they are unable to ever become cash cows. This is a waste of money and products of this nature should receive suitable investment or be divested". </quote><fnote>Adapted from  URL  </fnote>Given this knowledge it would be fitting to increase advertising from its current 1,000,000 figure. SULI is positioned very eclectically within the model. The most promising segment appears to be that of High Earners. Whilst it is currently in the position of a dog implying it doesn't generate significant cash flow, it is on the fringe of becoming a cash cow. The company results show a consistent overall contribution after marketing of between 23 and 27 million which meets the description of a 'cash cow' in that "a product in this category generates large amounts of cash over and above that required to keep the product in this sector." Whilst in five periods time the size of the High Earners is expected to decrease, this is only slight and with a Average Market price second only to Professionals, SULI is well positioned to maintain profits. <fnote>'Essentials of Marketing: Text and Cases' - Lancaster and Massingham - Page 79 </fnote><figure/>The matrix above shows that the VUCK brand is very badly placed. Growth rate for both Innovators and Early Adopters is extremely low and segment sizes are also appalling, particularly for Innovators. The problem with the VUCK product is that current brand awareness amongst he Followers segment is respectable at 31.1% but consumer purchase intentions are only 8.2% of the market. The implication of this is that advertising levels aren't the problem and that the product simply doesn't suit the demands of the customer. This is evident from the ideal characteristic analysis. With a correct launch strategy a strong market share should be attainable. If this is achieved it will place PVUUU in the Rising Star category. "The long-term health of an organization depends on having some products that generate cash and provide acceptable profits plus others that use cash to support growth". Given this knowledge the combination of SULI and the modified VUCK product should give the firm a strong portfolio of products. <fnote>Marketing Concepts and Strategy - Dibb, Simkin, Pride and Ferrell - Page 673 </fnote><heading>Suggested marketing strategy </heading>The company's performance and therefore Stock price index is based on a number of key performance indicators (KPI's). These include Market Share, Retail Sales, Net contribution and ratios such as Current Return on investment. In order for the firm to re-assert its position in the market, it must focus on maximizing all these KPI's as opposed to simply increasing profits. A number of conceptual frameworks have been developed in order help firms develop strategy for growth including SWOT analysis, Ansoff's Matrix and Borden's Four P's, all of which will be utilized in this recommendation. <heading>SWOT analysis </heading><quote>"In setting objectives a company needs to appraise both external factors and internal resources. This matching process, sometimes known as 'Strategic Fit', is essentially one of relating external opportunities and threats to internal strengths and weaknesses and is hence referred to by the mnemonic 'SWOT'."</quote><fnote>Adapted from 'Essentials of Marketing: Text and Cases' - Lancaster and Massingham - page 72 </fnote>Perhaps the most important aspects of this for firm U are the internal strengths and weaknesses as these are far more controllable. Amongst the firm's strengths is the SUCK brand aimed at 'Singles' This is the second biggest segment size with the second biggest projected growth rate. SULI is targeted at High Earners and Pros which have the highest Av Market price. In the Sonite market the firm has the lowest 'cost of goods sold and inventory holding costs. The company is very weak in terms of sales-force expenditure with figures far below all the other firms in the industry especially in Sonite market. Particularly worrying is the difference between team U and those who have similar levels of retail sales - A, I and O. Given the sales achieved with a smaller sales-force an increase in personnel targeted at the right segments should yield a significant increase According to market research, awareness of SUCK within singles is very low but purchase intentions are still high this represents a very definite opportunity to further increase market share and establish dominance within the 'Singles' market. The Main opportunity still definitely lies within the Vodite market as there are only 2 rival brands. VEBA is clear leader so it is necessary to reduce their dominance. The growth potential, particularly in the 'Followers' segment is also a very positive opportunity. Whilst SUCK is highlighted as a key opportunity for development, the main threats in terms of purchase intentions come from SOFT and SIBI. Purchase intentions for SOFT are higher than that of SUCK and brand awareness is lower. This means that whatever opportunities are present for SUCK are also available to SOFT. Perhaps the biggest threat can be illustrated by Appendix Four. This shows the growth rates for all but the 'Others' segment are lower in period 7 than in periods as late as 5. This strongly suggests the growth of the overall Sonite market is coming to a close. <heading>Ansoff Matrix</heading><figure/>Since the firm already has products in Sonite and Vodite markets there are no others for the firm to enter into. The only opportunities are therefore through market penetration and product development. "Market Penetration is the strategy of expanding sales based on existing products in existing markets." This can be achieved in both Sonite and Vodite markets but is likely to be simpler in the latter as natural growth of the market will help facilitate penetration. A key area for the firm will be through product development. The brands currently in play, especially in the Vodite market aren't suitable for the fast growing segments. As a result "a strategy of increasing sales by improving present products or developing new products for current markets" is essential to facilitate growth and ultimately improve the companies share price. <fnote>Adapted from 'Essentials of Marketing: Text and Cases' - Lancaster and Massingham - page 77 </fnote><fnote>Marketing Concepts and Strategy - Dibb, Simkin, Pride and Ferrell - Page 673 </fnote>In light of this, PVUUU will be ready for launching by period 9. "In the introductory stage, the product is introduced to the market through a focused and intense marketing effort designed to establish a clear identity and promote maximum awareness." This means that in order to position the brand in the best position, as much of the budget as can be spared should be spent on advertising targeted at 'Followers'. Whilst VUCK already has some brand awareness it is better to treat the PVUUU introduction as a re-launch of the brand. <fnote> URL  </fnote><heading>Marketing Mix</heading>The management of the company's portfolio and as such, its current position has been particularly influenced by principles of the marketing mix. This principle - 'the four P's' represents a key part of marketing strategy and is illustrated in Appendix Five. <heading>Price</heading><quote>"Price competition is the policy used whereby a marketer emphasises price as an issue that matches or beats the prices of competitors."</quote><fnote>Marketing Concepts and Strategy - Dibb, Simkin, Pride and Ferrell - Page 568 </fnote>When the VUCK product was launched in the Vodite market it was the first of its kind. Given this, a price-skimming policy was employed whereby "a company charges the highest possible price that buyers are willing to pay". This was the most suitable introductory price as demand tends to be inelastic in the early stages of the product lifecycle. This method has a number of benefits - skimming can generate much needed initial cash flows to help off-set the cost of development. Unfortunately the premium price charged can attract other firms to the market which happened within our industry and undermined our product. PVUUU has an estimated base cost of 300 and should therefore be well positioned to generate profit or employ a 'Penetration Pricing' strategy. This involves "setting a price below the prices of competing brands in order to penetrate the market and produce a larger unit sales volume. When introducing a product, a marketer sometimes uses penetration pricing to gain a large market share quickly". There is already some brand awareness with VUCK and the improved product it should see this translate to improved purchase intentions. <fnote>Marketing Concepts and Strategy - Dibb, Simkin, Pride and Ferrell - Page 568 </fnote><fnote>Marketing Concepts and Strategy - Dibb, Simkin, Pride and Ferrell - Page 599 </fnote><heading>Product / Production</heading>There are currently 11,000 units of VUCK in inventory, but after period 6, production was decreased to 32,000 and sales of 54,000 were achieved. If VUCK maintains its market share and the market grows as predicted, approximately 86,000 units will be sold. This means that production should be increased to approximately 50,000 to allow the units in inventory to be sold off and try to limit inventory held in future periods, particularly since it is held at a cost of 8%. When PVUUU is available in period 9 the brand will be modified but we will increase production in line with the growth of the market in an effort to capitalize on its re-launch as suggested above. . <heading>Promotion</heading>When PVUUU is 're-launched' in period 9 there should be a large slice of the advertising budget spent. This will further increase the consumer's awareness of the brand and after a few periods of it being bought, purchase intentions will increase as will market share. This can be reduced in subsequent periods. An increase in advertising expenditure on SUCK from the current 1,000,000 figure should help facilitate this. <heading>Place / Distribution</heading><quote>"Channels of distribution are the set of people and/or organizations concerned with the flow of products from producer to consumer". </quote><fnote>Lecture Notes: 'Place' - Jonathan Freeman </fnote>As a result a strategy of targeted sales-force placement must be employed to bolster sales. SULI is aimed primarily at High Earners and Professionals with HE's highlighted as the most suitable audience for the product. From market research it is evident that HE's do 50% of their shopping in Department stores and 36.9% of total Sonite sales take place here. It is therefore prudent to increase sales-force in this area from 25 to 50 and increase their effort allocation further towards SULI from 50% to 60% with a 5% reduction on SUCK and VUCK . Historically SULI has sold around 40% of its units in Speciality stores where the firm currently has the majority of its sales-force. Given the cost of hiring and the relatively small growth in the market it is probably prudent to leave the number of sales people selling SULI in specialist stores unchanged. In the longer term it will also be expected that with the modifications made to VUCK the number of retail sales will increase. To accommodate this we will need to again increase sales-force in period 10. Since the new VUCK product is to be aimed solely at Followers who do 41.8% of their shopping in Mass Merchandising stores it will be prudent to add approximately 15 extra staff here and change their effort allocation to 75% VUCK. <heading>Conclusion and Learning Points</heading>All of the performance indicators must be considered together. In the latter periods the firm kept expenditure below total budget in order to improve ROCE but this was achieved at a price, with retail sales and market shares both falling. This ultimately led to a fall in stock price. At the launch of a product advertising has to be as prevalent as the budget will allow. In addition to this, production levels should be high to accommodate the initial demand for the product. This mistake was made in the launch of both SUCK and VUCK but was particularly a detrimental in the launch of VUCK into the Vodite market where it was the only brand available for the initial period. Given inventory holding costs are only 8% it is therefore sensible to over produce in the initial period and then adjust production levels when more is known about demand. Using the tools available it is better to base products on predicted future ideal characteristics so the brand will be attractive once its position in the market is better cemented. Since it takes a number of periods from research into a product to its launch, it is better to target customers' future satisfaction as we have done with PVUUU. It is not always better to be the first brand to a new market. Whilst short term gains are possible, in the long run, the experience gained by competitors from the initial entrants will often enable them to establish a dominant position as the market grows. Profits generated from the introduction of VUCK were good after its launch, but since VEBA entered the market, retail sales have failed to grow in line with the growth of the industry and a sustained market share has been unattainable. Make sure that the cost of R & D can be comfortably recouped by performing break-even analysis. It cost 7,630,000 to bring VUCK to the market and it has yet to recoup its costs. It is also going to cost an additional 2,990,000 to make the modifications currently in development as the project PVUUU because there is more information about the market. Given the growth of the market it is expected to recoup its costs in only a few periods. Use the tools available. Given forecasts for market growth and the market research into current and projected market shares it is possible to predict demand quantities and as such suitable production levels. It is therefore un-necessary to over/under produce in any period apart from in the period of introduction. This is especially true given the 20,000 units under or over produced at the discretion of the production staff. Know the market. The analysis tools are useful in terms of finding out what competitors are doing, but the market research studies are the best indications of what customers want, where they go to get it, and how much they will pay for it. This is the perhaps the best tool for determining advertising expenditure, sales-force numbers and effort allocations and distribution channels. 