I would advise Albert that it may be difficult to recover all of his losses. This case is an example of Economic Loss arising from 'negligent mis-statement' and as such, it must be proven that a duty of care exists between the two parties. The duty is established by the relationship between the claimant and the defendant, a 3 stage duty test. The 'proximity test', requires the parties to have been brought adequately close to one another i.e. 'the statement must be made directly to the claimant by the defendant' (1). They were friends from university, and were having lunch thus establishing proximity. There are grounds to disagree with this as their meeting was coincidental and they hadn't seen each other for a long time. The next, is 'reasonable foreseeability'. "Defendants will not be liable unless they should reasonably have foreseen that the claimant would reasonably rely on the statement and voluntarily assumed responsibility for it."(2) In the case of 'Hedley Byrne v Heller, (1963)' the House of Lords indicated criteria upon which this may be established. Amongst these were:- 1) The defendant's ability to give reliable advice - Barry was a Director of the firm and we can therefore assume that he knows about the company.. Even so given 'Esso Petroleum v Marden (1976)' the defendants were liable because they had more skill/experience than the claimant. Given his position in the company, this is likely to be the case. 2) The circumstances in which the advice was given - 'Howard Marine and Dredging Co Ltd v Ogden (1978)' is relevant here. It said that it had to be 'considered advice which someone would act upon' and not 'off the cuff'. We know that it was an off the cuff remark made on a social occasion. Inspite of this, in 'Chaundhry v Prabhakar (1989)' - liability was imposed when the statement was made on a social occasion but the defendant had specialist knowledge. In 'Caparo v Dickman (1990)' the House of Lords tightened the rules in such cases. Hence "the defendant must reasonably have anticipated that the advice would be acted upon without the claimant seeking further clarification or independent advice." I feel this may prove difficult to argue given the size of the investment and the possibility that Barry may have ulterior motives. Even so, as a company director we would expect his advice to be relied upon especially given the certainty of his words. There are possibilities that the defendant may not be liable in this situation. However, the law suggests that it is likely Barry will be liable in tort. I would therefore tell Albert that he would be well advised to attempt to recover damages from Barry, but be prepared that he may not recover the full amount. Even if a duty of care could be established, it may also be possible for the defendant to prove that said duty wasn't breached. We are told only that the advice was given & 'some months later' the firm went into liquidation. We would have to find out whether or not the advice given was accurate at the time & Albert's losses were unforeseeable. If this was the case, then there was no breach of duty. The second case is another example of Economic Loss arising from 'negligent mis-statement'. This case is slightly different to the previous in that Mrs Smith sought the advice and Jim gave it to her in a professional capacity. This fulfils the second of the criteria set out above (Hedley Byrne v Heller (1963)) to establish whether or not a duty of care was owed. We can also assume that the first of the criteria - that the advice is deemed to be reliable - was fulfilled as Jim was a law lecturer and had agreed to provide support to the Student Law Centre. This infers that he is confident enough in his knowledge of the law to advise others. Regarding the tightening of the rules regarding duty (Caparo v Dickman (1990)) as mentioned in the above case, we can assume that Jim could have reasonably foreseen that Mrs Smith would have relied on the advice given without seeking further clarification. I would advise Mrs Smith that she has a good case, but may have to settle for less than she would have made from the insurance claim if the case is viewed as an example of 'Contributory Negligence'. Whilst it is reasonable for Mrs Smith to have relied upon the advice given by Jim, it could be said that it would have been simple for her to seek a second opinion.(ie from a solicitor who is currently practising and would therefore be more up to date on any changes in the law). This does however make the assumption that she could afford to seek secondary advice. She did rely, to her detriment, on the advice of an expert and therefore might be able to win full damages. In the third and final case, the claim is made based on a negligent act. The most likely party to make the claim against would be George's employer as this is most likely a case of Vicarious Liability. We aren't told in the text the reason for the accident, so this would have to be established. If it occurred during the course of George performing the job for which he is employed, then it is his employer that is liable. If this isn't the case (i.e. George was taking an unnecessary detour) then it may be George himself that is liable. If however the accident was unavoidable then there would be no case to answer To successfully make a claim, damage must be proved. I would have to advise Percy that he may only be able to claim the price of the crops destroyed plus the profit he would have made selling those, as this is regarded as 'consequential economic loss'. The further field of crops that he was unable to grow is classed as 'pure economic loss' and as such may not be recoverable. This is illustrated in the case of Spartan Steel v Martin + Co (1973). In this case, the claimant successfully claimed for the cost of metal spoilt by the defendant's negligent act and the proceeds that would normally have been made on its sale, however the claim for lost profits on the melts which couldn't be processed because of the damage, was rejected by the court. This policy is also illustrated in 'Weller & Co v Foot & Mouth Disease research Institute (1966)' where the court held that as a matter of public policy the claim must fail. Should such an action be allowed to succeed it would open the door to a host of other claims. In our case this could be from the firm that processes the crops, the eventual retailers or a host of other parties involved. The argument against this is that the remoteness of the damage could be seen as being 'reasonably foreseeable' as opposed to just a direct consequence. 'The Wagon Mound (1961)' case is relevant here. Since our case deals with petrol, it is foreseeable that an accident involving such a liquid would cause consequential damage and therefore it may be possible to seek damages for future crop profits as well. In short I would certainly advise Percy to proceed with the case but he should make sure to further investigate the nature of the crash and if it could have been avoided. This information will generally be available from the police report of the incident. Footnotes - Law for Business Studies (3 rd Edition) - Alix Adams (2003) - Pg 155 - Law for Business Studies (3 rd Edition) - Alix Adams (2003) - Pg 156 