<abstract><heading>ABSTRACT</heading>This essay will describe how the responses to this type of questions have usually revolved around dichotomies such as realism versus idealism or communitarianism versus liberalism and cosmopolitanism. The essay makes a critical interrogation of the nature and content of the debates about moral pluralism and universalism within IR theory. Firstly this essay will focus on the 'responses' offered by communitarianism, realism and cosmopolitanism to the dilemma of moral pluralism and universalism. The discussion will be constructed around issues like the self, society and morality. Is morality socially constructed? Do individuals need the freedom to form, revise or change their conceptions of the good life? Is there an inescapable starting point or meta-narrative in evaluating the 'morality' of morals? On the one hand, universalism and cosmopolitanism have been accused of giving insufficient consideration to moral pluralism, neglecting local or national identity for the sake of a supposedly transcendent moral universal truth or ideal that may actually reflect just the European tradition. On the other hand, communitarianism has been accused of over-emphasising the moral priority of the community, arguing for an embedded self, which may be a constraint upon human freedom. This essay will argue that there is a need to blur this duality as an emphasis on one extreme is misleading and potentially dangerous. Moral spaces need permanent negotiation. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>This essay will provide a critical interrogation of the nature and content of the debates about moral pluralism and universalism within IR theory. What is moral pluralism? Is the defence of a pluralist international society a way to preserve the static approach to international relations? Are there any universal moral values? This essay will make a critical account of the responses given by IR theory to the above type of questions, responses that have usually revolved around dichotomies such as realism versus idealism or communitarianism versus liberalism and cosmopolitanism. On the one hand, universalism and cosmopolitanism have been accused of giving insufficient consideration to moral pluralism and diversity, neglecting local or national identity for the sake of a supposedly transcendent moral universal truth or ideal that may actually reflect the Western European historical tradition. On the other hand, realism has been criticised as overlooking the interdependent fate of human beings and their equal worth as moral subjects. Similarly, communitarianism has been accused of over-emphasising the moral priority of the community over the individual, arguing for an embedded self, which is considered by liberals as a constraint upon human freedom. This essay will attempt to show the overlapping nature of communitarianism and cosmopolitanism indicating that an emphasis on just one of the two is actually misleading. The main focus will be placed on the moral issues advanced by the two main strands of argumentation. The essay will show how the IR responses have tried to prove the prevalence of one perspective, generally neglecting the degrees of overlap between the two allegedly opposing standpoints. It will argue that if reconciliation between the two perspectives is looked for, then the first step to be made is to admit the relevant truths in both since an either/or approach is sterile. Firstly this essay will focus on the 'responses' offered by communitarianism, realism and cosmopolitanism to the dilemma of moral pluralism and universalism. Moral pluralism refers in this essay to the existence of a plurality of world-views, which are said to be contextual and contingent giving birth to certain ways of life, behaviours and public cultures, which significantly differ from one community to another. Morality has different meanings in different contexts. Rights are ranked differently in different places. For instance, the idea of human rights seems incompatible with East Asian values since the virtue of personal autonomy, which underpins it, is not a basic virtue there. As Linklater mentions, "human subjects cannot perceive the world other than through the distorting lens of language and culture which has already made them what they are as moral subjects".  <fnote>Amitai Etzioni, "The End of Cross-Cultural Relativism", Alternatives, 22, 1997. </fnote><fnote>Andrew Linklater, The transformation of political community: ethical foundations of the post-Westphalian era (Oxford: Polity, 1998), p. 48. </fnote>However, all these incommensurable paradigms form and complete the truth about humanity since, as universalism highlights, certain moral universal standards exist and ought to be respected irrespective of community, nation, state or territory, their culture and morality. These standards are based on the idea that all human beings have equal worth. However, philosophy has written a lot about the contextuality of knowledge and morality, namely, that "the realisation that the truth of propositions or the rightness of norms can be assessed only against the background of a shared conceptual scheme and, moreover, that there exists an irreducible plurality of conceptual schemes". Universalism has to take into account the scepticism that characterises our century with regard to any attempt to universalise values, principles or world-views. However, as Linklater says "it is not universalism as such which should be at issue in contemporary debates about ethics and difference but one specific form in which it is supposed that individual reason can discover an Archimedean moral standpoint that transcends the distortions and limitations of time an place". <fnote>Alessandro Ferrara, "Universalism: Procedural, Contextualist and Prudential", in David Rasmussen (ed .), Universalism vs. Communitarianism, Contemnporary Debates in Ethics, (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990), p. 11. </fnote><fnote>Ferrara, "Universalism: Procedural, Contextualist and Prudential". </fnote><fnote>Linklater, The transformation of political community, p. 48 </fnote>Issues like values and morality, the 'self' and the good life have long been neglected in IR theory. They have been extensively debated in political philosophy or theory but clearly avoided in foreign policy and international relations given the lasting realist focus on state as the basic actor and on morality as irrelevant at the international level. The problem of the debate between communitarianism and cosmopolitanism is that we have "(...) an already established political theory literature of ethics and the untheorised domain of international relations (...) this literature is compromised orthodox frames of reference (...). both camps searching for a singular ethical theory."  <fnote>David Campbel and Michael Shapiro, Moral Spaces: rethinking ethics and world politics (Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1999), p. VIII. </fnote>Secondly the essay will argue that there is a need to blur the so-called 'dichotomy' that allegedly exists between cosmopolitanism and communitarianism as there are overlapping points between them. This essay will conclude that polarisation of the debate is misleading and can even be dangerous. <heading>IR RESPONSES TO THE DILEMMA OF MORAL PLURALISM AND UNIVERSALISM</heading>This section critically examines the two main responses to the dilemma of moral pluralism and universalism, namely communitariansim and cosmopolitanism. The discussion will be constructed around issues like the self, society and morality. Is morality socially constructed? Do individuals need the freedom to form, revise or change their conceptions of the good life? Do they want to change them considering that these may be past deeply rooted habits of their heart and minds, offering a cosy satisfaction and safety? Is there an inescapable starting point or meta-narrative in evaluating the 'morality' of morals? In political philosophy the debate between communitarians and liberals on answering to these types of questions has a long history and eventually reiterate the fundamental issue of the 'self'. Communitarians advocate communal self-determination, arguing that the community is prior to the individual because it does not have ephemeral nature and it embodies the wisdom of centuries. Taylor says that there is no such thing as neutrality of moral norms. The self is embedded in the community's history, culture and traditions while moral codes mirror particular backgrounds. <fnote>Charles Taylor, Sources of the self: the making of the modern identity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989). </fnote>By contrast, liberals explain that the individual has moral priority based on his or her natural rights to freedom of self-determination. Locke sees the rights of states as deriving only from the natural rights of individuals; the individuals have agreed to transfer some of their prerogatives to the political authority of the state but they always have the right to disobey and to remove an authoritarian rule.  <fnote>John Locke, Two treatises of government (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). </fnote>What the two theories seem to have in common is that equally legitimate competing conceptions of the good life do exist. However, the main difference is that for liberals, individual freedom gives persons the moral power to oppose a certain principle or behaviour that society may impose upon him or her. The self is not 'embedded' in society's traditions and the realisation of individual freedom is justified and encouraged as long as it does not impede the same level of freedom for other persons and does not harm the others. Rawls' argues that individuals should always have the freedom to form, revise or change their conceptions of the good life. But what type of autonomy and independence does a communitarian agent have? <fnote>Rawls' theory of justice reiterates Kant's correlation between morality and reason in order to reveal that there are substantive principles of justice that all rational persons would and should accept as moral constraints. See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973). </fnote>For communitarians, "We are what we are in virtue of participating in the larger life of our society" or "One is a self only among other selves". What Taylor calls higher evaluated goods (we are committed to) are not invented by individuals, but located in the social world which gives the standard measure for lower or higher values. Also, MacIntyre writes in an Aristotelic tradition that even the ideas of Sophocles and Homer hinted to the fact that if isolated from society, individuals cannot have any sense of justice and is deprived of his or her attributes as human being. We normally think of ourselves, as members of a family, community or nation. I did not choose my mother. Moreover, Walzer writes that "Politics (...) depends upon shared history, communal sentiment, accepted conventions (...) Communal life and liberty requires the existence of "relatively self-enclose arenas of political development." Is this moral priority of the community enough to defend regimes, which violate human rights? Do these regime still have the right to closure? <fnote>Michael J. Sandel, (ed.) Liberalism and its critics,( Oxford : Blackwell, 1984) p. 183. </fnote><fnote>Taylor, Sources of the self: the making of the modern identity, p. 35. </fnote><fnote>Alasdair MacIntyre, Whose justice? Which rationality? (London : Duckworth, 1988), p. 96. </fnote><fnote>Michale Walzer, "The Moral Standing of States: A Response to Four Critics", Philosophy & Public Affairs, 9, no. 3, 1980, p. 228. </fnote>Rawls's liberal ideas (criticized of communitarian accents) address issues regarding international justice by writing about self-determination, self defence and non-intervention. He rejects realism's urge for rational self-interest but he also rejects cosmopolitan's ideas on global principles of justice. Rawls focuses on the justice of societies. However, well-ordered and decent societies (which should be tolerated according to his theory) may very well unfairly treat their citizens by devoiding them of basic liberties. By being society-oriented, his theory allows some to impose certain constrains on others, allows intolerance and discrimination. His minimal requirements for respect of decent societies may actually allow apartheid, racism, and ethnic cleansing. The same critique can be addressed to Kant as well. Indigenous people could not participate in negotiating a universal common sense because the Kantian conceptualisation of this is not appropriate to incommensurate cultural practices. <fnote>See Simon Caney, "Cosmopolitanism and the Law of Peoples", The Journal of Political Philosophy, 10/1, 2002 and Chris Brown, "The Construction of a 'Realist' utopia: John Rawls and International Political Theory", Review of International Studies, Vol. 28, no. 1, 2002. </fnote><fnote>See David Campbell and Michael J. Shapiro (eds.) Moral spaces: rethinking ethics and world politics (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999). </fnote>There seems to be something wrong with unchosen attachments. That is why liberals have always stressed the prospect of free choice as being essential. Otherwise, is there any genuine personal autonomy? Is there any such communal attachment so constitutive to ones identity that cannot be revised and rejected? One can argue that the extent to which people may give priority to traditional national, religious or ethnic loyalties may be exaggerated. People do not necessarily conform one hundred percent to the absolute requirements of their religious, cultural or national traditions. Questioning, defying or changing certain deeply rooted habits that constrained certain groups have always been the motor of progress and human development within communities. Looking back at the women rights or anti-slavery movements often highlighted by cosmopolitans is relevant in this respect. Can this type of revolutionary changes be explained in a communitarian sense? Walzer writes about the fact that all human practices are socially constructed and determine the identity of individuals. He pointed to the Indian caste system, as an illustration of a non-liberal society that may be just according to its own standards. If there is going to be any universal practices or principles these embrace the whole existent variety of communities. However, such an all-encompassing universal code would be too abstract to become significant. According to Walzer, state sovereignty must be recognised and defended because it is the only space in which striving for individual freedom makes sense. However, he admits that states have rights only after they gain a formal recognition and if they have offered a decent treatment of their citizens. <fnote>Michael Walzer, Just and unjust wars: a moral argument with historical illustrations (New York: Basic Books, 2000). </fnote>Slightly different than communitarianism, realism is following the same line of argumentation in defence of the primacy of the state. However, realism sees ethics as inapplicable to international politics. Realists overemphasise conflict as endemic in international relations given the natural search for power, which dominated states' conduct and the fixed egotistic human nature. Starting with Thucydides, Hobbes or Machiavelli, realism has upheld the idea that what characterises relations among people as well as among sovereign states is an eternal and selfish competition for power. National interest is the only interest a state may have and since the state is not a moral agent than it follows that morality has no proper home in inter-state relations. The six principles of realism listed by Morgenthau are relevant to describe this amoral situation. Most of all, the fifth principle clearly expresses that since there is no universally agreed moral code, all the moral principles that are used in international relations are actually covers for particular national interests. Carr as well is extremely sceptic about moral universals as actually concealing vested interests of Great Powers in search for dominance. Extension of human rights as universal principles is only imposition of ones' morality on others. However, in its defence of state priority as the main actor in international relations, realism has been accused as actually protecting the status quo, ignoring issues like human rights violation, poverty, or unaccountability of global decision-makers and perhaps also advocating a certain ethical code that suit the most powerful. <fnote>Hans Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations (New York: Alfred A Knopf, 5th ed , 1973). </fnote><fnote>Carr, E.H. The Twenty Years' Crisis, 1919-1939 (London: Palgrave, 2001). </fnote>Cosmopolitanism is a liberal theory according to which all human beings belong to a single moral community of humanity. Contrary to communitarian perspectives, for cosmopolitans the community or the state is not the ultimate source of right in international politics. Whether one is insider or outsider is morally irrelevant since one should be viewed as a human being and humanity is the primary locus of loyalty. <fnote>Hutchings, International Political Theory: Rethinking Ethics in a Global Era, (London: SAGE Publications: 1999). </fnote><fnote>Since the society where one was born is a matter of contingency, there is no soundness in privileging our fellow-citizen. See Charles R. Beitz, Political theory and international relations (Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press, 1999). Influenced by Rawls, Beitz has proposed a global difference principle as a possible remedy for the unfair global distribution of resources. </fnote>Even if they were emphasising that people can pursue the good life only within their own polis, Ancient philosophers such as Socrates or Plato were sensitive to cosmopolitan feelings with regard to humanity. Socrates refusal to travel may very well be interpreted as a cosmopolitan gesture since nosce te ipsum is not conditioned by place. Furthermore, Stoics also viewed the cosmos as the perfect 'polis' since its order is of divine origin. Serving other individuals as best as we can was considered God's demand. Stoic cosmopolitanism influenced Christianity. Augustine, for instance, was limiting the citizenship in the city of God to those who love God. During the Enlightenment factors like rise of capitalism, expanding empires, travels the attached 'discoveries' as well as the emerging 'human rights' concept and philosophical focus on human reason have all contributed to a rebirth of cosmopolitanism. The Enlightenment heritage is reliance on reason and rational progress, antipathy to tradition, customs or inherited institutions (especially religion), and faith in the enlightened cosmopolitan citizen who transcends particular loyalties. Following the American and the French Revolution, the theory has been revived by utilitarians like Bentham or Mill who grounded cosmopolitanism on universally shared feelings such as the capacity to experience pleasure or pain. As a ramification of the liberal tradition of thought, utilitarianism displays certain cosmopolitan key concepts. It invests the individual with the locus of moral significance: "the ultimate locus of value is the individual, and the reason for this is simply that it is individuals, not communities, that can be happy or unhappy, have desires satisfied or unsatisfied". The greatest happiness for the greatest number of people is the main utilitarian principle and states should be merely instruments for the fulfilment of this principle. Utilitarians are cosmopolitans given their conception of the citizens as world citizens with duties for humanity's welfare.  <fnote>Tony Coates, "Neither realism nor cosmopolitanism", in Barry Holden (ed.) Global democracy: key debates, (London: Routledge, 2000). </fnote><fnote>Anthony Ellis, "Utilitarianism and International Ethics", in Terry Nardin and David R. Mapel (eds.) Traditions of international ethics, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), p. 172. </fnote><fnote>Responding critically to utilitarianism but providing some other form of cosmopolitan heritage Kant argues that global peace is possible when states are republics, enter voluntary league for peace, and respect the human rights of foreigners as well. Kant introduced the concept of "cosmopolitan law," according to which individuals also have rights as 'citizens' of the earth. Se e Immanuel Kant Perpetual peace, translated by M. Campbell Smith (New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1948). </fnote>Generally, the cosmopolitan theories agree with loyalty to fellow-citizens, and justify forms of service to them when they provide a way to do good to human being who happen to be fellows but not because they are fellows. Procedures do count but actual practices may very easily hide discriminatory tendencies. How is one to avoid moral favouritism? Building on the ancient cosmopolitan assumptions, Martha Nussbaum speaks about the similarity between ethnocentric particularism and nationalism, both being actually subversive to a nation's values. For her, the source of morality is only that community whose boundaries are measured "by the sun". Recognising and respecting humanity is the first principle of what she calls the cosmopolitan education. Only by giving our allegiance to humanity (based on justice and reason) can genuine political deliberation among people take place. However, she mentions that "Becoming a citizen of the world is often a lonely business (...) a kind of exile - from the comfort of local truths, from the worm, nesting feeling of patriotism (...).  <fnote>Seneca, De Otio quoted in Martha C. Nussbaum, For love of country? (Boston : Beacon Press, 2002), p. 7. </fnote><fnote>Nussbaum, For love of country? p. 15 </fnote>In reply to Nussbaum's theory Putnam mentions that we must not choose between patriotism and universal reason because "Tradition without reason is blind; reason without tradition is empty". Wallerstein replies that it is easier for the stronger to have cosmopolitan feelings (hinting to the American cosmopolitanism). The weaker will be safer if standing on principles of group loyalty and equality. To avoid assimilation for instance, ethnic groups should be allowed the preservation of those communal elements that are constitutive for their identity. The rights of minorities and ethnic groups should be respected and protected in a multicultural society. One can hence argue that there are different degrees of cosmopolitanism and the extent to which one identifies with it also depends on the type of source for self-identity one has and the degree to which it is legally protected and politically represented. <fnote>Hilary Putnam , "Must we choose between Patriotism and Universal Reason", in Nussbaum, For love of country? p. 94. </fnote><fnote>Immanuel Wallerstein "Neither Patriotism nor Cosmopolitanism", in Nussbaum, For love of country?. </fnote><fnote>See Will Kymlicka, Multicultural citizenship: a liberal theory of minority rights (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995). </fnote>More recent accounts on cosmopolitanism depict it as an idealist (but not unrealistic) multilateralist theory, concerned with human equality as well as celebration of difference, and above all, human rights as cosmopolitan rights prevailing over state sovereignty. Cosmopolitanism can only be conceptualised because it appeals to our minds and heads and not to our hearts (as nationalism does). Without our knowledge or willingness, our lives become part of other worlds, other cultures and other global risks. Nowadays we all seem to reach a status of minorities in this way and, we all seem to endure this kind of cosmopolitanism which strengthens the ties people have in a community of humanity. <fnote>Mary Kaldor, "American Power: from 'compellance' to cosmopolitanism", International Affairs, 79, 1, 2003. </fnote><fnote>Ulrich Beck, "Cosmopolitical Realism: on the distinction between cosmopolitanism in philosophy and the social sciences", Global Networks, 4, 2, 2004. </fnote>The above chapter has critically examined communitarianism and cosmopolitanism as the main strands, which have offered solid argumentation of pluralism or universalism in domestic and international ethics. The following section will point out to the overlapping nature of the two responses to the dilemma of moral pluralism and universalism. <heading>BLURRING THE 'DICHOTOMY'</heading>The section will point out to the main overlapping and complementary points or ideas of the two main IR responses to the dilemma of moral pluralism and universalism. It argues for the necessity of both in overcoming the either/or deadlock and in furthering an emancipatory theory and practice in international relations. The chapter will also point out to the necessity of a plural and complex universalism required by the existence of transnational harm or crimes against humanity. While the old-world order was much more culturally homogeneous within the European system, the present world society is much more complicated in terms of its normative basis since it has to offer the same consideration for many other cultures than the Western one. One possible answer is offered by the fact that many different cultures accepted (willingly or not) the nation-state Western type of political community. Moreover, the international society as a 'practical association' is appealing. The practices of the international society are authoritative on all states, because they are not purposeful but out of a natural and general desire for peace and justice and do not favour one single conception of the good. While the Westphalian system made the state the central authority, Brown considers that "never very plausible, this assumption is clearly under more threat today than ever before". Present crises in international sphere such as dire poverty or refugees, make us reconsider the duties we may have to humanity and the continuous threat posed precisely by the state to the well being of the individual. In IR theory, realists must remember that states are only contingent and recent artificial inventions. More generally, communitarians should remember that the concept of political community has never been fixed. For instance, the Ancient "polis" is no longer democratic enough for us today and for long time women had not been considered citizens lacking any political rights. <fnote>Chris Brown, Understanding international relations (Basingstoke : Macmillan, 1997). </fnote><fnote>Nardin and Mapel, Traditions of international ethics. </fnote><fnote>Brown, Understanding international relations, p. 230. </fnote><fnote>Kantian cosmopolitanism was limited only because during his time the modern problems of mass immigration and global markets did not exist. The nature of the state is changing and by contrast with Kant's times, states have and should use now a very clear system of regulation and surveillance to determine who is a citizen and who is an outsider. See Brown, Understanding international relations. </fnote><fnote>Andrew, Linklater, The transformation of political community era. : ethical foundations of the post-Westphalian era (Oxford : Polity, 1998). </fnote><fnote>Archibugi, Daniele. "Cosmopolitan Democracy" in Daniele Archibugi (ed.). Debating Cosmopolitics (London:Verso, 2003). </fnote>However, as Hutchings indicates there are communitarian-like accounts, which instructively attempt to move the debate beyond the either/or approach. One is formed by constitutive theories, which seek to reconcile the norms of state with the individual rights. For instance, Frost sees that the rights of states and those of the individual are mutually constitutive and hence one cannot exist without the other. Moreover, Spegele's neo-Aristotelian approach is an evaluative political realism which states that there is no abstract standard to judge diverse practices and institutions but there is a need for dialogue and creative thinking with regard to various contexts. Practical reason is the key to avoid both the amorality of realism and cosmopolitan imperialism. In addition, Rorty proposes moral sentiments instead of rational arguments as key components for international ethics. Feeling the sufferings of others is a way to fuel humanitarian feelings. There is a need of a humane morality because human differences are worthless in the face of shared experiences of pain and humiliation. No need to urge others to identify with a certain abstract human community but rather to develop the solidarity among people. <fnote>See Mervyn Frost, Ethics in international relations: a constitutive theory, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996). </fnote><fnote>See Frost, Ethics in international relations: a constitutive theory. </fnote><fnote>See Roger D. Spegele, Political realism in international theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996) quoted in Hutchings, International Political Theory. </fnote><fnote>Hutchings, International Political Theory. </fnote><fnote>Rorty quoted in Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community. </fnote>On the one hand, in blurring the so-called dichotomy between cosmopolitan and communitarian approaches to moral pluralism and universalism we should notice that cosmopolitans do not have an issue with the right to cultural integrity. Cultural diversity is appreciated as enriching and deserving respect by many cosmopolitan thinkers. For example, Archibugi argues that cosmopolitan democracy seeks to promote diversity of cultures, rights and people. Cosmopolitans agree that "people are no longer inspired by a single culture that is coherent, integrated and organic. Instead, the arrival of transnational migrants has enriched and altered the cultural repertories of many people."  <fnote>Daniele Archibugi, "Principles of Cosmopolitan Democracy", in Daniele Archibugi, David Held, Martin Kohler, (eds.) Re-imagining Political Community, Studies in Cosmopolitan Democracy, (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998) </fnote><fnote>See Campbell and Shapiro (eds.) Moral spaces: rethinking ethics and world politics, p. 4. </fnote>On the other hand, one should notice that there are communitarian thinkers who accept the necessity of international moral obligations. Moreover, they do not necessarily embrace a Hegelian defence of state sovereignty especially when it covers violations of minority's rights. Walzer speaks about a minimal universal morality to be materialised in support for humanitarian aid to individuals or groups who experience natural disasters or human rights violations. His 'politics of difference' is a celebration of value pluralism but in a context of recognition of the fact that there is a need of a 'thin' concept of international morality to protect the existence of 'thick' moralities of particular communities. However there is no obligation for states to aliens who are known as racist, no automatic right of refuge. Waltzer argues that the right of closure should be exercised by states or communities in circumstances of threat or danger to cultural survival. But he also considers that closure motivated by reasons of difference is not sound. Collective right advocated by communitarians may not necessarily be the same with state-right. "Communitarianism does not put the moral validity of the state into question as such but it ties that validity to the link between state and culture, community or nation."  <fnote>See for instance, David Miller, Principles of social justice (London: Harvard University Press, 1999). </fnote><fnote>Walzer quoted in Hutchings, International Political Theory. </fnote><fnote>Hutchings, International Political Theory, p. 45. </fnote>In addition, the principle of individual self-determination characteristic for modern European states (defended by Hegel as advanced forms of organisation) cannot escape the accusation of ethnocentrism since its universalisation justifies European conquest of other peoples. Belief in the possibility of human progress need not lead to belief in the superiority of Western forms of progress. Zolo's iconoclastic critique of cosmopolitanism is relevant in this respect. He considers that the origins of cosmopolitan international institutions like the League of Nations or the UN lie in the WWII "hierarchical institutional model, which superimposes the hegemonic tactics and aspirations of a narrow elite of superpowers on the sovereignty of all other countries". The human rights principle is incompatible with the non-intervention principle and hence cosmopolitan pacifism is actually promoting the hegemony of the Western powers. Zolo argues that this world of allegedly universal values furthered by cosmopolitanism is lacking the "requisite variety to map out a path to peace in a world of growing complexity". He rejects an artificial world order imposed by Western interventions and advocates an "order emerging 'spontaneously' from disorder; there is no need for centralising domestic-like arrangements at the international level. The debate is relevant because "Deep down the dispute is about values. (...) interaction of diverse and particular moral communities (...) not through the imperial rule of the particular moral culture that happens to be dominant at any one time"  <fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community. </fnote><fnote>Danilo Zolo, Cosmopolis: prospects for world government (Cambridge: Polity, 1997), p. 164. </fnote><fnote>Zolo, Cosmopolis, p. 166. </fnote><fnote>Zolo proposes a weak realistic pacifism and interventionism, which accepts that aggression should be allowed and not resisted by aggression. However, in a fierce criticism of Zolo's idea of a spontaneous world order, Coates argues that the peace that may result out of conflict may be just a peace of 'the dead'. See Tony Coates, "Neither realism nor cosmopolitanism", in Barry Holden (ed.) Global democracy: key debates. </fnote><fnote>Danilo Zolo, "The Lords of peace, From the Holy Alliance to the new international criminal tribunals", in Barry Holden (ed .), Global Democracy: Key Debates. </fnote><fnote>Coates, "Neither realism nor cosmopolitanism", p. 91. </fnote>But thought Coates admits about cosmopolitanism that "Its intrusiveness, the threat which it poses to particular moral communities, is not to be underestimated", he replies that there is no clear theoretical and practical dominance of cosmopolitanism and not all kinds of universalism are inherently or potentially totalitarian (the tradition of natural law is universalistic and particularist without being cosmopolitan or realist).. Narrowing cosmopolitanism to such a totalising project is ignoring the "multi-layered character of cosmopolitanism", its complexity and its communitarian concerns in terms of preservation of cultural diversity. Moreover, these universal values are upheld precisely because they do not necessarily favour one particular culture but have their origin in pure human rationality (which according to liberals is neutral irrespective of cultural differences). Nevertheless, there are "instances of moral convergence" which do not necessarily represent impositions of Western ideas on other cultures or civilisations. In addition, the founders of cosmopolitanism (Phoenicians or Semites Stoics) have been non-Europeans and can find echoes in many cultures like Hinduism, Buddhism or Islam. Moreover, there are reasons for advocating some degree of universalism such as transnational harm, or crimes against humanity, shared pains and problems. Moral values such as combating apartheid, landmines, child abuse or poverty can also motivate people's conduct and not only loyalties or attachments. <fnote>Coates, "Neither realism nor cosmopolitanism", p. 92. </fnote><fnote>Coates, "Neither realism nor cosmopolitanism". </fnote><fnote>Campbell and Shapiro, Moral spaces: rethinking ethics and world politics, p. 3. </fnote><fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community, p. 102. </fnote><fnote></fnote><fnote>Campbell and Shapiro, Moral spaces: rethinking ethics and world politics. </fnote><fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community. </fnote><fnote>Simon Caney, "International Distributive Justice", Political Studies, 49, 5, 2001. </fnote><quote>No culture tolerates indiscriminate lying, stealing, or violence within the in-group. The essential universality of the incest taboo is well known. No culture places a value upon suffering as an end in itself.... We know of no culture...where the fact of death is not ritualised.</quote><fnote>A. L. Kroeber and Clyde Kluckohn, Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions (New York: Vintage Books, 1963), p. 349 quoted in Amitai Etzioni , "The End of Cross-Cultural Relativism", Alternatives, 22, 1997. </fnote>Moreover, even Taylor replies that "we have no choice but to be cosmopolitan and patriots, which means to fight for the kind of patriotism that is open to universal solidarities against other, more closed kinds". Taylor argues that a 'genuine, unforced consensus' on human rights norms is possible only if we allow for disagreement on the ultimate justifications of those norms. <fnote>Charles Taylor, "Why Democracy Needs Patriotism" in Nussbaum, For love of country? p. 121. </fnote>Critical theory offers a distinct account on the debate between moral pluralism and universalism. More liberal-oriented, Habermas develops the communicative theory of justification based on the concept of rational consensus. Truth and justice are procedural outcomes of open and genuine dialogue among all affected parties. While we can think validity of our moral claims in a universalistic way, we can never claim an objectivity of this universalism. He proposes a dialogic cosmopolitanism displaying an ethical universalism in a multi-cultural revised form. Norms are not valid if they do not have the consent of all those who can be affected by them. The procedural conditions of his theory do have Kantian roots; however, the test of universality is not individual private reasoning but collective and open dialogue within wide communities where no one can be excluded, where there is no a priori certainty but mutual criticism and self-questioning is encouraged. <fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community, p. 88 </fnote><fnote>However, Lyotard critique of Habermas's theory is instructive since it highlights the dialectical Socratic way of reasoning based on power and control and meant to achieve consensus and impose the most forceful argument. Universalism is actually another form of power control with no moral superiority but only improved mechanisms of domination. However, Liotard himself has defended some form of international rights rejecting any kind of abuse of power (in the case of the Vietnamese boat people). See Ferrara, "Universalism: Procedural, Contextualist and Prudential", and Linklater The Transformation of Political Community . </fnote>Linklater continues Habermas's ideas by proposing the dialogic ethic communities when all parties are free to participate irrespective of cultural or other differences, when no particular outcome is anticipated but the most powerful and reasonable argument will gain a transcultural status. "(...) There is more to the moral life than the special ties and obligations between fellow-citizens united by the accident of birth". However, there should not be any imposition of moral hierarchies and loyalties though this is always tempting. <fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community, p. 76. </fnote><quote>Dialogue is not confined then to maximising consensus within the normative parameters which dominant groups take for granted. One of its key purposes is to widen social parameters by making it possible for individuals to expand the realm of admissible disagreements which political communities have often suppressed in the name of totalising project.</quote><fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community, p. 96 </fnote><heading>CONCLUSION</heading>This essay made a critical interrogation of the nature and content of the debates about moral pluralism and universalism within IR theory. The first section of this essay has outlined the answers to questions about morality and community offered by communitarians, realists, liberal and cosmopolitanists. It has described the ever-present polarisation of the debate around whether or not morality has different meanings in different contexts or communities (the communitarian and implicitly the realist argument) or there are universal moral truths irrespective of community or nation (the liberal and cosmopolitan argument). The second section of the essay has shown that an exaggerated emphasis on just one of the two strands of argumentation is actually inappropriate and can be dangerously exclusive. As even Walzer mentions, "Both are dangerous; the argument needs to be cast in different terms" Moreover, even Carr as a realist has acknowledged that some degree of idealism and belief in human progress should be taken into account. Diminishing the exaggerated polarisation between them is important because "(...) opting for one or other of two apparently opposed alternatives in fact perpetuate dependence on certain axiomatic positions".  <fnote>Walzer "Spheres of Affection" in Nussbaum, For love of country? p. 127 </fnote><fnote>Carr, The Twenty Years' Crisis, 1919-1939. </fnote><fnote>Hutchings, International Political Theory, Rethinking Ethics in a Global Era, p. 51. </fnote>However, not even the communicative theory is voided of axiomatic assumptions taken for granted (such as the superiority of modern rationality which may very well in fact imply contextual values) in providing 'the best' framework for dialogue, and openness to critical examination. These 'superior' models are said to be the best just because there are no others to prove the contrary. However, their superiority over other more primitive forms of rationality as well as the irreversibility of modernisation are also questionable. For Linklater, dialogue represents "the preferred means by which subjects should decide whether system of exclusion are justified". The cosmopolitan dialogic ethics is said to respect communitarian ideas of respect for community's traditions but what if it is precisely these traditions that refuse dialogue as potentially subversive? Can the rules of this dialogue be set in a value free context? Or, how are these ruled established? Moreover, how do we ensure that everyone is able to participate in this widen dialogic community? <fnote>Linklater, The Transformation of Political Community, p. 109. </fnote>The paper has shown that not only strict polarisation of the debate is misleading but both theories would agree on the fact that neither meta-narratives nor relativism and pure scepticism should be embraced. A new context, a new type of community; need to redefine moral communities in terms of new moral problems that affect more than just one or another nation-state. It is precisely because the nature of the nation-state is changing so the communitarian approach to states morally prior to the individual should be subject to re-examination. Moreover, there is no need to be a globalist to admit that terrorism (in its new transnational form) may affect you irrespective of your home country, religion, and culture. State closure and exclusion through drawing boundaries is no longer achievable as before. The fate of peoples can no longer be simply confined and understood in national terms. Globalisation does not mean the end of territory, state or the 'exclusion' associated with them but the nature and content of these elements is changing. The proper home of politics and morality becomes a puzzling matter that should be discussed from a wider perspective combining the virtues of both communitarianism and cosmopolitanism: "Taken together, they constitute the best starting point for developing a concrete universalism capable of meeting the challenge of post-modern scepticism". A universal morality may co-exist with particular moralities and hierarchies between these are artificial, contextual and dependent on concrete cases. Consequently, moral "spaces need to be continually negotiated rather than physically or symbolically secured." <fnote>Ferrara, "Universalism: Procedural, Contextualist and Prudential", p. 14. </fnote><fnote>Campbell and Shapiro, Moral spaces: rethinking ethics and world politics, p. XVIII. </fnote>