<abstract><heading>Abstract. </heading>Globalisation has contradictory effects. It can boost wealth but also lead to more poverty. While accepting that overall, globalisation might have potential for poverty reduction, the paper will focus on the negative impact of economic globalisation on world poverty and the extent to which foreign aid may alleviate this negative impact. Globalisation (i.e. the spread of market capitalism) accentuates poverty and social inequities instead of being the medicine to cure these problems. This is due to the fact that the economic processes of globalisation undermine national states to provide social public goods. Globalisation has a negative impact especially in developing countries since they do not have the prerequisite to access its benefits. Consequently, it generates just another call for aid (development international assistance). However, aid is generally perceived as ineffective in terms of poverty reduction. Moreover, as in a vicious circle, in the 1980s, aid economic conditionality (as in the form of SAPs) reiterates the neo-liberal requirement for liberalisation, which may bring economic growth but do not actually reach the poorest. Foreign aid (as it is presented by the 'Washington consensus' institutions), being conditioned by trade liberalisation and structural reforms, is only making things worse since the recipient states are, in the same time, effectively undermined to provide social public goods. The conclusion of the paper is that foreign aid's contribution to poverty reduction is in fact perpetuating globalisation's harmful impact since they both operate with the same standard neo-liberal methods. While accepting the fact that globalisation generates benefits, the problem of poverty is a problem of concentration of wealth into a few hands. Global markets do not serve the poor. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION</heading><quote>"For most of the world's population, Hobbes's definition is still true: Life is nasty, brutish, and short."</quote><fnote>Sarah J. Tisch and Michael B. Wallace, Dilemmas of Development Assistance: The What, Why, and Who of Foreign Aid (Oxford: Westview Press, 1994), p. 3. </fnote>The intractable creed that sustained economic growth will eventually reduce world poverty underpins economic globalisation and neo-liberal policies primarily characterised by economic liberalisation (deregulation, decentralisation, and privatisation), free markets economics and free trade. While accepting the fact that overall, globalisation might have potential for poverty reduction the present paper will mainly focus, at a high level of generalisation, on the negative side of economic globalisation. Globalisation, as the spread of market capitalism virtually to every country in the world accentuates poverty and social inequities instead of being the medicine for these illnesses. It has a negative impact especially in many developing countries since they do not have the prerequisite to access its benefits. <fnote>See Thomas Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization (New York, Anchor Books, 2000, revised ed.), pp. 7-8. </fnote><fnote>By prerequisite for economic growth it is intended for instance, macro-economic policies needed to sustain internal and external balance and proper climate for attracting private investments namely, political stability, rule of law, and honest government. The paper will elaborate on this. </fnote>A peculiar thing about globalisation is that it places societies on potentially contradictory routes: conflict as well as co-operation, integration as well as fragmentation, exclusion as well as inclusion and wealth as well as poverty. On the positive side, globalisation has improved economic security in some ways and for some people. On the negative side, globalisation engenders a loss of economic security and poverty remained rampant. Given this negative side (on which the essay will elaborate in the first chapter), economic globalisation seems to generate just another call for aid. However, aid (international assistance or development assistance) is generally perceived as ineffective in terms of poverty reduction. Moreover, as in a vicious circle, in the 1980s, aid economic conditionality (as in the form of SAPs) reiterates the neo-liberal requirement for liberalisation. Especially after 1980, foreign aid (as it is presented by the 'Washington consensus' institutions), being conditioned by trade liberalisation and other structural urges for reconstruction which are stipulated in conditionality, is only making things worse since the recipient states are, in the same time, undermined to provide social public goods. Reducing poverty through foreign aid (or development international assistance) should help create 'public goods' such as education or health, the lack of which constitute a significant component of world poverty. However, states alone are no longer capable to create them being forced by economic globalisation to cut welfare and other social costs on behalf of competition on the free global market. <fnote>On the debate between sceptics and globalists see, for example, David Held and Anthony McGrew (eds.), The Global Transformations Reader: An Introduction to the Globalization Debate (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000). </fnote>The first chapter of the paper offers a brief account of world poverty and examines the impact of economic globalisation on world poverty and inequality. It analyses the concept of globalisation (and especially of economic globalisation), the concepts of poverty and inequality and the connection between them. The chapter will point out to how economic globalisation actually prompts more aid. The second chapter will look at the 'institution' of foreign aid, and its capacity to alleviate the harmful impact of economic globalisation on world poverty. It will emphasise the difficulty to measure the impact of aid, the purpose of aid giving and the history of aid as overlapping with the history of globalisation and neo-liberalism especially starting with 1980. The conclusion of the paper is that foreign aid contribution to the harmful impact of economic globalisation on world poverty cannot possibly alleviate poverty since it is mainly conducted with the same standard neo-liberal tools of globalisation. Many regions and people of the world are still excluded from the benefits of globalisation. Moreover, as in a vicious circle, aid conditionality reiterates the neo-liberal requirement for liberalisation, which do not help the poorest though it may bring economic growth. <heading>DIRE POVERTY AND GLOBAL LUXURIES. HOW DOES GLOBALISATION PROMPT MORE AID? </heading>The following chapter gives a brief account on the situation of dire poverty existent in the world by contrast with the luxuries that the rich countries can afford to consume. The chapter also establishes a working definition of poverty and inequality and shows how globalisation (even if overall may have positive impact) actually prompts more aid for developing countries. Though globalisation is said to bring 'honey and milk' for all, more than 1.3 billion people live with a dollar a day. 880 million people do not have access to health care services while 2.6 billion lacks sanitation. 840 million individuals of our world are malnourished and 250 million children work while 160 are malnourished. Many people are starving while others enjoy abundant wealth. The rich countries consume 45% of all meat and fish while the poorest fifth only 5%; the rich consume 58% of total energy, the poorest fifth less than 4%. The rich countries have 74% of all telephone lines, the poorest fifth 1.5%; the rich consume 84% of all paper while the poorest fifth only 1.1%. Something seems terrible wrong with the world today. <fnote>UNDP Report, 1997 p. 22 quoted in Caroline Thomas, "Poverty, Development, and Hunger", in John Baylis and Steve Smith (eds.), The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997). </fnote><fnote>Human Development Report 1998 Overview, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  URL  accessed 24.01.2004. </fnote>Moreover, the financial crisis in Asia has significantly increased poverty especially in Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand. India's number of poor people is also increasing and despite some economic success, inequalities in living standards are striking. The same can be said about other parts of the world like Brazil, Latin America or the Caribbean, while the financial crisis are unfortunately complemented by conflicts in Eastern Europe or Africa. The Third World is still facing economic stagnation, debt crises and social disintegration. <quote>The world at the end of the 2-th century not only overproduces food, but also a wide variety of luxuries amusements. And yet around a billion and a half people are denied their basic human rights and needs. This illustrates not so much inertia and lack of imagination on the part of the comfortably off majority (...). Rather it demonstrates the failure of political leadership at grand scale.</quote><fnote>Tony German, Judith Randel, "Trends towards the new millennium", The reality of aid: an independent review of poverty reduction and development assistance: the reality of aid project (London: Earthscan, 2000), p. 15. </fnote>But what exactly is understood by poverty? The literature in the field point to a common perception, i.e., it is difficult to define poverty, to list all the causes of poverty, to precisely identify the poor of the world or to make a very accurate evaluation of poverty reduction strategies. Just as any other complex concepts, poverty is controversial and it is difficult to agree on a clear-cut definition. Moreover, this present paper does not suggest that globalisation is the only 'scapegoat' to blame for poverty but instead is a try to show that economic globalisation is accelerating poverty. The problem of poverty is so complex that it cannot possibly be explained by one single cause. Corrupted governments, failed states, or authoritarian leaders may very well be responsible for perpetuating poverty in certain countries. Let us first take a look at two main different perspectives on poverty. The orthodox conception of poverty is 'lack of money' to satisfy basic needs. As the Report of the South Commission in 1990 states, many people in the world are just "too poor to buy enough food to sustain their energy". This outlook on poverty is also generally the result of globalisation of Western culture and expansion of market capitalism. After all, it is the World Bank, which invented the headcount measure (average income per household). Thomas Caroline relevantly draws the distinction between this orthodox (neo-liberal) understanding of poverty and the alternative to it. While the former emphasises 'money' as the criterion for assessing poverty, the latter highlights a more self-sustaining approach giving priority to empowerment of the poor and of communities. Development can a result of national or local endeavours in line with their own choosing of the path of development. <fnote>Report of the South Commission (1990), p. 84 in Caroline Thomas, "Poverty, Development, and Hunger". </fnote><quote>There is basic agreement on the material aspect of poverty, such as lack of food, clean water, and sanitation but disagreement on the importance of non-material aspects. Also, key differences emerge in regard to how material needs should be met, and hence about the goal of development (...). </quote><fnote>Caroline Thomas, "Poverty, Development, and Hunger", p. 561. </fnote>Consequently, poverty may be seen as lack of money but this would be a limited perspective. Lack of access to basic services such as water, education or health are very important components of poverty that must be taken into account when evaluating the level of poverty in certain areas. And it is precisely these shortages that impede many people from enjoying the benefits of globalisation. Global communication is for instance of no real use if illiteracy is widespread. Capital inflow is irrelevant if there is no human skill to usefully employ it. Hence, when speaking of poverty, a single dimension of the phenomenon is misleading and should be added other elements according to the region's specific characteristics. With regard to inequality, there is also controversy on its cause and types. Prakash Lougani makes a relevant distinction between global inequality, cross-country inequality and within country inequality. While global inequality refers to the situation among people on the globe, cross-country inequality is measured in terms of average incomes within states. Cross-country inequality has indeed increased and hence, the slogan 'richer are getting richer while poorer are getting poorer' is not misleading. While the average global citizen has become richer, this way of analysing inequality is inappropriate because reducing inequality is a matter of state policy and hence states, not only people should be taken into consideration. Cross-country accounts of inequality are much more relevant because they indicate whether governments have adopted the 'right' liberal policies. The author is saying that inequality may not be so unacceptable as long as the right liberal economic policies are adopted which will eventually generate economic growth. After all, let us remember the liberal Rawlsian principles of justice according to which, certain inequalities are accepted as long as they make the least advantaged person better off too. While accepting that inequalities will always exist since pure equality is utopian and even dangerous (if we think of the communist ideal of equality) one can, however, state that the global inequalities today do not seem so acceptable. In 1990, the income of 10 percent of the world's population was 120 times higher than that of the poorest 10 percent. Oligarchies interested in preserving their wealth and power represent the real danger, and they seem to be favoured by the current global market capitalism. <fnote>Prakash Loungani. "Inequality: Now you see it, now you don't", Finance and Development, pp. 22-23, September 2003. </fnote><fnote>Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971). </fnote>Especially starting with 1980, development (and the way poverty and inequality are understood and addressed) has been conceived within the ideological framework of the Western global capitalism or economic globalisation. Since the end of the Cold War, this is the dominant ideological framework. Globalisation can be traced back to the nineteenth century (when speaking about how modernity was integrating the world), but the term started to be used only in the 1960s. Different policy reactions have been developed with regard to globalisation. While neo-liberals advocate a leading role of global markets and a passive role for the state, reformists consider that some state intervention is required to alleviate the negative effects of globalisation by assuring a healthy environment, minimum living standards and greater social equity. Neo- Marxists and other leftists see globalisation as just another stage in the pathological expansion of market capitalism, mainly beneficial for core states and detrimental for poorer ones (in the periphery). The present paper adopts a moderate liberal perspective seeing globalisation as a new phase of real structural changes that have a great impact on people lives everywhere (although not to the same extent). One cannot claim that what we live is just a myth (as sceptics consider) and, although global capitalism can be viewed as an instrument working on behalf of great powers, people everywhere may be at least potential beneficiaries of this process. However, while accepting that overall, globalisation might have potential for poverty reduction the present paper will mainly focus on the negative side of economic globalisation's impact on world poverty. This negative side is also due to what might be called 'market fundamentalism': <quote>Market fundamentalists hold that the public interest is best served when people are allowed to pursue their own interests. This is an appealing idea, but it is only half-true. Markets are imminently suitable for the pursuit of private interest, but they are not designed to take care of the common interest. (...). The protection of the common interest used to be the task of the nation-state. But the powers of the state have shrunk as global capital markets have expanded. (...). Since capital is essential to the creation of wealth, governments must cater to its demands, often to the detriment of other considerations. (...). Social values can be served only by social and political arrangements, even if they are less efficient than markets.</quote><fnote>Excerpts from George Soros, Open Society: Reforming Global Capitalism (New York: PublicAffairs, 2000), pp.xii-xv. </fnote>Neo-liberals believe that the global marketplace itself ensures a kind of "rule of the people" because their free choices as customers in a free market empower them to affect their circumstances. But poverty (in this case, precisely as the lack of money) is still rampant worldwide and it impedes people to become free customers. Scholte also criticises this outlook since it "presumes that money and materialism are the be-all and end-all of politics", highlighting efficiency at the expense of fair equal opportunities. Of course, on the one hand we recognise that market rules are efficient and governments should allow freedom for these rules dynamics to operate. But, on the other hand, there is something that markets cannot provide, and that is, public goods. <fnote>Global communication, for instance, represents an important modern development but only a minority of individuals can enjoy such an innovation. Many people are disconnected from the so- called world-wide web. Only very few people have fax machines or access to the internet, TV and some do not even have a radio or a telephone. We face again the same unequal access to global benefits (such as high technologies) among and within states. </fnote><fnote>See Jan Aart Scholte, "The Globalization of World Politics" in Baylis, John and Steve Smith (eds.). The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997) p. 27. </fnote>On the positive side, globalisation has improved economic security in some ways and for some people. We witness economies of scale for many producers, wider choices for many consumers and poverty has indeed declined in terms of UNDP Development Indicators. Successful outcomes like the 'Tigers of Asia' are a proof for this. Therefore, it is a non-sense to ask for a reverse of globalisation. To sabotage the WTO does not help the poor of the world. Globalisation is generating benefits like international division of labour, economies of scale and the rapid spread of innovations from one country to another, freedom of choice associated with the international movement of goods, capital, and people, and freedom of thought associated with the international movement of ideas. The benefits however, can be sustained only by efforts to correct the deficiencies. These deficiencies consist of an uneven distribution of benefits, instability of the financial system, the incipient threat of global monopolies and oligopolies, the ambiguous role of the state, and the question of values and social cohesion. History indeed shows that economic growth in developed countries has been achieved through trade and access to international capital while those developing countries which grown rapidly have followed the same path. However, these countries have been in the position to take advantage of global changes.  <fnote>Paul Mosley, Overseas aid: its defence and reform (Brighton : Wheatsheaf, 1987). </fnote><fnote>George Soros, "Towards a Global Open Society",  URL  January 1998, accessed 24.01.2004. </fnote><fnote>Howard White, "Pro-poor Growth in a Globalised Economy", Journal of International Development, 13, 549-569, 2001. </fnote>On the negative side, globalisation engenders a loss of economic security. Poverty is still rampant, the absolute number of poor has grown, and most of the South has not become NICs (sub-Saharan Africa). Generally, as a result of globalisation we witness a decline of the welfare state, increased unemployment, and increased immigration. Making poorer even poorer and richer even richer, globalisation widens the gap between the rich and the poor both within and among countries. Developing countries are still disadvantaged in comparison with industrialised ones, and thus are marginalized from the benefits of globalisation while their people are not informed about why this situation is not changing and why they are so isolated while others enjoy abundant wealth. The Uruguay Round of negotiations of the GATT meetings has in fact, strengthened a system, which is biased against developing countries that are still unjustly affected by tariff barriers. In sum, the processes of globalisation are said to result in a minority of winners and a majority of losers. But how exactly does globalisation prompt more aid? <fnote>The literature on globalisation is extensive. For more information on the negative impact of globalisation see Scholte, Jan Aart, Globalization: A Critical Introduction (London: Palgrave, 2000) or Jeremy Brecher and Tim Costello, Global Village or Global Pillage: Economic Reconstruction From the Bottom Up (Cambridge: MA: South End Press, 2nd ed. 1998) or John Gray, False Dawn: The Delusions of Global Capitalism (London: Granta, 2002). </fnote><fnote>Martin, Hans-Peter and Harald Schumann, The Global Trap: Globalization and the Assault on Democracy and Prosperity (London: Zed Books, 1997). </fnote>Opening markets, attracting capital in a "race to the bottom", and outward-oriented economic policies, have become the orthodoxy of the new emerging global era. Therefore, redistribution mechanisms (such as progressive taxation) and the provisions of the welfare state seem to have been swept away by the new wave of efficiency and global competitiveness ideology of the neo-liberal elite. Some of the critics of neo-liberalism advance hypotheses of a jobless future (caused by raising unemployment, labour saving technologies, mergers and acquisition, downsizing of enterprises and relocation of stages of production in low cost areas). Insecurity and worsening working conditions all around the globe are due to this race to the bottom and downward levelling caused by economic globalisation. The basic idea is that the economies of states have to adapt to global competitiveness of global markets, finance, and capital. Attracting foreign investments for capital inflow means lowering taxation, offering good conditions for business to flourish. Higher profit is made, if there are fewer workers, working more hours, having low social protection, with less respect for the environment and with less safety at the workplace. If they do not conform, companies can always move their manufacturing stage elsewhere, where there is a cheaper labour and conditions for making fast profit. <fnote>Jeremy Brecher and Tim Costello, Global Village or Global Pillage: Economic Reconstruction From the Bottom Up (Cambridge: MA: South End Press, 2nd ed. 1998). </fnote>Thus, even in the developed countries, because of the general restructuring, there is rising unemployment and low job security. The global capital volatility caused by liberalisation of financial flows is a serious problem. States have to comply in order to retain it. Lower taxes, subsidies to new businesses, building infrastructure, all of these cause huge deficits. The state does not have any money left for assuring social protection and for social expenditure (hence the deteriorating health, education or other social fields). Moreover, the pressure for a neo-liberal path of development in many developing countries has neglected the improper conditions such as too weak foundations for capital inflows and lack of redistribution, substantial equal opportunities and access to benefits. As already mentioned, economic globalisation has a negative impact especially in developing countries since they do not have the prerequisite to access its benefits. By prerequisite it is also intended for instance, infrastructure (to facilitate market participation even for those people from remote areas), human capital (skilled workers, trained professionals), access to information and knowledge, political stability (rule of law and institutional development). As Mosley suggests, in some developing countries, liberalisation or privatisation are not right or wrong but irrelevant since there are no markets and hence the issues is how to create them and not how to 'unleash' them.  <fnote>Paul Mosley, "Attacking Poverty and the 'Post-Washington Consensus'", Journal of International Development, 13, pp. 307-313, 2001. </fnote>The situation is made even worse for the poor countries of the South by the mounting external debt. Paying the interest means less money for social services and economic recovery. Moreover, debt is associated with economic uncertainty and instability which in turn discourages private investments. Most HIPC debt is to the World Bank and IMF and hence cannot be relieved. How can poverty be alleviated in this context? Generally one can say that "Without massive resource transfers from rich to poor countries, coupled with stronger efforts to ensure that these transfers reach, benefit and empower poor people, the world will continue to have far more hungry people (...)". Hence, as the chapter has tried to point out, economic globalisation generates just another call for aid to support developing countries. <fnote>Tisch and Wallace , Dilemmas of Development Assistance: The What, Why, and Who of Foreign Aid, 1994, p. 135. </fnote>The next section will focus on aid as an instrument for reducing poverty, its effectiveness and its capacity to alleviate the pernicious impact of economic globalisation on world poverty. The chapter will emphasise the difficulty to measure the impact of aid, the purpose of aid giving and the history of aid as overlapping to a certain extent with the history of globalisation and neo-liberalism. <heading>3. IS FOREIGN AID MAKING A DIFFERENCE? </heading>The following chapter considers foreign aid as an essential redistribution mechanism in establishing a new global order. Aid, as defined by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), represents the flows of resources provided by the official agencies or governments with the purpose of promoting economic development and welfare for the recipient countries. Aid must be concessional in nature, with an interest rate below that of the market and it must contain a grant element of al least 25% of the total package. How effective is aid in alleviating the damaging impact of economic globalisation on world poverty described in the above section? The chapter shows that foreign aid is a complement rather a beneficial supplement of globalisation. Generally most of the foreign aid has been bilateral aid and its origin can be traced back to the Cold War times of ideological confrontation between the United States of America and the Soviet Union. Consequently its starting point reveals its nature as a foreign policy instrument with clear political objectives for the donor country, namely, 'buying' loyalty by pushing a recipient to embrace a certain ideological stance and enter a certain camp. However, there are authors who believe that humanitarian and moral concerns have actually led to aid giving. Lumsdaine, for instance, points out to the fact that generally the supporters of aid have been leftists concerned with reducing inequalities, social welfare advocates, NGOs activists concerned with helping the Third World. It was exactly the case that those who had strategic commercial or selfish considerations in mind were actually against aid. The right generally perceives aid as a kind of welfare state policy, which created dependency and bureaucracy. Lumsdaine's conclusion is that "national interest justifies a general commitment to making the world a better place" Moreover, in the cosmopolitan theory of humane internationalism it is stated that people in developed states have a moral duty to help poor people in underdeveloped or developing nations. World equity and welfare is also in the interests of the Western world. The present paper emphasises the creed of reform internationalism which denies market fundamentalism: the market alone is neither efficient nor sufficient in poverty (and inequality) reduction. <fnote>David Halloran Lumsdaine, Moral Vision in International Politics: The Foreign Aid Regime 1949-1989 (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1993), p. 139 </fnote><fnote>Olav Stokke, "Foreign Aid: What Now" in Olav Stokke (ed.) Foreign Aid Towards the Year 2000: Experiences and Challenges (London: Frank Cass, 1996), </fnote>A brief look at the history of foreign aid may offer good evidence for the basic argument of the present paper, namely that foreign aid's contribution to poverty reduction is in fact perpetuating globalisation's harmful impact since they both operate with the same standard neo-liberal methods. First, during the 1950s - 1960s foreign aid had macro-economic objectives: economic growth was paramount because of the assumption that it will certainly 'trickle-down' the benefits in order to combat poverty. Moreover, it was believed that inequality should not be a policy concern since economic growth will reduce the numbers of persons living in poverty. However, eventually it had been seen that efforts to stimulate economic growth do not necessarily contribute to poverty reduction let alone to reducing inequalities, a goal which, was not even targeted. Need of social services, transfer of resources and knowledge, education and training became urgent. <fnote>Rolph van der Hoeven, "Poverty and Structural Adjustment: Some Remarks on Tradeoff between Equity and Growth" in Paul Mosley and Anne Booth (Eds.), The New Poverty Strategies: What Have They Achieved? What Have we Learned? (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003). </fnote>Consequently, the 1970s brought a lost in the credibility of this 'trickle-down' approach, and the need to target aid more directly to improve the situation of the poorer population was acknowledged. The belief that there is no universal recipe for development emerged, highlighting basic a human-needs strategy, endogenous path of development, self-reliance and structural transformation. This new approach was also influenced by the dependencia, the Latin school of thought, which advocated de-linking of the South from the industrial North. Aid was meant to be channelled directly to poor countries in terms of low GNP per capita, which might have contrasted with the commercial interests of donors. However, even with the new focus on social services, macro-economic concerns remained essential since the basic human-needs strategy was not contradictory but complementary to the commercial interests of donor countries and the new approach had a marginal effect. Most importantly, aid "was not made conditional on a good social justice performance".  <fnote>Stokke, "Foreign Aid: What Now", p. 73. </fnote>During the 1980s, neo-liberalism appeared as the predominant political ideology in the West reinforcing the macro-economic focus while the South was confronted with deep structural economic crisis. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) proposed the same cure as the one implemented in the North when trying to restore the balance of payments and in crisis management. Aid's purpose was to contribute to this macro-economic management but was not tailored to meet the specific needs of the individual recipient countries. <quote>While foreign capital was flooding into emerging markets - Latin America included- foreign debt payments more or less went unnoticed because we could not see the 'wood' (the weak, precarious reality of the countries of the region) for the 'trees' (incoming capital)." </quote><fnote>Humberto Campodonico, "The context of international development cooperation", The reality of aid: an independent review of poverty reduction and development assistance : the reality of aid project (London : Earthscan, 2000), p. 7. </fnote>After this capital flow diminished the crisis began. Economic growth, though contributing to poverty reduction to some extent, has brought about increased unequal distribution of income and social inequality especially in Africa, Eastern Asia and Latin America. The reform package was indeed a clear promotion of the neo-liberal policy by generally reducing the role of state and strengthening the position of free markets to the detriment of public goods provision which are vital components in poverty reduction. Interference with the domestic policy was made clear by conditioning external development support on external administration monitored by the IMF and the World Bank. Campodonico' s conclusion is that "there should be as much market as possible and as much State as necessary." Consequently, as mentioned earlier, aid can be seen as a complement and not supplement in the sense of correcting the deficiencies of neo-liberal globalisation processes. <fnote>Stokke, "Foreign Aid: What Now". </fnote><fnote>Campodonico, "The context of international development cooperation", p. 12. </fnote><quote>(...) development assistance became increasingly an instrument in the promotion of economic policy reform in developing countries. The linking of development finance to a commitment by the recipient government to structural adjustments in the general direction of a liberal economic regime became the most manifest expression of this policy.</quote><fnote>Stokke, "Foreign Aid: What Now", p. 43. </fnote>Nevertheless, there are other factors, which hinder a pro-poor macroeconomic and political framework, such as lack of clear knowledge on the causes of poverty, lack of concerted donor action, inconsistency between donor's conditions and their own practices at home. The objectives of foreign aid are not necessarily and not always consistent with poverty reduction since the reasons for offering aid are not necessarily and not always humanitarian altruist reasons. Only 69 percent of aid are offered to low-income countries. Strategic considerations of state-interest can actually determining donor countries to reduce aid. "Aid has increasingly became 'commercialised' and bilateral aid agencies have increasingly advertised the 'return flow' of aid: the share of ODA that has been used to buy commodities and services at home." The United States, the dominant power in world politics nowadays, has always spent only a small amount of aid on countries of little strategic interest. Also, the kind of aid offered is inappropriate (in terms of technology and absorptive capacity of the recipients) and can actually harm the poor by asking for more sacrifices on their part or by keeping them still away from the possibility to benefit. The self-interest of the donor countries may actually be deleterious for the population in recipient countries. <fnote>Tony German, Judith Randel, "Trends towards the new millennium", The reality of aid :an independent review of poverty reduction and development assistance : the reality of aid project. 2000 (London : Earthscan, 2000). </fnote><fnote>Stokke, "Foreign Aid: What Now", p. 107. </fnote><fnote>Mosley, Overseas aid: its defence and reform. </fnote>Moreover, sometimes the recipient countries do not give high priority to poverty reduction. Foreign aid negotiations are primarily political instead of professional. These negotiations are eventually futile since once the implementation of the policy or project starts, there is no actual control of the process anyway. As Hyden mentions nobody actually owns aid because while the donor imposes some strings, it also has to accept the recipient's interests and hence in the actual practice control become very ambiguous. Moreover, recipient governments became more concerned with donor's view and neglect their constituencies. In addition, political actors in recipient countries seem to be more interested in seeking a clientelistic or cartelistic allegiance which encourages 'bargain over a slice of the pie rather than how to make the pie bigger".  <fnote>Cassen, Robert & Associates  Does aid work? : report to an intergovernmental task force (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994). </fnote><fnote>Goran Hyden, "From Bargaining to Marketing: How to Reform Foreign Aid in the 1990s", Olav Stokke (ed.) Foreign Aid Towards the Year 2000: Experiences and Challenges (London: Frank Cass, 1996), p. 207. </fnote><fnote>Hyden, "From Bargaining to Marketing: How to Reform Foreign Aid in the 1990s", p. 199. </fnote>However, the good news is that we witnessed a post- Washington consensus: the World Bank has actually acknowledged that economic growth and poverty reduction has not been successful in the 1980s and 1990s while financial liberalisation (with weak regulation and volatility of capital flow) generated severe disturbance in economic performance. Consequently, the New World Development Report (2000 and 2001) has been surprisingly 'inconsistent' with the previous neo-liberal approach. The 2001 Report has added the 'pillars' of opportunity, empowerment and security to the 2000 ones of labour-intensity, investment in human capital, and social safety nets. These new pillars demonstrate a broadening manner of understanding poverty and its causes. Selectivity, aid being directed to 'good', namely, democratic governments has replaced conditionality. Moreover, the focus on sector aid has its own shortcomings too since it may become just another name for project-aid, which has proved to be poor-oblivious, uncoordinated, fragmented, unsustainable and, given the donor's pursuit of commercial interests. Consequently, the impact of these new changes is open to criticism especially because there seem to be no consensus within the World Bank on the path to be followed while the previous approaches still remain. "One aspect, then, of the Bank's retreat from liberalisation is a simple change in expository style: from aggressive advocacy of specific policies to a much more agnostic posture (...)". Donors' commitment should be more than just rhetoric. <fnote>Paul Mosley, "Attacking Poverty and the 'Post-Washington Consensus'". </fnote><fnote>White. "Will the New Aid Agenda Help Promote Poverty Reduction?". </fnote><fnote>Mosley, "Attacking Poverty and the 'Post-Washington Consensus". </fnote>Consequently, it is generally said that aid has failed to reduce poverty. Aid is indeed an instrument for poverty combat but its power to reduce poverty is only minor. Even if the target of the donors in adopting the Shaping the 21 st Century strategy would be achieved in 2015, there will still be 900 million people living in absolute poverty which is indeed morally unacceptable. As the chapter has tried to emphasise, the crisis of foreign aid is actually part of the overall crisis of our changing globalised world since the discourse of globalisation has captured the practice of foreign aid institution too. <heading>4. CONCLUSION</heading>As shown in the essay, globalisation as the dominant meta-narrative has also become the ideological framework in international assistance. The paper has focused, at a high level of generalisation, on the negative impact of economic globalisation on world poverty. Globalisation (i.e. the spread of market capitalism) accentuates poverty and social inequities instead of being the medicine to cure these problems. In line with the tenet of reform internationalism, the present paper denies the negative component of globalisation, namely, market fundamentalism. The market alone is neither efficient nor sufficient in poverty (and inequality) reduction. As John Gray rightly asserts "Economic globalisation does not strengthen the current regime of global laissez-faire. It works to undermine it". That is so because pure free markets can only exist if there is no need for human concern. <fnote>John Gray, False Dawn: The Delusions of Global Capitalism, (London: Granta, 2002) p. 7. </fnote>The paper has also argued that globalisation has a negative impact especially in developing countries since they do not have the prerequisite to access its benefits. How can one developing state let the markets do their job to improve economic performance when there is no market or possibility to participate in market transactions? Economic growth has not been successful in terms of poverty (and inequality) reduction since the neo-liberal 'recipe' has generally neglected the specific country situation. Consequently, economic globalisation has generated just another call for aid to support developing states in coping with global competitiveness. However, as shown in the paper, aid is generally perceived as ineffective in terms of poverty reduction. Aid programs have been designed in the same neo-liberal blueprint, neglecting the fragile conditions for markets and liberalisation. Moreover, as in a vicious circle, aid economic conditionality, especially in the 1980s reiterated the neo-liberal requirement for liberalisation which may bring economic growth but do not reach the poor. Aid has been a complement rather than a supplement of globalisation, ineffective in correcting its deficiencies. Nevertheless, the fact that globalisation has also losers does not mean that it should be resisted. The problem is that they are unaffected by it and hence marginalised. Remote parts of Africa and even of India or China are technologically disconnected. Foreign aid's contribution to poverty reduction in these regions is in fact perpetuating globalisation's harmful impact. They both operate with the same standard neo-liberal methods relying solely on the power of free markets. Unfortunately, free markets do not serve the poor. So far, it has been the other way around. 