<heading>1. Introduction</heading>To meet growing demand for the Flexi-Connector, there is an opportunity to invest in production capacity. This report analyses three possible investments into expanding the existing product line using the Net Present Value (NPV) method of appraisal. The NPV technique calculates whether an investment yields a return in excess of other available investments of equal risk. NPV = sum of discounted net cash flows from the investment - investment outlay. <heading>2. Section One </heading><heading>2.1. Summary of NPV Results </heading>Table 1 displays a summary of the three different NPV calculations used to evaluate each investment. See appendix, figures 5 to 9 for the detailed breakdowns of these NPV calculations and appendix, figure 1 for the assumptions made. Table 2 shows the basic facts about each investment. Compotech should only invest if the return is greater than the opportunity cost (NPV>=0). I.e. the cost of not being able to invest the firm's capital elsewhere. <table/><table/><heading>2.2. Results from Calculation One </heading>This first set of calculations highlights Waltham as the only attractive investment. Additionally, Waltham makes a very sound investment if its capacity cannot be used to extend other product lines and if it would not be profitable to sell. The use of a 20% discount rate is well above the cost of capital (10%), which means that unforeseen cash outflows and other risks have been generously accounted for. Therefore, in reality, the NPVs are likely to be of a higher value. Compotech operates in a rapidly changing environment so estimating demand, costs and prices in ten years time is a far more inaccurate task than making estimations within a five-year time horizon (see p.5 limitation b). Therefore, the net cash flows and NPVs calculated with a five-year lifespan are more accurate, but ignore the fact that the lifespan of all three investments is likely to be more than five years. I recommend focusing on the less accurate NPVs that reflect the true lifespan of each investment. <heading>2.3. Results from Calculation Two </heading>The lower the discount rate, the greater the present value of future cash inflows, so this calculation using a 10% discount rate improves the NPV of all three investments. Waltham still shows the most promising return within five years, mainly due to the small outlay it requires. <fnote>According to Elizabeth, a 10% discount rate is a more realistic figure because it approximates Compotech's cost of capital. </fnote><heading>2.4. Results from Calculation Three </heading>A ten-year time horizon is a better estimate of the investment's life. Conversely, within ten years, equipment may need to be replaced or technological advancement may outdate the Flexi-Connector, so an investment in R&D will be required to modify the product. Such potential costs and their associated probability of occurrence need to be accounted for because these costs will have different implications for each investment. Since Ireland has the largest capacity and therefore can potentially make the highest revenue as demand grows, the improvement in this investment's NPV is the greatest relative to the other alternatives. Ireland is clearly the most attractive investment when a ten-year lifespan is used. I assume that Jack says he has "bad news" for David and Elizabeth because their NPVs have been beaten. <heading>3. Section Two </heading><heading>3.1 Using NPV to Assess Alternative Investment Opportunities</heading><heading>Benefits to Compotech for using NPV:</heading>a.) Being a PLC, NPV is an appropriate measure for Compotech since it is consistent with the objective to maximise shareholder wealth. b.) It is easy compare (and add together, if necessary) absolute, monetary values. c.) Considers the time value of money (i.e. a pound today can be invested and is therefore worth more than a pound earned five years from now). This discounting technique reduces the value of future cash flows. d.) The risks associated with each investment can be incorporated via increasing the discount rate. e.) Uses cash flows and not profits, which eliminates accounting inconsistencies as the cash flows represent the benefits of the project rather than accounting profits. f.) Provides flexibility and depth as the NPV equation can adjust for inflation as well as incorporate other financial analysis tools such as sensitivity analysis, Monte Carlo simulation, etc. However, see limitation (a). <heading>Limitations of NPV's use: </heading>a.) NPV is static in the respect that it does not account for any capital and risk changes that may occur in the future as new information is obtained. Ignoring the value of flexibility 'may cause managers to undervalue projects and make serious capital budgeting mistakes." For example, Ireland may lead to expansion opportunities into the European market, which is not accounted for by NPV. I therefore recommend using the Real Options concept, which combines the NPV concept with managerial flexibility. <fnote>'A better understanding of why NPV undervalues managerial flexibility' (2002) by Feinstein & Lander. </fnote>b.) The discount rate and cash flows (especially 10 years from now) are difficult to estimate. The corporate finance staff should check Elizabeth's estimated discount rate against an investment of equivalent risk and with a known discount rate. c.) A heavy use of NPV in decision making can lead to an over-emphasis on the quantitative factors. Therefore, undertake a Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) alongside NPV, to incorporate the qualitative benefits from an investment into the decision-making. For example, consider the value Compotech places on operating in Ireland with closer proximity to the European market and more advance equipment? The results of CBA depend on Compotech's objectives. If their sole aim were to maximise shareholder wealth then estimating a monetary value for the qualitative factors of the investment would be appropriate. d.) Ranking projects by NPV may lead to incorrect decisions when it is possible to conduct many small, independent projects (i.e. Santa Clara and Waltham), which may have a higher combined NPV. In this situation the PI method of ranking is more useful than the NPV method. See appendix, figure 2. <fnote>In the case of investing in both Santa Clara & Watham, the NPVs cannot simply be added because adjustments need to be made, see appendix, figure 8. </fnote><heading>Further NPV Analysis</heading>Taxation Operating in different countries implies different tax burdens, capital allowances, etc. Therefore, it is important for the corporate finance staff to use the after tax cash flows for each NPV calculation. It is likely that the Ireland investment will become relatively more attractive due to government tax incentives. Inflation If cash flows will be affected differently by inflation (e.g. Labour costs rising at a faster rate than income) then adjustments need to be made. If all values are likely to rise at a general rate, the NPV values will be unaffected so no adjustment is required. It is important to treat inflation consistently by performing all calculations in the same inflation terms and by treating cash flows and the discount rate in the same way. Sensitivity Analysis Due to Compotech's rapidly changing environment, a sensitivity analysis should be conducted to find the critical success factors. Managers can then focus their attention on these factors to reduce the overall investment risk. For example, the lifespan is a critical success factor because the NPV of each investment increases drastically when the lifespan increases to ten years. Therefore, it is important that an accurate estimation of the duration of each investment is made. Additionally, a Monte Carlo simulation will considers all possible variable combinations, NPV outcomes and the associated probability distributions for further analysis. <fnote>These are the key drivers of the NPV value. </fnote><fnote>Go to office.microsoft.com/en-us/assistance/HA011118931033.aspx for use of Monte Carlo simulation in Excel. </fnote>Risk   <fnote>Risk; the probability of an undesirable outcome. </fnote>The risk associated with setting up a new plant in a new country is much greater than that of expanding or modifying an existing plant. This is because Compotech is less experienced and knowledgeable about the costs, legislation and business environment of operating in Ireland (assuming no previous experience). The plant in Ireland also takes much longer to pay back, see payback calculations, appendix, figure 3. Therefore, a risk factor should be incorporated into the NPV calculations, which is likely to worsen the NPV values of the Ireland investment due to its higher risk. 10. Life Span, Replacements & Terminal Value If the projects are found to have different life spans then conduct further analysis using either the 'equivalent annual cash flow' method. If the machines are to be replaced before 2003, then incorporate the estimated disposal and replacements values into the calculation. Also, if a plant will be sold for at the end of its life then incorporate its salvage value into the NPV calculation. <heading>3.2. Further Analysis & Recommendations</heading>I would not recommend basing an investment decision upon the rough NPV estimations made so far because the estimated demand, time horizons and discount rates used have not been accurately justified. I therefore recommend undertaking more thorough analysis as explained below to aid a better final decision. A SWOT analysis may help to identify more 'creative' investment opportunities in potentially more profitable areas. <fnote>Strengths. Weaknesses. Opportunities. Threats. </fnote>A detailed cash flow forecast for the next ten years, derived from a more accurate sales forecast. An accurate estimate of future demand is a fundamental foundation. A detailed breakdown of the investment outlays. Get quotes from potential contractors, etc. This is important if Compotech has no past experience of this unique investment. I have not assumed mutually exclusive investments, enabling both Santa Clara and Waltham to be invested in. I have calculated the combined NPV (figure 8), PI (figure 2) and payback (figure 3) for this combined investment. The combined capacity of Santa Clara and Waltham is 55 million units, which will satisfy an annual 10% demand growth for the next seven years. Further Financial Appraisal Analysis: 5.a. Profitability Index (PI) The PI index is similar the NPV except PI divides the total net cash flow by the total investment outlay and hence should be greater or equal to one. PI is useful to Compotech because it easily ranks investment alternatives in terms of cost vs. benefit. Appendix, figure 2. The PI consistently ranks Waltham as the best investment regardless of the lifespan or discount rate selected. 5.b. Payback (PBP) The results from the payback calculations (appendix, figure 3) show that Waltham is the quickest to pay back. It would be particularly beneficial for Compotech to select Waltham as their investment if the company experiences cash flow problems. Talk to the corporate finance staff about the state of the company's liquidity. 5.c. Internal Rate of Return (IRR) & Accounting Rate Of Return (ARR) I have not included the calculation of IRR or ARR in this report because not all investment appraisal techniques are required. PI and PBP are useful for companies with constrained investment funds, as I have assumed is the case for Compotech. <heading>4. Conclusion</heading>Santa Clara The NPVs indicate that Santa Clara makes a good long term investment, that's slightly worse than Waltham. Santa Clara requires $9m more but has a larger capacity and lower fixed costs. Even though the cost of the site has already been covered, I would recommend Waltham as a more attractive prospect. Ireland If Compotech are looking for a long term, high risk and potentially high return investment then Ireland is the one to chose because its NPV over ten years is the highest (providing the cost if capital is 10% or less). However, I recommend eliminating this investment on the assumption that shareholders will demand an investment with a faster return and in such a rapidly changing market, it is hard to predict future variables. Ireland's long term success is highly dependent on demand maintaining its 10% annual growth rate for ten consecutive years. For example, if the demand growth rate falls to 5% per annum after 1998, the NPV will fall to $ 37,702,731  and the plant won't reach its optimal capacity within ten years. This will incur inefficiency costs and make the other investments more attractive. Even under the 10% growth rate, the optimal capacity will not be met for seven years even, which results in wasted capacity so fixed costs are being spread thickly over few units. <fnote>At a discount rate of 10% for 10 years. </fnote>Waltham It is important to consider the other potential uses of Waltham's capacity. If this spare capacity will be wasted or redundant then I would definitely recommend investing in Waltham so as not to forgo this opportunity cost and because the NPVs reflect that this is a low risk investment with good short and long term returns. Waltham's maximum capacity will also be met within roughly four years, so fixed costs can be quickly spread across many units to reduce total unit cost. However, this does not satisfy long-term demand growth, which forgoes future revenue opportunities. Therefore, if demand continues to grow, invest in the Santa Clara plant 1996 so it will be ready to produce in 1998 (i.e. the year that Waltham meets its maximum capacity). I assume that funds are available for both these investments. See appendix, figure 8. N.B. The recommends are subject to the results of any further analysis. 