<heading>Introduction</heading>We have decided to compare the inflation rate and GDP growth rate of Malaysia and United Kingdom in this assignment. Malaysia is a developing country, situated in Southeast Asia. Its growth for the past three decades is one of Asia's fastest. Malaysia transformed itself from a raw material producer into an emerging multi-sector economy. Growth was driven by exports, mainly in the electronics industries, and as a result, Malaysia was hit hard during the global economic slowdown in the year 1997 to early 2000. Malaysia's main export destinations are the United States, Singapore and Japan. These three countries account for almost half of Malaysia's export. The United Kingdom is a developed country, situated in Western Europe. It was the dominant industrial and maritime power of the 19 th century. During the two world wars, United Kingdom's economic might depleted. After the dismantling of the British Empire, the UK underwent a massive rebuilding process, converting it into a modern and prosperous country today. The United Kingdom is a leading trade power, and it is also one of the world's financial capitals. Tertiary industries, particularly banking, insurance, and business services account for the largest proportion of UK's GDP, while industry declined in importance. United Kingdom's main trading partners are United States, Germany and France. <heading>The Model</heading>In this model, we hypothesize that inflation and GDP growth are positively related. This ought to be consistent with the idea that an increase in output would result in an increase in consumption, hence an increase in the price level. A detailed rationale behind the choice of countries and variables will be provided later on. <heading>The Process</heading>However, before we dwell further into the results of the analysis, we should explain the process that we used in order to get the results above. First of all, we chose the two variables. He, we chose inflation and GDP growth. These variables were chosen because of the uniqueness of their relationship. Economists have been arguing on whether there is a close, if not any, relationship between inflation and GDP growth. We decided that we would like to analyse this arguments on our own. After choosing the variables, we needed to choose two countries. In order to have a distinct comparison, we decided on choosing Malaysia and United Kingdom. The decision to choose these two countries was based on the fact that the pairing offers us a developing-developed country combination and also due to our familiarity of these two countries. Next, we collected time series data on inflation and GDP growth of these two countries. The data was collected from the World Development Indicators CD and was imported to Excel. The data collected were annual observations from the year 1961 to the year 2001. We chose to collect the data for only 40 years because we believe that the period is long enough for us to see the relationship between the two chosen variables. This period also includes the years of economic crisis, such as the world oil crisis in the 1970s and also Asian economics slowdown in 1997. No seasonal adjustment of the data was required since there is no seasonal component in the data. Even if there were a seasonal component in the data (the business cycle), it would be quite impossible to de-seasonalize it since the length of a period in a cycle is never the same and hence de-seasonalizing would just prove to be a futile exercise. Using the data analysis tools in Excel, a detailed analysis on the data was made. The results of this analysis are given in Table 1. Scatter diagrams of each country's GDP growth and inflation were plotted. Scatter diagrams show the relationship, if any, between variables. Graphs of inflation and GDP growth for both countries from the year 1961 to 2001 were also plotted. These graphs were drawn in order to see the trends and movements of the variables over the years, and also the relationship between the two variables' trend. <heading>The Results</heading><table/>Looking at Table 1, we observe that for some statistical indicators, the results from both sets of data differ significantly. For example, from the sample variance and also standard deviation, we can see that the GDP growth in Malaysia diverged more from the mean compared to United Kingdom's. An interesting point that should be pointed out is the distinction between the mean of both variables for both countries. United Kingdom had a mean inflation of 6.8% and mean GDP growth of 2.5%. Meanwhile, Malaysia had a GDP growth mean of 2.9% and an inflation mean of 7%. These figures weaken the argument that inflation and GDP growth have a positive relationship since the data shows otherwise. Figure 1 shows Malaysia's inflation and GDP growth rate from 1961 to 2001. Up to the early of 70s, Malaysia had a generally high GDP growth rate and also very low inflation. The GDP growth rate in that period was constantly over 5% and inflation sometimes dipped under 0%. From the 70s to middle of the 80s, both inflation and GDP growth rate fluctuated rapidly, with inflation at first skyrocketing to around 18% in the early 70s and turning into deflation in 1975. In 1985, there was a slump, causing negative GDP growth and also a deflation of about 8%. After that, Malaysia recovered with a high GDP growth of around 8% and an inflation rate of around 4%. This lasted until 1997, when an economic downturn caused the GDP growth to dip under 0% and the inflation rate to rise to around 8%. In Figure 2, United Kingdom's GDP growth rate and inflation were plotted for the years 1961 to 2001. Up to the 70s, United Kingdom had an inflation rate and GDP growth rate of around 3-5%. Following that, the inflation rate started to climb rapidly, reaching around 26% in 1975. At the same time, GDP growth slumped to around -1%. The economy recovered after that with the inflation rate falling to around 14% and GDP growth at 3%. In the early 80s, the GDP growth rate once again sub-zeroed and inflation rose to around 19%. Since then, the inflation rate fell steadily to around 4% level and the GDP growth rate also steadied around 4%, except for the years 1990- 1992, when inflation rose to around 7% and GDP growth rate fell to around -1%. In Figures 3 and 4, inflation and GDP growth rate for each country were plotted on scatter diagrams. From the scatter diagram, we could draw a regression line. For Malaysia, the regression line equation is  FORMULA  Meanwhile, for United Kingdom, the regression line equation is  FORMULA  We also managed to get the correlation coefficient for both set of data. The coefficients were calculated using Excel tools. The following are the coefficients. <table/>From the correlation coefficients, we can see that the results for Malaysia and United Kingdom differ. For Malaysia, the positive coefficient shows that there is a direct relation between the variables, while the negative coefficient for United Kingdom indicates an inverse relation. In conclusion, we found that there is insufficient evidence to support our hypothesis that the two variables are positively related. This is proved by the correlation coefficients and also the scatter diagrams. There are a few possible explanations regarding this conclusion. One of the possible explanations is that since Malaysia is a developing country and United Kingdom is a developed country, there might be a different relationship between variables. One can argue that this distinct economic background of both countries might result in these countries react differently to shocks. The degree of dependency on foreign trade of these two countries differs greatly. Hence these two countries might react differently to price changes. A developed country might have a bigger foreign reserve and stronger currency compared to a developing country. Another reason that no relationship can be found through this analysis is that due to the difference in the time lag between the reactions of the variables in both countries. The time lag in United Kingdom seemed to be consistent (about 2 years), meaning that a rise or fall in GDP growth was followed by inflation rising or falling 2 years later. However, in Malaysia the lag in the reaction varies. Hence comparing the data of the two variables of the two countries while observing the time lags would be quite impossible. An academic might also argue that the Keynesian view of inflation accompanying economic growth should be revised. It is because, in today's world, where the economy is affected by so many factors, a standard rule might not apply. For instance, in this analysis, the different background conditions for Malaysia and United Kingdom lead to totally different results. <figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><heading>Conclusion</heading>Having done this analysis, we can conclude that there is no evidence to support our initial hypothesis that inflation and GDP growth are positively related. In this report, simple statistical tools in Excel were used to determine measures of centrality and dispersion, the least square regression equation and the coefficient of correlation between the variables of each country. Changes and movement in inflation and GDP growth in Malaysia and the UK have also been summarized here. This assignment and the preparation of this report have helped us develop our experience in using official statistics and programming a spreadsheet. It has also aided us in increasing our understanding of economics and statistics. 