A change in oil price is what economists would usually refer to as a supply shock, that is a shift in the aggregate supply (AS), hence leading to a change in employment level. Before that, the price setting relation of wages and other factors of production need to be studied carefully. The general price level of goods and services in the economy is determined as a function of the sum of factor payments, such as wages, rent etc. Since this essay is concerned about the effects on employment due to a rise in oil prices, it shall be assumed that in the economy only labour and oil are the factors of production. Factor payments for labour are called wages and oil, rent (since oil is basically a product of land). It shall also be assumed that the economy is not perfectly competitive; hence there will be a chance to make supernormal profits. Hence the general price level is defined as  FORMULA  Where a unit of labour is paid W and a unit of oil paid R. a and b are how many units of labour and oil used to produce a unit of output and M is the profit obtained per unit of output, otherwise known as the markup. Rearranging the variable in the equation to form what is known as the price setting relation, the real wage is  FORMULA  The equilibrium real wage and unemployment rate are determined when the price setting and wage setting curves are put together. The wage setting curve slopes downwards since a reduction in the real wages will lead to more people being willing to forgo working (in return for consumption), since the incentive for people to work, due to the substitution effect. <figure/>Looking at the real wage equation (price setting relation), an increase in the price of oil will cause real wages to fall, and this will be demonstrated by a downward shift of the price setting curve. At the new equilibrium, real wages are lower and the unemployment rate is higher (Unemployment has increased to U2). <figure/>The increase in oil prices can be demonstrated in the aggregate supply and demand model also to show the effects on unemployment. An increase in oil prices will cause the AS curve to shift to the left. This is because to produce a particular amount of output now, it costs more than before to do so. As observed from the diagram, the general price level has increased and output has gone down. This reduction in output would cause fewer resources to be employed - workers laid off or less oil used or both, depending on the marginal rate of technical substitution of both resources. But it is quite obvious that an increase in oil prices would lead to a reduction of both resources since labour and oil (land) are complements to each other. Hence unemployment would follow. An increase in oil prices may also affect the aggregate demand curve and not just aggregate supply. Oil price increases lead to the AD curve to shift downwards. Rising oil prices may cause firms to change investment decisions such as by postponing or canceling investment. Less oil changing hands may mean that governments collect less oil royalties or oil taxes and hence affect its ability to sustain public expenditure at previous levels. However, it may also work the other way round. Consider an oil producing economy. An increase in oil prices may allow this oil economy to enjoy higher profits, depending on the price elasticity of demand of oil. Although production of oil will be lowered and some workers employed in this industry laid off, profits from firms accumulated can be injected into the economy when firms decide to reinvest profits through other sectors causing aggregate demand and employment to increase. Or consider an economy which produces a competing fuel such as coal or uranium. Rising oil prices in the long run may cause countries to consider these forms of fuel and substitute them in place of oil. A reduction in the use of oil will cause the economy to be less reactive and elastic to the change in oil prices in the future and in the long run and so there would be little effect on unemployment. As a whole it can be seen that it is usually likely that an increase in oil prices will lead to an increase in the level of unemployment and though it is possible that the employment level may actually rise, it is very unlikely and would usually occur in oil exporting countries, which most countries aren't anyway. However in the long run, as economies start replacing oil with other forms of fuel, the effects on unemployment, and the natural rate of unemployment in particular would be minimal. 