The question of law's gender neutrality, originating from the ancient Greeks has today become an issue of principal concern in the legal system. Women, traditionally assigned to private and domestic spheres, devoid of rights and freedoms through our patriarchal society is the archetypal example of social inequality. Early feminists, conscious of the issues argue gender is not a simple division of the sexes: a marked distinction between gender and sex exists. Sex is the biological categorisation, whilst gender is the socially constructed representation of sex. It is no surprise that the exploration of this essay will be on the inequalities of women in the law regarding its claimed 'gender neutrality; for very few discrepancies against men exist. Indeed anthropologist Bradislaw Malinovski argued that from the earliest times women's interests were assigned, from the men in power, to a position of child bearing and nurturing. I shall investigate whether the 'modern legal system' of the 21 st century, supposedly liberal, equal and rights conscious delivers, or whether the antiquated, patriarchal roots still breathe masculinity as defiantly as the laws male-dominated creators. Feminism, the largest critique of gender neutrality makes fundamental criticism of laws foundations, suggesting that despite reform legal issues that appear "facially neutral exclude and disadvantage women." Early feminists mark the conceptualisation of gender, distinguishing from sex, and thus identifying the issues from feminine perspectives. The social perception of sex organises "every realm of our life." It orders and divides life, making distinctions. But why are these distinctions important? Gender "privileges the male over the female" dividing sex into a hierarchal system, perceived by its opposites with "the male half positive and the female negative:" two opposing divisions have emerged. <fnote>Atkins and Hogget 1984 </fnote><fnote>Gender Studies, Terms and Debates page 1 </fnote><fnote>Gender Studies, Terms and Debates page 1 </fnote><fnote>Gender Studies, Terms and Debates page 1 </fnote>Whilst legal theories adopt either internal or external rationale, Feminism occupies a third perspective: the interpretive, aspiring to a critical interpretation of legal practices, linking theory to practice. Feminism analyses law not only from female perspectives, but from positions of equality and neutrality, rationalising and explaining legal reasoning democratically, fairly. Liberal feminism emerged through liberal political thought (dominant in the west) during the Enlightenment, focusing on universal, equal citizenship and rights for women including Formal equality and equal opportunity; although formalistic concepts such as Dworkin's are much stronger. Indeed Nedelsky, a liberal instils women's right to autonomy and the need to be self building, with equal opportunity to do so. Liberalism supports many ideals, but its division of life into public and private spheres supports women's subordination. The private sphere is liberal, unregulated providing a haven for male domination behind the façade of public life: law's reaction to female rights violations contrasts between public and private spheres, e.g. domestic rape vs. public rape. <fnote>Nedelsky (1989, 2-3) </fnote>Radical Feminism, the most autonominous and distinctive conception claims to be the only exclusively feminist theory, viewing sex difference as more radical than class or race. It is strongly utopian, wanting to re-evaluate women's position in society. Liberal feminists are contentious with specific laws existing to disadvantage women, whilst radical feminism purports that law's very essence, the legal reasoning embodied within, reinforces male superiority. The concept of objectivity, whilst theoretically formally equal, always contains masculine standpoints where persuasive male power exists, e.g. legal profession. As women have not occupied this position, laws integral objective perspective is non-representative of their values. Even our language reflects male dominance. <quote>"man fucks woman: subject verb object"</quote><fnote>Jurisprudence and Legal Theory: Commentary and Materials </fnote>Male dominance underlies our society, law and theoretical approaches (e.g. Aristotle's Pythagorean Table) adopting masculine philosophies, reflecting the male paradigm. Olsen illustrates societies "binary division," associating gender with societies predominant characteristics, and male predilection with these dualisms: <list><heading>Male / Female:</heading>Rational / irrationalReason / emotionPower / sensitivityObjective / subjectiveAbstract / contextualizedPrinciplalized / personalized</list>Despite assuming some generalisations, it is representative of the male paradigm and women's perception in society. Olsen argues that men oppress and exploit women, whilst still idolising them, placing them on a pedestal in a fantasy world. Is this biased, unbalanced approach an ideal legal system? Olsen makes this analogous with Nature: the ultimate male conquest where realistically we degrade and exploit the natural world. Whilst men "romanticize" with the womanly virtues, the law's dominant ideology is masculine: the rational is still held above the irrational; the legal perspective is entirely male. It is "rational, objective, abstract and principled;" the very masculine virtues we model our system on. Gilligan illustrates law's essence as male orientated in her debate of whether a husband should steal medicine he cannot afford to aid his dying wife. The male approach of "Jake" is logical, the greater good equating to justification, whilst perhaps identifying with naturalistic theories. The female approach is communicative, preventative, avoiding conflicts of rights. It is pragmatic, relating to relationships and understanding the truths in context. The masculine approach reflects our legal system, yet which is best? Abstract principles or contextually based preventative solutions? This question drives into further issues, such as formalistic or naturalistic approaches to law, but highlights the masculinity of positivism, naturalism and liberalism (societies division). Irigaray concurs, commenting that "the written law is established for men." <fnote>Gilligan (1982, 25-31, 173-3) </fnote><fnote>Irrigaray (1994, 59-63) </fnote>It is evident within law that patriarchal divisions exist. Malinovski proclaims women have been assigned by the dominant men globally to the private sphere of life, assisted by liberalism. The practice of Chinese Footbinding (12 th century) to instil purity and femininity illustrates male domination; as does female circumcision, which continues in the Middle-East and South-America for male benefit, securing purity. It is painful and obnoxious yet so entrenched that females enforce the practice, a poignant example of male supremacy. The custom of witch hunting, a typically male exercise was justified by women threatening religion and social order. The underlying truth is more plausible with the eradication of many spinsters who were an obvious threat to society's patriarchal establishment: independent women had freedoms that endangered male authority. Law traditionally treats wives in a manner that stresses the husband's supremacy. Until 1882 the husband was the sole owner of property, justified by women's "special status" or more realistically, inferior status. The "husband and wife are one person" and the "very being and legal existence of the woman is suspended during marriage," supporting Aristotle's concept of a woman as chattels. Further indication of the law's bias is indicated by previous divorce law where men committing adultery could be sued for damages, where as a woman could be divorced "without more." Fortunately property law has become increasingly gender neutral, largely following Lord Denning's developments, e.g. Deserted wife's equity, establishing women's proprietary rights. <fnote>Anthropologist Bradislaw Malinovski in the 1920's </fnote><fnote>Sir William Blackstone </fnote><fnote>From Introduction to Feminist Jurisprudence </fnote>Abortion law is particularly controversial yet to achieve law's hallmark of autonomy and integrity, women must have the self right to make decisions concerning their body, including opportunity to regulate fertility. Our society is historically patriarchal, placing women in the private sphere, and men in the position of power: the public sphere, concurrent with liberalism. Patriarchy justifies female subordination because of their reproductive status: women are reproductive objects. Female exclusion is necessary for maintaining male superiority; women have one role "as a maternal and still silent ground that nourishes all foundations." I suggest it is ironic that women bear the beast that keeps them captive. In this respect women are a commodity for fulfilment of male need. <fnote>Irrigaray (1994) </fnote>Abortion gives women a right to control fertility in competition with their male partners. Men see reproduction as the female purpose, thus they are incapable of other roles. This traditional assumption is flawed, yet it informed the development of law and medicine. Fertility control is an autonominous right and when absent society is unequal, harming the individual. Contraception and abortion provides choice: women are no longer reproductive instruments, Itigaray arguing it enables females to be conceptualised as women, not mothers therefore "modifying...social relations between men" <fnote>Luce Itigaray </fnote>Akin to abortion is sterilisation, where women's right to reproduction is forcibly expanded into broader social considerations. Conversely, this right is abused and compulsory sterilisation is a gross rights violation. Should 'developed' societies not prevent such atrocities? A woman's reproductive right is a Human Right: the decision should free. Yet in America some states retain legislative provisions for compulsory sterilisation of women with mental health disorders, but why not men? The laws development is disconcerting. In Re D the courts instilled a rights based approach, permitting sterilisation only if beneficial to the individual and therefore "therapeutic;" non-therapeutic sterilisation remained unlawful. Yet in Re F the court held the decision could be reached on a basis of necessity: legalising non-consensual sterilisation. However F has right's to such relationships and should not be forcibly sterilised, why her and not her male partner? Once again the female is subordinated, subjected to gross violations, the male protected. Are women therefore inferior, perhaps as Olsen's binary concepts suggest? <fnote>Re D (1976) Canadian Case decided by the English CofA: </fnote><fnote>Re F (mental patient: sterilisation) 1989 </fnote><quote> "Domestic violence is the systematic, ahistorical, acultural manifestation of male power...patriarchy supporting and maintaining it." </quote>Law should protect individuals from harm, yet its inequality fails women. Globally men commit violence against women: 92% of victims are female in South Africa. In England, rape is the most underreported crime, with women at huge risk from violence no matter the class, race or background; continuing under patriarchal notions of male ownership and control, symptomatic of unequal power. Still the police are reluctant to intervene, the CPS hesitant to prosecute, what sort of a legal system is this? It is an indication that men do not accept equality. Liberalism, insistent on public and private division is the dominant political ideology. The private sphere is protected from legal control, behind closed doors under the 'blessing' of freedom; but where is the freedom for women. Law shuns its responsibility for impartiality, no longer is it the state's business, affording violence a refuge: the home, the battleground for women. For domestic violence men receive lesser sentences, indicating a tolerance that does not exist within the public sphere, privileging domestic abusers. Subsequently, is law's very public strive for equality a facade; the private sphere illustrating shameful reality: underlying subordination of women. <fnote>United Nations figures </fnote>When considering marital rape, Mill comments that the "sole remaining state of slavery exists within marriage." Traditionally society confined women to the home, denying them the right to work or vote. Mathew Hale's rhetoric stood until 1991 that women give "non-retractable consent for sex" upon marriage. It was even suggested that a legal obligation for women to submit to intercourse existed, illustrating female objectification. Perhaps these antiquated notions characterise the legal system: chauvinistic, male dominated, the perfect example of gender inequality, for until 1921 the system was entirely male, and by 1998 still only 33% of women were solicitors. Is this a fair representation of society? It is inconceivable that 'modern' law legalised marital rape until 1991. Law depicts rape from an entirely masculine perception, simply as non-consensual sex, devoid of female consideration. Conversely MacKinnon states women see it as "an act of sexuality," intrusion and objectification. Law focuses on penile penetration, whilst MacKinnon argues this is "less pivotal to women's sexuality, pleasure or violation, than it is to men" and that "the definitive element centres upon a male defined loss," "a crime against female monogamy than against female sexuality." Law infers it is not as harmful to be raped by someone familiar, yet women feel more traumatized as trust and mutuality have been shattered. "In whose interest is it to believe that it is not so bad to be raped by someone who has fucked you before as by someone who has not?" Acceptability is argued from the defendant's perspective and a reasonable man, rather than the victim, suggesting implicit male bias; particularly as objectivity subordinates women. Trials centre on their lifestyle, humiliatingly probing as if women are wrongdoers. Judges even stating "a women that says no does not always mean no." It is shameful to be a victim. For marital rape, law consistently gives shorter, non-custodial sentences. Whilst abusive partners can be evicted, where victims have no occupational entitlement it is limited to 12 months irrespective of relationship duration; unsurprising considering male property right domination. <fnote>Mill JS, The subjection of Women (1869) 1989 </fnote><fnote>Hawkins J </fnote><fnote>Katherine Mackinnon 1983 </fnote><fnote>Judge Wild in his direction to the Jury, 1982 </fnote><fnote>From Introduction to Feminist Jurisprudence </fnote><fnote>Under the Family Law Act 1996 </fnote>Pornography, a graphic representation of women's inferior status "contributes causally to attitudes and behaviours of violence," according to radical feminists and a Canadian report. Andrea Dworkin states "it is a portrayal of women as whores," whilst I believe it reinforces patriarchal beliefs of women as commodities for male fulfilment. Law legitimises this degradation for male pleasure, illustrating sexual superiority, legalising female subordination and defining women as sexual beings. This creates "systematised physical aggression against women," through pornography, prostitution or escort agencies. <fnote>Canadian AG Commission on Pornography 1986 </fnote><fnote>Andrea Dworkin </fnote>Laws defences are inherently male, provocation for example is constructed to male criteria: its roots stem from medieval times where men settled arguments physically. It is modelled on masculine confrontation: a "sudden and temporary loss of self control," yet women behave differently, such as in Ahluwahlia or Thornton: "the final surrender of frayed elastic, a snapping in slow motion," according to Kennedy, consequently failing women. <fnote>as per Duffy (1949) 1 All E.R. 932 and approved by S3 Homicide Act 1957 </fnote><fnote>R v Ahluwahlia (1992) 4 All E.R.; (1993) 96 Cr. App R 133 </fnote><fnote>R v Thornton (1992) 1 All ER 306 </fnote><fnote>Helena Kennedy QC on women's reaction to provocation </fnote>We must acknowledge reform. The HRA and ECHR provide opportunity to question gender equality. Law has reformed, e.g. sexual offences under SOA which are fairer for women and men, formally expanding male and female rape. The strive for equality dramatically reformed society, education and opportunity. Reforms such as the Equal Pay Act and Family Law Act challenge traditional notions, whilst judges such as Lord Denning provided remedies for women in property law, e.g. the "deserted wives equity." Gender equality is now an open debate; it is politically correct, and rapidly changing. Men are also subject to inequalities, such as child custody, frequently awarded to females. Ironically, this is because society's inherently masculine perspective assigns women to materialistic positions, a consequence of patriarchal male development. In defence of pursuits such as pornography, we can relate to rights of freedom of choice for women and men, whereas illegality could drive it underground, creating more harm: law imposes regulation. Judges now acknowledge laws limitations, and defences such as provocation have now been expanded, however their shortcomings still prevail. <fnote>Human Rights Act 1998 </fnote><fnote>European Convention on Human Rights </fnote><fnote>The Sexual Offences Act 2003 </fnote><fnote>Equal Pay Act 1970 </fnote><fnote>Family Law Act 1996 </fnote>Distinct distance between male and female values exists. Laws male-dominated creation can only adhere to masculine perspectives causing gender inequality. Law is inherently masculine in reasoning, rhetoric and practice: biased, supportive of patriarchy and the male paradigm. Liberalism, separating public and private spheres suppresses equality, affording patriarchy a curtain of protection: the home, the battleground of women. A legal system aspires to justice and impartiality, yet even justice is a male defined concept. Acceptance of equality has begun, but as radical feminists acknowledge women's oppression is so engrained that law needs to be deconstructed: laws underlying tones permit female abuse. Law is a reflection of society, evolving to changing morality. Reform occurs after delay, (e.g. marital rape) following the majority, consequently law is progressively moulded. There is overwhelming evidence of gender inequality, but progress has begun despite forcible initiation. Conversely, are the changes just feeble concessions to gender neutrality when domestic violence towards women continues? My concern is that whilst appreciating women's difficulties, applauding and wilfully demanding change, we must not lead ourselves to reform the laws as so to be condescending. We are equal, and must be treated thus. Feminist perspectives are largely fair, measured and equal. Unlike other male influenced theories, they are altruistic. This is a man-made world. Literally. 