<heading>Introduction</heading>The implementation of the 1994 EU Directive on European Works Councils (EWCs) with the subsequent establishment of consultative bodies at European level in multinational companies (MNCs) has provoked research interest on the side of academics and practitioners for several reasons. First of all, the councils are seen, as 'the most significant institutional innovation in European-level company-based industrial relations' (Hall and Marginson 2005:1) as they present a novel approach to granting information and consultation rights for employees in MNCs. As such, EWCs are considered as a possible solution for closing the emerging gap between managerial decision-making at corporate cross-border level and employee representation at national level (Hallal. 2003). This, in turn, leads to raised hopes about the Europeanisation of industrial relation systems, human resource management practices and management-labour interaction on the continent (see also Wills 2000). Logically, another motive for researching EWCs arises, as it is becomes visible that they concentrate the different expectations and prerogatives of the industrial actors involved in their operation - as Wills notes 'companies might be expected to use these new institutions to impart the corporate vision, to transfer productivity gains and to benchmark best practice from one place to another (...), [while] trade unionists are hoping to raise European standards through EWCs' (1999:19). Last but not least, Müller and Hoffmann (2001) draw attention to the fact that while some of these different expectations and experiences - the employee or trade union side - have been explored in some detail, the managerial perspective has been examined in a more perfunctory way and research on implications with regard to EWCs' benefits and threats to employers needs to be furthered (also Wills 1999). This essay will attempt to identify the advantages and disadvantages that EWCs might and actually offer for the management side of the companies where such bodies have been established. It will first review the nature of the EWCs with regard to their introduction, implementation and operation as defined by the European directive and will continue to suggest some of the benefits and costs employers experience in making use of them. Finally, it will provide an evaluating conclusion on the predominance of the opportunities or threats EWCs present for companies' management, drawing on the evidence presented. In doing so, the text will refer to investigations that have used survey methodology (Nakano 1999, Wills 1999), interviews (Lamers 1998, Weber et al 2000) and case-study reports (Cressey 1998, Royle 1999, Wills 2000). <heading>Legislative Context </heading>The European Works Council Directive (94/45/EC) was adopted in 1994 under the Maastricht Treaty's 'social protocol' and applied to all then 15 countries-members of the European Union (EU), except UK which opted out. Its coverage was later extended to include the three European Economic Area (EEA) countries, non-members of EU (Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway) in 1995, UK (after the Labour government reversal of the opt-out policy) in 1997 and the 10 new member states after the enlargement process in 2004. The main aim of the Directive is to foster information and consultation procedures, most often through the establishment of EWCs in Community-scale undertakings with at least 1000 employees, of which at least 150 each in two or more member states (see also Carley and Hall 2000). Quoting figures compiled by the European Trade Union Institute (ETUI), an EIRO (2004) report claims that the number of companies that fall within the scope of the Directive is 2,169 after the enlargement in 2004. The same report notes that, out of this number, the companies that have a working EWC in place are 737 - a figure which despite representing only one third of the organisations currently covered by the Directive, signifies, according to the EIRO analysis that 'EWCs have become an established feature of the European industrial relations landscape' (2004:14). As far as the implementation mechanisms are concerned, the Directive allowed for procedures that were tailored and customized to the companies' specific needs and circumstances (Carley and Hall 2000). The MNCs were given three options - a voluntary agreement to be negotiated before the Directive's deadline of September 1996 (voluntary 'Article 13 agreements'), an agreemement to be concluded by a 'special negotiating body' (SNB) process that could be triggered unilaterally by employees or management after that date ('Article 6 agreements') and standard 'subsidiary requirements' to be applied detailing the EWC's constitution, rights and issues to be dealt with, in cases when negotiations fail for a number of reasons. Referring to these three possible scenarios, Cressey (1998:69) notes that under pressure from the European employers' peak organisation UNICE the European Commission has explicitly expressed its preference and encouragement for companies to conclude voluntary EWC agreements and regards the use of 'the formal machinery as a last resort'. This inbred flexibility and possibility for customization in the implementation methods forms a part of the EWCs advantages that companies' management can make use of and these, alongside with the potential disadvantages will be explored in greater detail below. <heading>Managerial Perspective</heading>Before moving on to describe some of the advantages that EWCs present to employers and the disadvantages they might pose, it is important to include a word of caution. A true picture of the actual benefits a council provides and the costs it incurs might be difficult to reveal because, as Hall and Marginson rightly point out EWCs 'remain relatively youthful structures which are taking both management and employee representatives into uncharted territory' (2005: 17-18) and accounts of potential opportunities and threats tend to prevail over analyses of real ones that have already materialized. This notion is supported by the point Müller and Hoffmann make in their detailed review of literature on EWCs in claiming that even later research (Wills 1999, Nakano 1999, Weberal. 2000) into managerial perceptions seems to have done little more than to confirm earlier catalogues of potential benefits to them (e.g. the one done by Gold and Hall 1992) - the review succinctly summarizes that 'EWCs were and are still largely seen as opportunities; it has yet to be studied what happens when these opportunities are actually taken up' (2001: 79). Another factor that might prevent an accurate description of the benefits and shortcomings of EWCs to employers arises from the possibility of conclusions and generalizations being formed on the basis of research methods allowing for socially desirable answers and bias in presenting information. Using only data collected through survey instruments or failing to recognize that management opinions on benefits might be one-sided and uncritical could prove to be an obstacle to a true analysis (see also Müller and Hoffmann 2001). Nevertheless, this essay will draw on accounts that refer to different methods of data collection, as mentioned above and will acknowledge the fact that generalizations could be made only in the researched context. It will present a picture of some of the advantages and disadvantages that EWCs pose to managers of companies where such councils are in place, and while it does not claim to be exhaustive, it will nevertheless attempt to provide an overview based on varied sources. <heading>Advantages that EWCs Offer to Employers</heading><heading>A. Enhancing Communication Processes</heading>Forming a large part of their 'raison d'etre', this function is logically named the EWCs' main one in the survey Nakano (1999) executed among Japanese-owned companies covered by the EWC Directive. His analysis of the results reveals that surveyed managers saw an advantage of the council bodies in 'improving the dissemination of managerial information among employees, exchanging opinions with employee representatives and promoting a spirit of cooperation' (1999:317). This is not at odds with the information Wills obtained from her questionnaire survey of UK-owned firms (both with and without EWCs or information and consultation procedure in place) - she confirms that 'British managers view the EWC as a new arm to corporate communication' (1999:29). The point is still furthered by Lamers (1998) in her accumulation of qualitative data on employer perceptions in 17 Dutch companies, covered by the Directive, an account that in the words of Müller and Hoffmann presents the ways in which ''continental' employers might deal with EWCs' (2001:90). Lamers similarly finds that an advantage is to be found in EWCs providing 'a European-level platform for communication on transnational matters between central management and the employee delegates from the different countries' (1998:177). It is important to note that all quoted research found that the role of EWCs is valued not only as an instrument to feed information downwards to employees, but management found it also useful as a mechanism to 'to hear the voice of employees' (Wills 1999:28), i.e. a way to foster a two-way dialogue. This is maintained by the UK Department of Trade and Industry Survey (Weber et al 2000), examining management views from ten companies with EWCs, which although revealing that most examined companies find the bodies to have a 'symbolic value', confirms the position that employers view them as beneficial in information exchange. Another point worth making is that the useful information provision concerns not only different directions of exchange but different levels as well. Several authors (Lamers 1998, Cressey 1998, Wills 1999) find that EWCs could be advantageous in improving the communication between different hierarchical levels of management and providing information to the central management of the group with regard to its operation in different countries. It is visible that all the research evidence supports the EWCs' function of bettering communication between both employees and management, and different layers of management as being one of the major advantages they offer to employers. <heading>B. Aiding Corporate Governance</heading>Building a sense of corporate identification and thus facilitating governance at the highest company level is another benefit that EWCs offer to employers. Based on his research Nakano sees them as a tool to 'establish a global identity for the company' (1999:310). He finds that 93% of the managers in his survey see the councils as a way to 'promote company spirit' (1999:318), a beneficial secondary effect to their main function. Moreover, Wills maintains that EWCs could not only support the creation of a universal identity but develop an overall company culture at European level (view expressed by 38% of the respondents in her survey). The same author goes on to summarize that 'the EWC was seen [by employers] as a mechanism to foster identification with the corporate mission [and] widen understanding of the management process (1999:28-29). That EWCs could be useful in aiding the establishment of common identity and facilitating governance at corporate level is a notion also advanced by Rehfeldt (1998) in his assessment of French initiatives with regard to European consultative bodies. Rehfeldt highlights that 'it is the declared aim of managements to use European (...) dialogue arrangements to promote a common awareness of the problems and a European 'corporate identity' amongst employees' (1998:219). It can be therefore concluded that another benefit that EWCs could and actually present to managers as judged by survey information is the creation of a common European corporate identity among employees and the promotion of a shared understanding of common problems, which, in turn, facilitates corporate governance in solving these problems. <heading>C. Retaining Managerial Decision-Making Prerogative</heading>Although trade unions might have justifiably expected a greater role in shaping managerial decisions thorough EWCs, this has not actually materialized in practice. As Wills notes 'information sharing has been afforded a higher managerial priority than any real consultation and the EWC agenda appears to consist of managers giving reports to the employee representatives that assemble' (1999:29, see also Wills 2000). Lecher and Rüb further the point by stressing that 'the right to consultation only represents a procedural guarantee that employee representatives can set out their views to a company's central management; it does not impinge on management's decision-making prerogative' (1999:10). Although the authors go on to acknowledge the value of the requirement of information sharing for employees' ability to influence company policy (see also Lecheral. 1999), the consultative element of EWCs that could actually affect management's decisions with regard to contents and, to a lesser extent, implementation seems to be limited (see case study research done by Marginson et al (2004)). This idea is supported by the EIRO (2004) report which concludes that 'consultation, where it takes place, seems largely to occur only once decisions have been taken by management, focusing on the implementation of those decisions rather than their framing or main parameters' (2004:14). It is clear that EWCs still predominantly fulfill the information part of their functions and the very restricted consultation element allows managers to retain their power in decision-making. This would allow employers to benefit from information exchange and overlook the consultative part to preserve their decision-making prerogative - inherent flexibility in EWCs' nature which serves employers' interests in yet another way. <heading>D. Facilitating Restructuring Operations</heading>Scholars appear to be divided in their views on whether EWCs actually support management in restructuring processes. Researchers like Weberal. (2000) and Nakano (1999) provide evidence of managers seeing little or no impact of EWCs in aiding organizational change. However, Lamers suggests that consultative bodies 'can contribute to the transparency and speed of the decision-making process, and its implementation' (1998:180). Even more directly, Hancké claims that 'management engages the EWC as a tool in industrial restructuring' (2000:39) and Lecher et al. argue that employers 'use EWCs (...) to minimise the 'frictional losses' experienced during restructuring operations' (1999:214). In addition, a survey executed by the American consultancy Organization Resources Counselors (ORC 2003) found that four-fifths of the 24 multinationals it had researched consulted their EWCs over restructuring situations as they found them useful in improving internal management co-ordination. In summary, there are indications that managers regard EWCs as beneficial in supporting restructuring processes and the scepticism in some cases seems to be the result of companies not having experienced such proceedings yet (Nakano 1999) or employers presuming more remote possible effects (Weber et al 2000). <heading>E. Benefits of Agreements Concluded under Article 13</heading>Last but not least, this text will address the advantages of earlier agreements concluded under the Article 13 clause. Managers see these as more advantageous with regard to the establishment and operation of EWCs for several reasons. In her analysis of Dutch practice concerning the councils Veersma notes that these agreements may be preferred as the management 'has the feeling that it is able to influence the direction taken by the development of the EWC in practice' (1999:306). Cressey (1998) complements the advantages these preliminary agreements may have for employers in pointing the possibilities they provide for more flexible arrangements, greater managerial control, better fit with existing information and consultation procedures and seemingly positive company attitude towards transnational consultation. It is visible that companies have seen the opportunities pre-emptive Article 13 agreements grant and have used them to gain another benefit from EWCs' operation. <heading>Possible Disadvantages of EWCs</heading><heading>A. Costs </heading>The expenses of the EWCs which must be met by the central management of the companies are amongst the most quoted drawbacks of the bodies in the surveys executed by Wills (1999) and Nakano (1999). In his case study analysis Cressey confirms that by pointing that the management in his researched firm felt that 'the financial costs were not insubstantial when the preparation work, elections and annual running costs were added up' (1998:75). Fears of increased expenditure due to EWCs are also included in the accounts presented by Lecher and Rüb (1999) and Weston and Martinez Lucio (1997). However, several of the same research papers (Cressey 1998, Nakano 1999) acknowledge that costs are not a considerable charge for employers, when calculated per group employee and 'would be more than offset by increased labour productivity' (Nakano 1999:310). Clearly, although financial costs are an issue for managers, the benefits that EWCs bring justify expenses, which turn to be not that significant in the end. <heading>B. Increased Bureaucracy </heading>Management concerns over increased corporate bureaucracy and rigidity that could be caused by EWCs are expressed by respondents in several surveys - Wills (1999), Weberal. (2000), Vitols (2003) and included in the research analyses of Gold and Hall (1994) and Weston and Martinez Lucio (1997). At the same time, that rigidity could be overcome by what Gold and Hall note as the 'the stronger emphasis in the [EWC] Directive on bespoke, enterprise-specific arrangements (...) [which] potentially offers a considerable degree of flexibility' (1994:183). As for the other non-quantifiable burden of bureaucratic delays, the survey of Weber et al. finds that actually the 'process of consultation was not seen to slow down management decision making' (2000:19) (also Wills 1999). In sum, anxieties over growing bureaucracy are present in employers' perceptions and these might be seen as a possible disadvantage of EWCs but these concerns are often found to be unjustified in reality. <heading>C. Raised employee expectations</heading>Employer respondents are found to regard EWCs as a source of unwanted employee expectations in the studies done by Wills (1999), Nakano (1999) and Weberal. (2000). It is feared that an EWC may raise 'expectations of what this forum might achieve, particularly in terms of influencing management decisions in relation to restructuring, employment and working conditions' (Weber et. al 2000:19), at odds with the agenda of managers who would most often use it to simply convey information on matters they are legally required to (see also Wills 1999). However, it must be noted that a survey carried out by Addison and Belfield found that there was 'no suggestion of any inflation in worker aspirations attendant upon the formation of an EWC' (2002:438). It can be seen that despite differences in employers' and employees' agendas being quite common and often inevitable, raised workers' expectations should not be taken for granted as a disadvantage that EWCs pose. <heading>D. Fostered Trade Unionism at European Level</heading>This had been raised as a major concern of employers and could signify a serious disadvantage of EWCs from their point of view. As Marginson and Sisson argue 'in the debate surrounding the implementation of the European Works Councils Directive, one of the key concerns articulated by management has been that EWCs could represent a significant step along the road towards European collective bargaining' (1996:230). Employers claim to see the councils as facilitating transnational trade unionism in the survey executed by Wills (1999) as well, attitude echoed by the results reported by Nakano (1999) and, to a lesser extent, Weber et al (2000). Nevertheless, the fact that collective bargaining negotiations at European level were left outside the scope of the Directive, prevents managers from seeing EWCs as a major threat in that sense (see also Weberal. 2000). This argument is advanced by Marginson and Sisson in noting that 'for the foreseeable future, such fears and aspirations are unlikely to be realised' (1996:230), referring to various factors limiting the possibility of European collective bargaining such as managerial demarcation of rights to information and consultation from those to collective negotiation and unwillingness of national trade unions to yield the necessary authority to European-level organisations, among others. It is visible that although aiding collective bargaining at transnational level could be a serious drawback of EWCs for employers, currently this is not a real threat due to the lack of formal negotiating rights granted to the consultative bodies. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Reviewing evidence from several examinations of managerial views, this essay has attempted to enlist some of the potential and actual (as perceived by employers) advantages and disadvantages of EWCs. Improving communication at various levels within the group, supporting corporate governance, preserving managerial decision-making prerogative and flexibility in implementation are among the gains for employers, while drawbacks like higher expenditure, aggravated bureaucracy, raised employee expectations and fostering of European-level collective bargaining look either relatively unsubstantial or somehow far-fetched. It would seem that despite some initial uneasiness, employers have found more opportunities in the operation of consultative bodies at European level than threats. Nakano reinforces that in summarizing that 'despite initial hostility towards the new system, many employers have found it in practice less threatening than anticipated, and some have been more positively enthusiastic' (1999:312-313) (also Hall and Marginson 2005). The reciprocal action between the different agendas and expectations unionists and employers have with regard to EWCs has increasingly meant that 'Europeanization of industrial relations is taking place primarily on management's terms' (Hancké 2000:39), as the information disclosure and exchange process sought by local unionists offers a tool for '[securing] understanding of the rationale for [managerial] cross-border decisions (...), and even acceptance' (Hall and Marginson 2005:5). This is not to say the EWCs do not have their advantages (and disadvantages) for employees and their representatives as well, only that currently employers have managed to utilize the advantages presented to them better than employees - as Weston and Martinez Lucio put it '[for now] the EWC directive is being seen more as a managerial tool to consolidate their strategies of control over labour, rather than effective tool for the trade unions to influence the employment relation for more positive outcome'. (1998:556) (also Royle 1999). Clearly, employers in MNCs have acknowledged the advantages and disadvantages European consultative bodies might offer them and have managed to turn the opportunities into benefits. At the same time, shortcomings are regarded as less prominent as most of the potential threats EWCs pose have not actually materialized. 