<heading>Introduction </heading>Employee participation and involvement have been the basis of a debate in British industrial relations since the 1970s, over three decades which have witnessed the reincarnation of different terms for similar processes - workers' control, industrial democracy, workers' participation, employee involvement, empowerment, social partnership (Marchington 2005). The interest in these mechanisms of providing employee voice has been prompted by the different agendas of industrial relations actors - of 'those seeking higher level of organisational performance and (...) those desiring better systems of employee representation' (Wilkinson et. al 2004:298). In addition, research has been aimed at exploring the on-going shift of focus from indirect to direct forms of employee involvement (EI) and the growth of the latter techniques, demonstrated by empirical survey data - as Marchingtonal. (1994:1) summarize there has been 'an absolute growth in direct communications and individualist techniques, and an aggregate decline in indirect and representative forms of participation'. Before referring in greater detail to the survey data, it is felt that a definition of the notion of (direct) employee involvement is necessary. The terminology used to analyse trends relating to it is often vague and imprecise which hinders the possibility for objective comparisons and conclusions (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). Hyman and Mason draw a distinction between the terms of participation and involvement, defining the former as 'state initiatives which promote the collective rights of the employees to be represented in organizational decision-making (1995:21, emphasis added). By contrast, the latter is described as integrating 'policies and practices which emanate from management (...) and which purport to provide employees with the opportunity to influence and where appropriate take part in the decision-making on matters which affect them' (ibid). It is clear that EI refers to management-led initiatives, aimed at stimulating employee commitment and allowing discretion for employee decision-making on lower, often task-based ground s. In this, it is very different from both industrial democracy and participative representation. This is reinforced by the description supplied by Fenton-O'Creevy which claims that EI marks 'the exercise by employees of influence over how their work is organized and carried out' (2001:25). The notion, defined in this way, will be further explored in this text and concentration will be more specifically on the direct (individual) forms of employee involvement (as opposed to indirect or representative forms), which concern the immediate interaction between management and single or group of employees, without the intermediation of third parties (Hyman and Mason 1995). The direct form of employee involvement could be further subdivided into consultative (where management seeks employees' opinions but reserves the right to take decisions unilaterally) and delegative (where workers are granted increased responsibility with regard to their work) participation (Sisson 2000). In addition, some authors see the rise of the term 'empowerment' as evolution of the participative decision-making and involvement concepts and by this term acknowledge the task-centered nature of employee involvement in allowing discretion about individual jobs (Greasleyal. 2005) This essay will review the survey evidence of the growth of direct EI techniques in the UK, will trace the managerial objectives in promoting and utilizing such methods and will critically evaluate the gains from them. By contrasting the espoused and achieved effects from direct employee involvement schemes, the text will try to demonstrate that although their extensiveness is growing and they are being applied in an increasingly systematic way, the successful implementation of such techniques still depends on numerous context- and process dependant factors and the searched effects are by no means guaranteed Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). <heading>Increased use of direct employee involvement techniques in the UK</heading><heading>Survey data</heading>Various types of surveys have tried to explore the nature and the extensiveness of direct employee involvement initiatives in the UK. Of these, attention will be paid to the ones executed and presented in IRS Employment Trends in 1999 and 2002 (IRS 1999, 2002); the first findings of the latest edition of the Workplace Employment Relation Survey (WERS 2004); and some insights from the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions EPOC (Employee direct Participation in Organisational Change) 1996 survey (as reported by Geary 2003). The IRS surveys (covering 49 organisations in 1999 and 52 firms in 2002) divide EI schemes into three main categories, two of which concern the direct forms of them. These two are named communication (marking the initiatives aimed primarily at disseminating information) and participation (defining mechanisms which have a more consultative element, seeking opinions from employees). The surveys note an increase or consistent levels of communication methods in the researched companies - in 2002 notice boards were reported as used in 96% of the cases, employee reports in 35% , team briefings in 88% of the firms (86% in 1999), while attitude surveys marked a significant increase from 49% in 1999 to 73% in 2002 (IRS 2002). The only communication initiative that saw a major decrease in level was the use of company journal/newspaper (from 92% in 1999 to 77% in 2002), but the survey commentary attributes that to the introduction and increased utilization of email (in 85% of the companies in 2002) and intranet (in 88% of the companies in 2002) (ibid). Participation methods show relatively stable levels between the two studied years as well (although less spread than the communication ones) - IRS 2002 reports a slight decrease in the use of team meetings (from 92% in 1999 to 90% in 2002) and in suggestion schemes and customer care initiatives (each present in 45% of the cases in 2002, as opposed to 56% in 1999) but the trend remains high. WERS 2004 (encompassing responses from 2178 managers in 2004 and comparing them with the WERS 1998 replies of 2047 managers) reveals a similar picture - notice boards were used in 74% of the cases in 2004, meetings with the entire workforce (incl. team briefings) increased from 85% in 1998 to 91% in 2004, one-third of the workplaces operated a suggestion scheme and around two-fifths (42%) carried out an employee survey in 2004 (no comparable data from 1998) (Kersleyal. 2005). The EPOC survey (812 workplaces in Britain examined) distinguishes between the consultative and delegative forms defined above and finds that in the first group of methods, 'temporary groups' (project groups or task forces which assemble for specific purpose only) were utilized in 33% of the firms and 'permanent groups' (groups discussing on-going work-related matters, e.g. quality circles) were present in 41% of the enterprises (Geary 2003). The delegative forms, 'involving individual employees and organized around team structures were found in 53 and 37 per cent of British organizations respectively' (ibid: 345). It is apparent that the use of new work practices and, more specifically direct employee involvement techniques on the side of UK employers has been growing in recent years or has stabilized at relatively high levels. More often than not, this has occurred at the expense of indirect, representative forms of involvement (IRS 2002, Marchingtonal. 1994) The above briefly described data complements earlier studies which have demonstrated similar trends - as Bryson notes 'between 1984 and 1998, the proportion of workplaces with only representative voice arrangements halved, while those with solely direct voice mechanisms more than doubled (2000:10). In addition, reviewing surveys executed before 1995 (ACAS 1990, CBI 1990, UK Employment Department Survey 1991), Hyman and Mason reinforce that 'management moves toward techniques aimed at employee integration through involvement have become increasingly visible in recent years' (1995:29). <heading>A Word of Caution</heading>Having presented the above survey evidence on the growth of direct employee involvement techniques in the UK, it is important to include a word of caution as to the different formats, terminology and designs that different surveys use. Exploring companies of different sizes, business sectors, ownership (private as well as public sector) and corporate cultures, it would be quite hard for them to draw a correct and fully comprehensive picture of UK enterprises with regard to involvement trends. Several texts draw attention to difficulties of precise interpretation of survey data, due to differences in terminology used (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005) or marking the presence or absence of techniques without taking their embeddedness into company culture and operation into practice into account (Marchington 2005). Moreover, threats to objective conclusions could be found in the fact that it is often only managers that present views on the operation of EI techniques in their companies (the case of WERS 2004) or that most surveys treat employees (actually or potentially subject to EI) as a homogenous group or explore the main occupational group in the enterprise only (the case of the EPOC survey, see also Shapiro 2000). Despite these possible shortcomings, survey data demonstrates growth in the utilization of EI schemes, as Marchington succinctly puts it 'in the early part of the twenty-first century, there is little doubt that the most widely used forms of participation are concerned with communication and participation' (2005:29). Bearing in mind the probable limitations of the survey evidence, this text nevertheless acknowledges the rise of new work practices in UK workplaces, as shown by the data, and will proceed to explore the likely managerial objectives in introducing and implementing such practices. <heading>Management Motives</heading>As noted above, direct EI initiatives are primarily management-led in their introduction and implementation. Managers have various and multi-layered motives in applying such schemes and some of these will be examined below. <heading>Levels of motivation</heading><heading>Societal and economic</heading>The societal and economic conditions and environment in the UK form the broader level of managerial motivation for introducing direct EI schemes. Marginson and Sisson describe the UK economy as 'an active market for corporate control, (...) [placing] an emphasis on short-run financial returns backed up by intensive internal monitoring and performance evaluation' (1994:29-30). Competitive pressures and product market change in the private sector, as well as deregulation and commercialization in the public sector thus shape the utilization of direct EI techniques in Britain (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). It is visible that this macro level of motivation is the underlying one in inducing champions of direct EI initiatives to make use of them in companies. This argument is not at odds with the one presented by Pooleal. (2001:497) which claim that 'increased economic competition' and pressures for good economic performance have made the achievement of 'rights-based' employee participation dubious, while encouraging employee involvement as more likely to lead to better 'market performance'. In addition, official UK government position seems to further stimulate the implementation of direct EI systems. Hyman and Mason especially note the 'UK government's stated belief that voluntarily implemented involvement provides a direct and accessible route toward employee commitment, flexibility and efficiency' (1995:186). This is very much linked to another, no less important factor in the macro environment and that is the increasingly marginalized role of trade unions in the country. The decrease in collective organisation and action has prompted both the state and the companies to look for alternative ways of allowing employee influence (Hyman and Mason 1995). It is easily seen why in a period of declining trade union density, employers may favour more direct involvement techniques which allow them to interact with their employees as a whole, rather than with a decreasing proportion of trade union members only. <heading>Organizational</heading>Besides the above described macro influences, micro factors at organizational level also shape the decisions of implementing direct EI techniques. Pressures for improved organizational productivity, efficiency and responsiveness to customers and markets have encouraged managers to seek ways to get closer to working processes by listening to what their employees have to say. Hyman and Mason suggest that increased attention to enhanced productivity 'or, more specifically, labour productivity assumes mythic proportions for (...) managers' (1995:24). Moreover, the quest for organizational flexibility and innovation has clear implications for the need for direct involvement - 'compliance, hierarchy and following rules are seen are supposedly less appropriate for employees who are expected to work beyond contract, exercise their initiative and embrace teamworking' (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005:399). The necessity to meet these growing market challenges, facilitated by responsive and adaptive workforce is clearly the organizational motive for steering managerial attitudes towards providing rationale for using direct employee involvement techniques. <heading>Types of Motives</heading><heading>Increasing productivity through enhanced commitment and loyalty</heading>Enhanced organizational effectiveness is the most widespread reason for employing direct EI techniques. Based on their longitudinal survey of twenty-five UK organisations, Marchingtonal. (1993:560) conclude that 'EI comes to be seen by senior managers as (...) integral to the achievement of improved productivity, profitability, market share and customer service'. These are often seen as achievable through the enhanced motivation, loyalty and commitment of workers, which, on their turn, stem as benefits from the introduction of direct involvement schemes (Cunninghamal. 1996). This argument is reinforced by the findings of the IRS 2002 survey where the desire to create a sense of ownership in employees (thus urging them to work towards improving company performance) and the need to ensure that workers understand their role in achieving business success are amongst the most quoted reasons for involving staff. It becomes visible that organizational success and efficiency, attained through improved employee commitment, motivation and job satisfaction (attributed to direct EI techniques) largely shape managerial objectives in utilizing involvement schemes. <heading>New forms of control</heading>Giving employees more discretion and responsibility over how they execute their work tasks through EI schemes may sound like an achievement of the transition from control to commitment approach to people management. While clearly there are sides of the process that benefit the workers in allowing them to have more say about their work, management control has not vanished or even diminished. In summary 'new work systems [have] reorganized but [have] not [transformed] the workplace regime' (Edwards 1992:388). This point is referred to by Geary as well in noting that 'control remains as pervasive as ever, albeit organized in a different and sometimes more distant and less immediate manner' (2003:347). Engagement in involvement systems (team meetings, quality initiatives) may mean imposed stronger ties to work practices and more possibility for supervision, besides the increased discretion. Evidently, models of rigid managerial control have not been replaced by ones of empowerment and flexibility (Geary 2003), but have started co-existing and blending together through EI initiatives, providing another managerial motive for using them. <heading>Legal Requirements</heading>Another point worth noting is the influence of the legal framework and especially the EU Directives requirements transposed in the UK. The European Works Council Directive and especially the Information and Consultation of Employees (ICE) Directive (DTI 2004) have a strong bearing on the operation of representative mechanisms in different formats of UK companies, although they affect the direct involvement forms less profoundly. Despite this fact, the ICE regulations provision for retention or extension of current consultation preferences in the workplace is likely to promote the further use of direct forms in non-union workplaces (where they are logically preferred), supplying managers with another justified objective in utilizing direct EI techniques. Having briefly described some of the managerial motives for implementing and operating direct EI initiatives, this essay will now examine the gains of these systems, as demonstrated in reality. <heading>Gains from Using Direct Employee Involvement Techniques - Rhetoric and Reality</heading><heading>Improved Organizational Performance</heading>As stated above, one of the main aims of introducing management-led direct involvement schemes is the pursuit of high-performance work places. Promoting employee commitment and motivation, EI systems are seen as invariably leading to improved company results and effectiveness (see also Edwards and Wright 2001). In reality, there are several problems associated with such claims. Firstly, the causal link between enhanced employee commitment and satisfaction and overall company performance is very difficult to establish. As Wilkinson et al. reasonably note, based on their case study research, 'any attempt to (...) draw any causal links to enhanced performance is problematic (...) precise details of cause and effect are almost impossible to disentangle' (2004:311). Where positive effects of direct involvement on output are identified, they are either regarded in an interdependent relationship with increased productivity, in the words of Edwards and Wright 'work organization and productivity outcomes are likely to be mutually reinforcing' (2001:575) or as beneficial in creating an overall environment of trust, thus supporting better work results. Gollan reinforces the latter point in arguing that it is not simply the existence and operation of involvement techniques that is important for achieving organizational effectiveness but rather the 'culture and trust developed by increasing employees' influence' (2001:55). Second difficulty in arguing that direct EI techniques stimulate performance arises from the complication of separating the effect of these systems from other relevant variables such as technology innovation, changes in labour market conditions or even financial trends (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). In their study of the aluminum industry Wright and Edwards advance this point in noting that 'productivity reflects a complex interplay of forces, and it would be unwise to try to attribute a certain component to individual factors' (1998:81). In brief, although studies (Cunninghamal. 1996, IRS 1999) find positive output effects of involvement such as cost savings, enhanced employee commitment and improved quality, it is hard to disentangle the influence of involvement on productivity from other internal and external factors as well as prove its causal effect on organizational effectiveness. In this, the gains from direct EI systems might not be self-evident and, therefore, easily acknowledged. <heading>Involved actors' attitudes</heading>Another measure that could be used to estimate the gains from direct involvement schemes is the improvement of employee attitudes seen as an end itself and not just a means of increasing organizational performance (see Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). Results from such an examination are not unambiguous as well. Empirical study evidence reviewed by Geary and Dobbins demonstrates that 'elements of the new work patterns were of benefit to employees and were welcomed, but there were also aspects which imposed new demands and intensified effort levels' (2001:19). The nature of employee acceptance of direct involvement is dependent on numerous factors, including workers' expectations, prior experience of such schemes, managerial reciprocity (often expressed in adequate payment levels and job security), trust relations and overall cohesion with business and HR strategy (Geary and Dobbins 2001, Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). A single or a combination of these factors may tip the balance for employee perceptions in the one direction or the other but most often produces something of a mixed result. As Wright and Edwards report in their aluminum plants case study, because of EI techniques, 'employees registered higher job satisfaction but this did not translate into 'high commitment' indicators such as high-trust relations or a strong identification with the employing organization' (1998:87). This view is complemented by the study of Cunninghamal. (1996) which finds employees' view of involvement (or the empowerment version of it) to be generally positive, although a proportion of the workers expressed concerns about additional workload, new roles, increased supervision and possibility of redundancies. It is clear that while there are gains for employees to be derived from direct EI techniques, such as more discretion and responsibility with regard to individual jobs (especially if the forms introduced promote the delegative and not only the consultative element of direct involvement), there are also more negative consequences that should not be underestimated. Last but not least, the perceptions of the managers who actually implement and lead the direct EI schemes should not be overlooked as well. The experience of senior managers that introduce the systems and middle managers and supervisors who usually implement them could limit the gains from them if this experience is connected with functional rivalry, control anxiety, insufficient training or fears of job or status loss (see also Marchingtonal. 1993). Evidently, direct EI initiatives could benefit all the parties involved in the process, so gains could be felt at all organizational levels but, equally, if not handled properly, they could not only not offer any gains, but bring new challenges with them. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This essay has tried to explore the objectives behind the increased or consistent utilization of direct employee involvement techniques in the UK, as demonstrated by empirical survey data. It has also attempted to note the gains that are derived from such schemes in practice and their dependence on the various factors and actors that influence them. Clearly, direct involvement schemes are being introduced in the workplace in a management-driven effort to increase employee motivation and commitment to their work, thus leading to enhanced organizational performance and flexibility (see also Cunninghamal. 1996). The real gains are more difficult to detect as materialized in practice, not least because as IRS points out 'most organisations do not have any formal mechanisms for monitoring the effectiveness of their EI strategies' (1999:8). In addition, the strong contextual dependence of EI schemes should be noted. They are introduced in different ways, at different organizational levels and by different functions as their champions (Ackers et. al. 1992). Moreover, their success is largely shaped by the business environment of the company (e.g. more prominent utilization in manufacturing firms with consultation traditions, IRS 1999), the different agendas actors involved in their implementation have (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005, Fenton-O'Creevy 2001) and their overall fit with the remainder of employee policies and business strategy (Marchingtonal. 1994). In sum, although managerial logic behind using direct EI schemes is manifest, the real gains from them are more problematic to demonstrate in practice. 