<abstract><heading>Objective</heading>In the last decade, managers have witnessed a revolution in technology and supply chains. A variety of shocks occurring throughout markets have radically changed the way managers view their environments. The rate of change in markets, products, technology, and competitors is rapidly increasing, leading to a situation in which managers must make decisions on shorter notice with less information, and with higher penalty costs. Despite the apparent impossibility of surviving under such environment conditions, some organizations are thriving, Super Soap is an example. As Super Soap strives to increase customer value by improving performance while simultaneously reducing costs, one area that attracting its attention is procurement and outsourcing management. In this essay, we will discuss them in details. It is divided in two parts. The first part is talking about the organisational structures of procurement department, function of centralized procurement organisation and the outsourced issues. The second part will analysis three cost saving measures, which are volume concentration, best price evaluation and global sourcing. </abstract><heading>Part one: Procurement Organisation</heading>Purchasing is presented in this book as a pro-active function involved in the management of the input to the organization, and as a key element in all business in which purchase costs are a significant proportion of total revenue or budget[1]. <heading>Traditional structure of procurement department</heading>At department level the number of people employed, the volume and variety of goods and services purchased, the ability and authority of the department head, the capabilities of the people employed in the department, and the importance of the supply function to the operation of the enterprise concerned, are among the factors which will affect the organization structure decision. Nevertheless, there are basic organization patterns around which variations occur. A simple form in a small department is often something like that shown in figure 1. with the exclusion in some cases of the stock-control function from the buyer's <figure/>responsibilities, this pattern is reasonably typical of a small departmental structure. Most departments, in the UK at least, are composed of less than four people. It should be noted, however, that an organization chart is but one aspect of the matter. It tells us nothing of the scope of the job the buyer holds, etc., nor does it describe the informal aspects of the organizational activity. Figure 2, with similar caveats, illustrates one approach to organization structure in a larger department. <figure/>The division of responsibilities in figure 1 is generally quite straightforward. The buyer assumes responsibility for the more important purchases, and his assistant deals with the more routine matters. In practice, the classic 80/20 relationship is evident in this division, for most of the money spent by the organization will tend to be concentrated on a relatively small number of items. In figure 2, the allocation of responsibilities within the department is more complex. Generally speaking the chief buyer is responsible for the policy-making as well as the efficient management of the department as an element in the company organization. He usually retains responsibility, too, for the most important contracts and purchasing decisions. In this type of structure a decision has to be taken as to how best to group the purchasing activities so as to be most effective. One common approach is to do this by commodity or material groups, where each buyer deals with a particular range of items; for example, one buyer may be responsible for raw materials, another for mechanical components and another for electrical/electronic materials. Apart from the advantage of specialization in a particular range of goods, this helps to avoid duplication of research and negotiation effort at plant level. It should also facilitate data collection and communication inside the department and with other sections of the company as a whole. It can strengthen the buyer's negotiating position through consolidation of total requirements and can reduce time spent in negotiation. In addition, liaison with suppliers is often improved by this means. However, if this approach to division of work is followed, it is important to bear in mind that provision should be made whereby a colleague can take over responsibility for a particular group of materials in the absence of the buyer normally responsible. One method which is commonly used to deal with this matter is to 'pair' buyers. Not only can this help to overcome such temporary problems, but it can be a useful means of staff development. In the organization show in figure 2, buyers 1 and 2 and buyers 3 and 4 might work together in this manner. In larger organization(see figure 3), each section will tend to become self-sufficient in this way. Development of staff in such cases, however, may involve moving people between sections. <figure/>Buyer specialization by commodity or material group may often be the best way to subdivide the work of a supplies department, but it is not always the case. In the construction industry, for instance, individual buyers or buying sections are often responsible for all purchases for particular contracts. Often these contracts amount to huge sums and the construction site may be many miles from where the responsible buyer is located. In such circumstances, a single contact facilitates liaison, even though there may be advantages in concentrating purchases for negotiation. A combination approach is frequently favoured, where buyers assigned to particular contracts place orders against contracts negotiated on a 'commodity' basis for the company as a whole. These contracts will typically, be negotiated by members of staff who have been designated as major contract buyers. Usually this work is undertaken in addition to order functions. <heading>Criteria of tasks in procurement process</heading>With regard to the allocation of purchasing tasks, responsibilities and authority, three different levels may be differentiated: <list>StrategicTacticalOperational</list><heading>Strategic level</heading>The strategic level covers those purchase decisions that influence the market position of the company in the long run. These decisions primarily reside under the responsibility of top management. Examples of purchase decisions at this level are: The development and issuing of operational guidelines, procedures and task descriptions, which provide authority to the purchasing department. The development and implementation of auditing and review programs in order to monitor and improve purchasing operations and performance. Decisions to outsource activities, which currently have been executed by the company to outside suppliers. Establishing long-term contracts and contacts with certified and/or preferred suppliers(for example long-term purchasing agreements, licence agreements, partnership agreements, co-design agreements). Decisions related to adopting a supplier strategy based on multi-versus single-sourcing. Major investment decisions(in buildings, equipment, computers). Decisions with regard to backward integration, i.e. decisions to participate financially in supplier organizations in order to safeguard the future supply of critical materials. Decisions related to policies concerning transfer-pricing and inter-company supplies. Decisions related to policies on reciprocal arrangements, counter-trade and barter-deals. This list illustrates the long-term, strategic impact that purchasing and supply decisions may have on the company's competitive position. <heading>Tactical level</heading>The tactical level encompasses the involvement of the purchasing function affecting product, process and supplier selection. Examples of purchasing decisions at this level are: Agreement on corporate and/or annual supplier agreements. Preparing and developing value analysis programs, programs aimed at design-review and product standardization. Adopting and conducting certification programs(including audits) for suppliers in order to improve the quality of incoming goods and materials. Selection and contracting of suppliers in general, and programs aimed at supply-base reduction, in particular. Decisions on these issues often have a medium-term impacts(one to three years). They are cross-functional in the sense that dealing with them effectively requires the coordination and cooperation of other disciplines within the company, including engineering, manufacturing, logistics, quality assurance. <heading>Operational level</heading>The operational level addresses all activities related to the ordering and expediting function. This level of activities incorporates the ordering of materials, monitoring the deliveries and setting quality disputes on incoming materials. More specifically, the operational activities of the purchasing function include: The ordering process(release of orders corresponding to already concluded agreements with suppliers). All expediting activities related to released orders. Troubleshooting: solving daily problems on quality, supply and payment in the relationship with the supplier. The monitoring and evaluation of supplier performance. Table 1 presents the relationships between the three defined task-levels and a number of purchasing activities. <table/><heading>Centralized purchasing structure</heading><heading>Description</heading>In this situation at the corporate level, a central purchasing department can be found where corporate contracting specialists operate at the strategic and tactical level(see figure 3). Decisions on product specifications are made centrally(often in close cooperation with a central engineering or R&D organization), and the same goes for supplier selection decisions; contracts with suppliers are prepared and negotiated centrally. These contracts are often multi-year agreements with pre-selected suppliers, stating the general and specific purchase conditions. The operational purchase activities are conducted by the operating companies. General Motors Europe and Volkswagen may serve as examples of companies which have centralized their strategic and tactical purchasing operations to a high degree. Other examples are Xerox and the Ford Motor Company. The main advantage of this structure is that, through coordination of purchasing, better conditions(both in terms of prices and costs and in terms of service and quality) from suppliers can be achieved. Another advantage is that it will facilitate efforts towards product and supplier standardization. The disadvantages are also obvious: the management of the individual business unit has only limited responsibility for decisions on purchasing. Often the problem is that the business-unit managers are convinced that they are able to reach better conditions on their own, and will act individually; in this way they will gradually undermine the position of the corporate purchasing department. This structure is appropriate in cases where several business units buy the same products, which at the same time are of strategic importance to them. <figure/><heading>Advantage of centralized structure</heading>Creating a centralized procurement group in a multi-plant or multidivisional environment can provide some define advantages. When purchasing was basically a clerical ordering function, it did not make much sense to centralize purchasing. The benefits gained from centrally accumulating and leveraging purchases ere usually outweighed by the reduced responsiveness and added layers of decision-making authority. As the scope and importance of purchasing increased, however, firms increasingly recognized the necessary of a centralized group to coordinate the overall purchasing effort. Centralization does not necessarily imply that the central group actually performs any buying. Instead, the central group managers those activities that provide advantages to the entire organization. <heading>COORDINATE PURCHASE VOLULMES</heading>Traditionally, the primary advantage of centralized purchasing has been to realize a favourable price due to accumulated volumes. Unfortunately, when firms pursued centralized purchasing, they not only centralized the sourcing of parts with suppliers but also the actually ordering process. This led to the widespread perception that centralized purchasing resulted in decreased responsiveness to manufacturing needs. There existed a widely held belief that centralization did not work. People believed that centralization just added another time-consuming step in the decision-making process. Today, however, the systems technology exists for a firm to identify common purchased items between divisions or business units for centrally coordinated sourcing. To facilitate this process, local purchasing personnel can still retain the authority to generate purchase releases directly to a supplier. A firm can achieve material cost reductions by combining purchase volumes while still recognizing the operating requirements of division or plant buyers. In fact with electronic data interchange systems, operating requirements are now often triggered by users and sent to suppliers, with little day-to-day involvement on the part of purchasing. <heading>ABILITY TO DEVELOP AND COORDINATE PROCUREMENT STRATEGY</heading>It is difficult for a firm, if not totally impossible, to develop and coordinate a corporate procurement strategy unless a strong central procurement group exists. One issue is whether it is advantageous to develop a corporate purchasing strategy. For most firms, the answer is definitely yes. A strong corporate purchasing strategy provides the proper match between opportunities and resources, provides operational guidance to managers, and provides flexibility as firms adapt to a dynamic environment. <heading>ABILITY TO COORDINATE AND MANAGE COMPANYWIDE PURCHASING SYSTEMS</heading>The need for advanced purchasing systems is increasingly important. The design and coordination of sophisticated purchasing systems should not be the responsibility of an individual business unit. This is particularly true if a firm plans on coordinating purchase requirements between divisions or units. If each division is responsible for the development of its own purchasing or part numbering system, the end result will be a mixture of incompatible systems throughout the organization. A centrally coordinated approach to systems development supports a system design compatible with all locations. <heading>OTHER ADVANTAGES OF A CENTRALIZED PURCHASING GROUP </heading>A number of other benefits to a centralized purchasing department or group exist. Centralized authority can provide greater control over large capital expenditures. Inventory part number reduction, an objective of most organizations today, is also possible with a department that has the authority to oversee the activities of each operating unit. From its unique perspective at the top of the organization, a centralized group can focus on controlling the growth of total purchased part numbers. A central group can develop a single coordinated approach to supplier development and support it by providing corporate resources or developing uniform guidelines. A central group can also help to integrate first-, second-, and third-tier suppliers into a supply chain management program. Because significant resources and central coordination is needed for such an effort, centralized purchasing is a must to ensure the success of this strategy. Finally, a central purchasing group can effectively coordinate a supply base reduction program. This makes sure that the reduction process supports the goals of the entire organization and not just a particular purchasing department. <heading>Outsourcing in procurement</heading><heading>Make or buy</heading>When conducting competitive and make/buy analysis, Cummins engine performed several critical tasks. The first was to determine the appropriate level of abstraction, (that is, the proper unit of analysis.) For example, due to the sheer number of individual components in most final products, it would be nearly impossible to make a sound make/buy decision on each and every individual component. Therefore, it was important to aggregate, or combine, the level of analysis moving from the individual component or subassembly level all the way up to the assembly or complete system level. In the Cummins example, managers considered a backhoe loader from the systems perspective, treating it as a system made up of a variety of assemblies and subassemblies, (the drivetrain, chassis, cab, engine, and so forth). Using the backhoe loader's engine as an example of a subsystem, the engine can be further broken down into a series of complex assemblies and subassemblies like the fuel delivery system and the power cylinder. This level of abstraction can then be further redefined in terms of individual parts and components such as pistons, rings, pins, and sleeves. A firm should analyze each level of abstraction and decide the appropriate level that the firm will use in determining its critical manufacturing requirements. Firms facing the strategic make/buy decision must painstakingly evaluate the entire hierarchy of components, subassemblies, assemblies, subsystems, and systems for each of its major product lines to determine which subsystems and assemblies are essential to the firm's competitive position. This analysis should include future anticipated product generations as well. The character of the make/buy decision will vary widely among firms and among industries because of the variation in perceptions of core competencies, goals, and objectives. In addition to the identification and consideration of core competencies that will provide direction to the make/buy decision, the firm must also evaluate its competitive priorities in terms of overall business strategies. The nature of the overall business strategy should dictate guidelines affecting how to conduct the competitive and make/buy analyses. <table/><table/><heading>Why outsourcing and benefits for it</heading>Companies should consider outsourcing their procurement functions for the same reasons they might outsource other operations, such as payroll or IT. Historically, the top rationale is that the work is not a core competency, and thus should be done by an organization for which the work is a core competency. At most companies, purchasing indirect or non-critical materials or managing basic processes such as procure-to-pay are not core competencies. However, many businesses now see outsourcing as a real opportunity to increase efficiency. This is doubly true in procurement, where significant savings can result from repositioning and centralizing large numbers of people and technologies, and avoiding burdensome investments in upgrades and new systems. Higher-level procurement efficiencies also exist, such as channelling more spend through aggregated corporate contracts (compliance). In this case, raising compliance from 60 percent to 95 percent can cut a company's cost of goods sold by as much as 4 percent. Across the board, it is not uncommon for procurement outsourcing to reduce the cost of materials and services by up to 15 percent. A major advantage to outsourcing is that it allows the buying firm a greater degree of flexibility. As market demand levels change, the firm can more easily make changes in its product or service offerings in response. Because there are lower levels of investment in specific assets, it is easier for the firm to make unexpected changes in its own production resources. There is a minimal investment risk for the buyer as the supplier assumes the uncertainty inherent in plant and equipment investment. Ideally, both the buying and the supplying firms should concentrate on their own distinct core competencies while outsourcing other products and services that are not considered areas of expertise, yet are necessary for competitive advantage. Also, outsourcing allows for improved cash flow because there is less upfront investment in plant and equipment. By using contract manufacturers, Dell computer supports $3 billion in annual revenues with only $60 million of fixed assets. A firm may achieve reductions in labor costs by transferring production to an outsource location that pays lower wages or has higher efficiencies, resulting in lower per-unit manufacturing costs. As the high cost of providing retirement and medical benefits continues to escalate, firms are increasingly avoiding hiring more full-time personnel whenever possible. <heading>Part Two: Cost Savings Measures</heading>A major responsibility of purchasing is to ensure that the price paid for an item is fair and reasonable. Evaluation of a supplier's cost versus the actual price paid is an ongoing challenge within many industries. The need to control costs requires that a buyer focus on the costs associated with producing an item or service, versus simply analyzing final price. In fact, innovative pricing approaches involve cost identification as a process leading to buyer-seller agreement on a final price. The measures in this category focus attention on efforts to reduce purchase costs. Cost measures fall into three general categories: cost reduction, cost avoidance, and return-on-investment (ROI based on cost reductions obtained). The use of cost measures requires a word of caution. The method used to achieve cost reductions is critical. A cost reduction based on mutual cooperation is the same, on paper, as a cost reduction resulting from heavy-handed pressure on a supplier. While the end result (i.e. a cost reduction) appears to be the same, the process used to achieve that result can have longer-term implications. Cooperation may reduce costs through joint improvement while heavy-handed cost pressure might force a supplier to cut corners, resulting in poor quality. A cost saving measure compares the actual cost of an item or family of items over a period of time. A cost reduction is a decrease in cost resulting from a change in purchasing practice brought about by individual or group effort aimed at achieving such a decrease. In the following paragraphs, we will discuss about three cost saving methods: globing sourcing, product specification improvement and best price evaluation. <heading>Globing sourcing</heading>The level of non-domestic purchases by U.S. firms has increase during the past several decades. In today's competitive markets, firms must search globally for quality products at the lowest total cost. The need to evaluate world sources of supply to remain competitive has become more of a factor for today's purchasing professional than it was twenty years ago. International competition requires purchasing from sources best able to support a firm's competitive position in the marketplace. In does not imply a conscious effort to favour foreign supplier over domestic suppliers. Purchasers would rather source from a geographically closer supplier if the local supplier is competitive at world-class levels. There is no real advantage to longer material pipelines, everything else equal. Recently, some larger U.S. firms have shown an increase willingness to work with domestic suppliers who have the ability to become world-class performers. Companies recognize the value of a local supply base capable of delivering best-in-class performance. Over the long run, the resources committed to developing local suppliers often provide benefits that outweigh the expenses involved. <heading>Why firms pursue worldwide sourcing</heading>COST/PRICE BENEFITS This is probably the most common reason why firms purchase worldwide. After considering all the costs associated with international purchasing, savings of 20 to 30% are not unusual on some items. Cost differentials between countries can arise because of lower profit margin, or exchange rate differences favouring the offshore producer. Firms are quick to point out that purchasing should only consider suppliers capable of meeting rigid quality standards. Price by itself should not be the sole criterion for a souring decision. <heading>Assessing the need for global sourcing</heading>Not all firms should commit the time and resources to develop integrated procurement systems. For example, a smaller manufacturer competing in regional markets against other regional producers probably does not have the need or capability to pursue anything beyond basic international purchasing. A firm with a single design and manufacturing facility will not require sophisticated global sourcing systems. A firm must assess the level of international or global sourcing required to remain competitive in its industry. The level required is a function of four variables: competitive forces, customer requirements, level of global competition, and the location of the best suppliers for the specific purchase requirement. Once a firm identifies its deport that level and identify its current sourcing capabilities. Identifying the operating requirements and current capabilities helps highlight any potential performance gaps between where a firm is and where it should be. <heading>The international sourcing process</heading>Firms often follow a structured approach when pursuing international part sourcing. This section discusses key portions of the international sourcing process in greater detail. Although the sequence of this process may vary, all of the steps must be completed at some point in order to successfully implement an international purchase. <heading>Choose Items to Get Started</heading>From firms unfamiliar international sourcing, getting started for the first time is usually a real learning experience. The initial attempt at foreign buying can influence the success or failure of the overall international sourcing process. Almost any item purchased locally is available internationally, especially basic, commodity-type items. Firms should select items for foreign purchase evaluation that offer an opportunity to realize quality, cost, or delivery benefits yet do not represent an unusual level of initial risk. A good first step involves selecting one or more items to evaluate. Here are some suggestions about how to select initial items if a manager is considering international sourcing for the first time. Select items non-critical to ongoing operations. Commodity-type items or items available from multiple sources are good candidates. Once enough experience has been developed with such an item, other types of items can be included. Select items with standard or easily understood specifications. Select items with sufficiently high purchase volumes to justify the effort associated with international sourcing. For purchases that are likely to require major effort in developing a source, select items that have the potential of providing a competitive advantage over time. Select items at a stage in the product life cycle will provide sufficient benefit for longer-term sourcing. Identify items that are not competitive along some key performance criteria such as cost or quality. These criteria are important, because if the international source fails to meet the buyer's expectations, domestic alternatives must be found on relatively short notice. Another factor contributing to initial success include keeping other departments informed about the items being considered for international sourcing. Also , firms should prepare extended schedules of quantity and delivery requirements to provide as much information as possible to potential foreign suppliers. <heading>Obtaining Information About Worldwide Sources</heading>Once a firm identifies potential sourcing items, it must gather and evaluate information on potential suppliers or identify intermediaries capable of that task. This can prove challenging if a firm is inexperienced or has limited outside contacts or sources of information. The following sources can provide valuable leads in identifying potential suppliers or trade intermediaries. INTERNATIONAL INDUSTRIAL DIRECTORIES Industrial directories are a solid source of information about suppliers by industry or region of the world. Hundreds of directories are available that identify potential international contacts. TRADE SHOWS Trade shows are a means to gather information on many suppliers at one time, and occur throughout the world for practically every industry. Most business libraries have a directory that lists worldwide trade shows. With a minimal amount of research, purchasers can identify trade shows related directly to their purchasing needs. TRADING COMPANIES Trading companies offer a full range of services to assist purchasers. For instance, the Westinghouse Trading Company(WTC) uses a proprietary computer program called the integrated global sourcing database. This system gathers and evaluates all pertinent information and quotation data before submitting it to clients as part of a comprehensive proposal. The company issues letters of credit and pays brokers, customs, dock fees, insurance, ocean, and inland freight bills. The client receives one itemized invoice for the total services performed. EXTERNAL AGENTS A host of experts are available to provide international sourcing assistance. Independent agents, working on commission, will act as purchasing representatives in a foreign county. They locate sources of supply, evaluate the source, and handle the required paperwork and documentation. Some agents provide full-service capability. Agents are an option when a company lacks foreign expertise or a presence in a foreign market. TRADE CONSULATES A purchaser can contact foreign trade consulates located in the U.S. for information. Almost all consulates have trade experts who are eager to do business with American buyers. These consulates are located in major cities across the country. A purchaser can also contact U.S. embassies located oversees to inquire about suppliers in a particular country. There are also a number of U.S. department of commerce offices staffed by trade specialists who have several good services available at a nominal fee. INTERNAL FIRM SOURCES These sources include the direct use of foreign subsidiaries, foreign buying offices a firm may have established, or international joint venture partners. Foreign partners will have greater experience with suppliers in their part of the world or have contacts who can get the required information. <heading>Evaluating Sources of Supply</heading>Whether the purchaser or an external agent coordinates the international purchase, foreign suppliers must be subject to the same performance evaluation and standards as domestic suppliers. Do not assume that a foreign company can automatically satisfy a buyer's performance requirements or expectations. Here are some of the issues to address when evaluating foreign sources: Is there a significant difference between the total cost of a domestic and foreign source? Will the foreign supplier maintain these differences over time? How stable is the foreign supplier's price? What is the effect of longer material pipelines and increased average inventory levels? What are the supplier's technical and quality capabilities? Is the supplier capable of consistent delivery schedules? How much lead time does the supplier require? Can we develop a longer-term relationship with this supplier? Are patents and proprietary technology safe with this supplier? Is the supplier trustworthy? How will foreign purchasing affect relations with domestic suppliers? Firms often use trial orders to evaluate foreign sources. Buyers are usually not willing to rely initially on a foreign source for an entire purchase requirement. A buyer can use smaller or trial orders to begin to establish a supplier's performance track record. <heading>Awarding the Purchase Contract</heading>Once a firm identifies what it believes are qualified domestic or qualified suppliers, it can solicit detailed proposals. If a foreign source is not competitive then a purchaser can select the domestic source. If the foreign source meets a buyer's criteria for initial supplier selection, then the buyer can begin to negotiate contract terms and conditions. Negotiable items include price, delivery lead times, currency payment, technical or engineering support requirements, sales terms, or quality-related issues. As with any selected supplier, a buyer must perform continuous supplier performance evaluation and management. <heading>Product specified improvement</heading><heading>Measuring cost reduction ideas leads to savings at Chrysler co. </heading>Chrysler Corporation has developed an effective cost-reduction program, called SCORE, which encourages suppliers to submit cost-reduction ideas. Each year, Chrysler asks first-tier suppliers to propose money-saving ideas totalling 5% of their sales to the company. The program allows suppliers to retain some of these cost savings and realize some projected future savings. "What we're doing is pursuing efficiency, quality, and affordability without eroding our suppliers' profit margins," says Tom Stallkamp, Chrysler's executive vice president of procurement. In 1996, Chrysler established a $1 billion cost-savings target, which suppliers met by saving $300 million in the current year and $700 million in projected future savings. Overall, the program has saved Chrysler $2.5 billion since 1989. Chrysler ahs entrusted its first-tier suppliers with design responsibilities, which gives first-tier suppliers the chance to involve second- and third-tier suppliers and pass cost-reduction savings along to them. Chrysler saves $200, 000 on average for each proposal. The company further supplier cost-reduction ideas. This system also shows that what gets rewarded gets done! <heading>Best price evaluation </heading>Purchasing uses various indicators to measure how effectively it spends purchase dollars. Measures in this category are price-effectiveness measures. The most common price-effectiveness measures include actual purchase price versus planned purchase price comparisons, actual purchase price compared to a market index, and comparisons of actual-to-actual purchase prices fro individual and aggregated items between operating plans or divisions within an organization. ACTUAL PRICE COMPARED TO PLAN A common price-effectiveness measure is the variance between actual and planned purchase prices. Actually, measurement of planned purchase price variance can occur at different levels within an organization. One level included actual-to-planned purchases for the total material budget: this is an aggregated price-effectiveness measure. Other levels show comparisons that provide greater detail. For example, purchasing may calculate actual-to-planned price variances for each individual purchased item. Table 4 presents various methods to calculate actual price as compared to a plan. <table/>In most organizations, buyers prepare the planned forecasts subject to managerial review. Other personnel involved in the material planning process can include finance, manufacturing, product engineering, and executive management. Aggregated material plans can eventually become part of a firm's overall profit plan. Cost targets are increasingly developed as part of the new product development process. ACTUAL PRICES-TO-MARKET INDEX Purchase price to market index measures provide information about the relationship between actual prices and published market prices. One approach includes calculating an index representing the actual price of purchased items and them comparing this index against the Wholesale Price Index(WPI) or the Producer Price Index(PPI) for the purchased items. This measure is particularly useful for identifying inflationary or deflationary pricing pressure. PRICE COMPARISONS BETWEEN OPERATIONS Actual price comparisons between plants, divisions, or business units for similar items also occur. These comparisons provide an opportunity to identify purchase price differences within a firm. This provides visibility as to which unit is negotiating or securing the best purchase price. The comparison activity can also help identify commonly purchased items between units for purchase consolidation. Although firms are increasingly focusing on cost versus price, price-effectiveness measures are still popular, especially with firms that have not developed close working relationship with suppliers and therefore lack visibility to detailed cost data. Price-effectiveness measures are also commonly used when purchasing raw materials or other commodity-type items. 