Swing Time (1936) was the sixth of nine films starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers made for RKO. It is often acclaimed as being the best film of the cycle with stunning choreography, brilliant direction and set design and the couple fully established as a successful dance partnership. However, whether the film represents a turning point within the cycle is open to interpretation. Many critical sources are quite happy to state that Swing Time represents the peak of the cycle 'The best of the Astaire-Rogers films is... Swing Time' ' Swing Time (1936) is often named as the best or most popular musical/romance of dancing duo Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire." This is a fair point to make. It lies numerically just over halfway through the cycle and includes some of the best music in the series, namely the Oscar winning 'The Way You Look Tonight' and the number 'Never Gonna Dance' which famously took 47 takes within one day, causing Ginger's feet to bleed through her shoes. Despite this she still claims it is her favourite film made with Astaire. <fnote>Ebert, Robert  URL  accessed 3rd November 2005 </fnote><fnote> URL  accessed 3rd November 2005 </fnote>RKO was the smallest of the major studios and housed very few stars, so the success of he Rogers and Astaire films was vital. The success of Swing Time is very well known, however RKO noticed a considerable drop in box office revenue, and after Swing Time, Shall We Dance was rumoured to be the final film in the series. Herein lies an argument that Swing Time represents the peak of their success and that it was during this film that they were reflecting on their career. This can be seen in some of the musical numbers in the film, such as 'The Way You Look Tonight', on which I will comment later. Although contributors such as Jerome Kern were rehired for this film, which suggests that this film is simply a remake of all the others, it also involved a new director, George Stevens which accounts for the extravagant, white, art deco sets, distinctive visual style to rival the dancing and the budget which successfully disguises the fact that this is a film made in the middle of the Depression era. Stevens' style is very different from that of Mark Sandrich, who directed the previous four films and would go on to direct a further two. It is very easy to place a large amount of credit with Stevens for the success of Swing Time and to use him to set this film apart from the rest of the cycle. This is the only film directed by him and so many of the changes made are bound to be attributed to him, and it has a definite style. However Edward Gallafent claims that too much emphasis is placed on the change in director, the result being that Swing Time 'has been given attention and respect largely denied to others'. He claims instead that 'There seems to be a measure of consent that Top Hat is the climax of the Astaire-Rogers musicals', with a 'perfect, enduring, typical performance'. This may be true to an extent. Top Hat involves similarly spectacular dance sequences and also finds the pair at the height of their popularity. This makes it even clearer how much of a turning point Swing Time is. The film enjoyed a similar amount of success, but the influence of a new director, and perhaps therefore a new way of looking at the pair, as a duo who were at a critical point in their careers. Gallafent does not put the film itself in a negative light, and argues convincingly that it is a landmark in the cycle, with a lot of changes, but suggests that it is the previous film, Follow the Fleet which expresses particularly a sense of self awareness and a reaction to the history of the couple and the impact of the previous films. What he wishes to emphasise, rather is that the films, whilst being successes in their own right, relate to each other and fluidly change as the cycle moves on. Rather than treating each one as a separate and individual entity, Gallafent sees them as films which are interwoven and take elements of the previous film as well as using new ideas to keep them from being the same formula rehashed. In fact he rejects the use of the word formula altogether. 'Concentration on the dance numbers has caused critics to lose track of the shape of the series... and to be content with terms like 'remake' and 'formula'. <fnote>Gallafent, Edward, Astaire and Rogers: A Movie Book, (Cameron Books 2005) pg 8 </fnote><fnote>Gallafent, Edward, Astaire and Rogers: A Movie Book, (Cameron Books 2005) pg 33 </fnote><fnote>Gallafent, Edward, Astaire and Rogers: A Movie Book, (Cameron Books 2005) pg 8 </fnote>I find this a little unrealistic in a way. There is validity in considering the effect that the films have as one cycle, however it would be foolish not to take each film individually as well. There is clearly a set pattern to most of the films and we should consider, where changes have been made, why they have been made and why at this particular time in one particular film. A major part of the argument for Swing Time as a major turning point is that it is the first to deviate from the narrative established in the Gay Divorcee (1934), the first film in which Astaire and Rogers play the central characters as opposed to supporting roles. Up until this point the films move between two plots: the first meeting and seduction via dance of the two characters or the placing of the two with another couple and asserting them as the better dance team. Generally the two meet, the Astaire character antagonises the Rogers character and the two of them go through a series of misunderstandings and often mistaken identities, but eventually Astaire seduces her through dance and a happy ending is achieved. Gallafent points out various places in the film in which this pattern and other patterns are not followed, suggesting that Swing Time is taking the couple in a different direction. Dance is generally used as a device to express emotions between the two characters; it is a method of seduction and also a plot-advancing device. Often when a song has ended the relationship between the two characters will have changed slightly, Ginger will not be quite so annoyed with Fred, or often the reverse will occur and she will like him even less e.g. 'Pick Yourself Up'. However, in Swing Time there are also dance numbers which do not advance the plot but seem to be purely there as a display of professional talent. For instance the 'Bojangles' number which Astaire does in blackface has very little to do with the romantic plot but could be seen to fit in with the storyline as an example of Lucky in his professional ascension in show business. Similarly the 'Swing Time Waltz' does not appear to forward the relationship but fits in with the performance plot line. This slight lack of integration could point to a recognition of the pair as highly successful dancers in their own rights which previously was not an issue as their films were rising in popularity, perhaps it is a celebration of their achievements thus far. The 'Bojangles' number particularly highlights Astaire and his talents. Of course there is the argument that just because the song does not advance the romantic plot does not mean it is not fully integrated into the narrative. Arlene Croce argues that what makes Swing Time stand out from the other films is that the songs are 'more tightly interwoven' with the storyline. I can appreciate this view, however I do think that numbers such as 'Bojangles' must be recognised as songs which do seem as little detached from the main plot, if they are integrated it is only very loosely, and this should be noted as an attribute of the film and their alternate purposes considered. <fnote>Croce, Arlene, The Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers Book (Vintage 1977) pg 104 </fnote>Another new sentiment in Swing Time is one of reflection on the past, highlighted in the song 'The Way You Look Tonight', the lyrics of which speak about looking forward to remembering one moment in the present. This could be seen as a reflection on the couple's career thus far and suggests that perhaps this is the highlight of the cycle, this is what will be remembered in the future. It also adds a sense of awareness that eventually the cycle will come to and end and that this ending is being considered. Arlene Croce supports this idea 'in the film it is the end of the affair, in life it is the end of Astaire and Rogers' Golden Age'. This awareness of the pair as an established couple with a history continues in Shall We Dance? . <fnote>Croce, Arlene, The Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers Book (Vintage 1977) pg 104 </fnote>'Never Gonna Dance' as the climatic number in the film also breaks away from the pattern which has been established. It has also been spoken of as the 'number that may be the high point of the Astaire-Rogers partnership'. In previous films the final number is usually a public performance, this dance is intensely dramatic, personal and private. Rather then finish together triumphantly, we see Astaire left alone on the dance floor as Rogers spins gracefully out of reach. There is a sense here of a relationship that is coming to an end, even though the audience, by this time, knows that there will invariably be a happy ending. Perhaps this is also some sort of recognition that from now on rather than spiralling up, the rest of cycle will be a winding down of the careers of the two. Indeed, Shall We Dance was rumoured to be the final film of the series, and both this film, Carefree and The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle gradually cling less and less to the image built up by the first few films. It is, arguably, only after Swing Time that these changes really start to occur and the series wraps itself up. <fnote>Ebert, Robert  URL  accessed 3rd November 2005 </fnote>Gallafent also points out that for the first time in the cycle, Fred and Ginger have musical numbers which do not involve dance. The 'A Fine Romance' number involves a dance like movement between the two of them, however there are no actual dance steps as well as in 'The Way You Look Tonight', when Fred sings as Ginger comes out with 'shampoo' in her hair. In previous films this is generally reserved for the second couple with whom Fred and Ginger are inevitably compared. However in Swing Time, with the lack of a second couple, these numbers are passed on to them, rather than cut out altogether. This could be an indication that the two are not simply dancers anymore but their acting and vocal skills are just as endearing. However many changes and deviations from the formulaic plot there may appear to be, Swing Time remains just as popular as many of the earlier films and does not seem to be, from this perspective, an indication of the couple losing popularity. Perhaps rather than a turning point it is simply a consideration of what to do next. But this consideration was made earlier than this as the couple were making  Follow the Fleet. Astaire is quoted as saying that the two of them wondered 'how long it would be safe to carry on this cycle of team pictures'. Swing Time is not the first film in which they contemplate the future of the cycle, but it is the first film in which this contemplation could be considered as being suggested to the audience. <fnote>Gallafent, Edward, Astaire and Rogers: A Movie Book, (Cameron Books 2005) pg 43 </fnote>This film also involves a sense of awareness that the two of them have a history together, which made the idea of them as a dance team more plausible. This idea of a background makes it easier for the audience to believe that the two are a good match, rather than having them be total strangers and suddenly dancing together in such an astounding way. This strategy affects Swing Time, the audience is by now entirely aware that the two are meant to dance together, so when, after the first number 'Pick Yourself Up' in which they dance to save Penny's job, they so suddenly become a professional dance team, this is no surprise to audience whatsoever and allows the narrative to move on. This acknowledgement of a partnership continues in the next three films, as is the sense of ending. Whether the audience was actually aware of any sort of change when Swing Time was playing at theatres is another matter entirely. It is only with retrospect that we can see the films as a completed cycle. Many of the changes noted by critics would probably not have been picked up by your average cinema-goer in the 1930s. The basics of the successful pattern are present. There are just as many dance numbers as there were previously, regardless of their place and purpose within the narrative, there is still the romance between the two major characters, the music is recognisably Kern and there are familiar supporting characters such as Helen Broderick's quick witted, wise cracking character, Mabel. The marked upbeat tone and the ideas of 'top hats and empty pockets' is exactly the same as the other films, the optimism which it is attempting to impart to it's Depression era audience is still very much an obvious part of the film as a whole. There is nothing in this to suggest overtly to the audience that this is a film which marks the end of the run which Astaire and Rogers were enjoying at the time. Perhaps rather than reflecting a change or a turning point, perhaps this film should simply be seen as a successful formula at it's best, this is probably how the public would have viewed it. <fnote>Croce, Arlene, The Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers Book (Vintage 1977) </fnote>Some would argue that the turning point for the pair did not occur within the cycle, only at the end of it in their leaving RKO. Arguably the entire cycle is a rise without a fall, with no pivotal moment in which it changed substantially. The final film in the cycle, The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle, as a biographical piece, does shift dramatically from the fictional encounters of the previous films. Perhaps it is only in this, their final film, in which everything changes, that there is such a turning point. This death of one of the pair, whilst being common knowledge to the audience, would have marked the end of the pair as a performing couple. It would plainly convey to the audience that this was the end of the cycle. Whereas some of the other films may suggest this, or suggest an air of something which was coming to its end, nothing plainly states to the audience that this is really, truly happening until the final film of the cycle. Just because there is a change of director, a change of style, would suggest merely to an audience that this is a set of films with a tried and tested idea which is trying perhaps to make it a little different, making an effort not to bore its audience with the same old thing over and over again. Swing Time clearly does take a different approach to the Fred and Ginger story, or the myth. There are changes which could be said to mark a turning point in the cycle and therefore in the careers of the couple, but similar subtle changes to the narrative etc can be seen in other films in the cycle as well, as well as changes in director and composers e.g. Gershwin in Shall We Dance. However, the myth of Fred and Ginger was obviously not something to be toyed with. It represented a means of escapism to its Depression audience and a massive source of revenue for its small time production studio RKO. Despite the noticeable drop in box office takings and the diminishing numbers of people who actually had the disposable income to visit the theatres, a dramatic change in the blueprint would have been financially and possibly even socially very risky. So where Swing Time may under the surface be taking issue with the formula and the consideration of the future of Astaire and Rogers professionally, outwardly it can just as easily be seen as another version of a tale retold over many years, keeping its audience happy and keeping the cash flowing. 