This quote refers to Bazin's argument that depth of field is not simply a tool, or a piece or pieces of equipment, but that is it created a significant change in the way that cinema communicated with the audience, opening new, important doors for filmmakers. However deep focus cinematography is not without its faults, and other critics have picked up on questions regarding the real value of deep focus which Bazin has ignored. Bazin begins his essay by roughly dividing cinema between 1920 and 1940 into two camps. Those who were interested in conveying reality, and those who were more involved with the idea of the image itself. He then separates the image in to two more categories: firstly the 'plastics' or general physical composition of the shot, and secondly the resources of montage. He goes on to discuss the latter in more detail. He points out that in silent cinema, via the juxtaposition of certain images, meaning was created without the need for sound, quoting Malraux to suggest that it was montage which gave birth to cinema as an art form i.e. creating a language of meaning, separated from a simple recording of reality. He goes on to point out that 'the language of the cinema was not at a loss for ways of saying what it wanted to say." This suggests not only that silent cinema is complete as an art form in itself, distinctly separate from sound films, but could also be taken to mean that films which depend less on montage to convey meaning i.e. deep focus films, actually have a different message to put across. <fnote>Bazin André "The Evolution of the Language of Cinema" in André Bazin What is Cinema Vol. 1 trans. Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967) pg 26 </fnote>Bazin then goes on to talk about realist films in which montage plays no part, but in which meaning is conveyed just as clearly. E.g. Robert Flaherty's film of a seal hunt which records the actual length of time it took. There is no cutting; the camera simply records what is there. Bazin claims that this natural, true-to-life, realistic style of filming is in fact more moving than images which are edited together to suggest meaning or connection, and that directors such as Stronheim and Murnau have a style which, due to a distinct lack of montage editing, not only adds to the reality of what the viewer experiences on the screen, but also reveals truths about the reality of the subject which montage simply cannot achieve. This claim goes on to back up his argument that deep focus offers a more realistic experience for the viewer and that this is what makes it so revolutionary. However I would argue that sometimes montage, simply for its manipulative qualities is actually more likely to extract an emotional reaction from a viewer. Sequences such as the Odessa Steps in Battleship Potemkin quite clearly make deep impressions on an audience, in part because of the way they are edited. Both methods appear to communicate quite effectively with the audience; they simply do so in different ways. Having discussed silent cinema as a language or art form in itself, Bazin moves on to post-war cinema, taking classical Hollywood cinema as an example of matured art, a 'well defined style of photography and editing perfectly adapted to their subject matter, a complete harmony of image and sound." Confirming his previous insinuations, Bazin then claims that the phenomenon of the years 1940-1950 is the introduction of new themes, unexplored by classical film. So rather than having to find new ways of saying the same things, cinema was having to approach new subject matter, and finding that the best way to tackle this was to do so in a different style. So deep focus was indeed a step forward in film language, it allowed filmmakers to express new ideas in new ways, as they had not previously been able to. Bazin touches on the technological influences on this revolution but suggests that since the technology for deep focus was available many years previously, but was left unexplored, there must have been other factors which pushed the use of deep focus into view as a truly influential mode of representation. <fnote>Bazin André "The Evolution of the Language of Cinema" in André Bazin What is Cinema Vol. 1 trans. Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967) pg 29 </fnote>Bazin then discusses editing since the introduction of sound. This continuity editing style was designed to be as invisible to the audience as possible, carrying them as naturally as possible through the narrative action and guiding them towards important dramatic points in the story. He claims that sound image, being more flexible then the visual image was bound to bring editing away from montage and closer to a more realistic, fluid style. However this would suggest to the read that deep focus, as a more realistic technique, was simply expanding on a 'dialectical step forward' which sound had already begun to take. Thus the following claim of Orson Welles' use of deep focus seems a little contradictory. Bazin suggests that this technique challenged the fashion of editing of the time. In a way this is true. Deep focus allowed whole scenes to be shot in one long take, without missing out on vital detail, so there was no reason for extensive cutting. However if we are also to take it that it provides a heightened sense of realism, 'bringing the spectator into a relation with the image closer to that which he enjoys with reality' then this is simply an extension of what sound has already achieved, it is not accomplishing anything new or different. In addition some critics claim that deep focus in fact does not provide as much realism as Bazin claims and that it in fact fits in with classical Hollywood codes. Comolli states 'it inscribes in the image.... The representational code of linear perspective' and deep focus can produce a space that is 'composite and composed, fragmentary and discontinuous, heavily coded." I think there is merit in this argument simply because unless deep focus is used in documentary style to capture exactly what is in front of it, scenes using deep focus allow the director to cram meaning into every plane of focus. Greg Toland says 'they were more than mere backgrounds: they helped trace the rise and fall of the central character'. There is so much space to fill and it cannot be filled arbitrarily, so in a sense the overload of symbolism, which can be found in many deep focus shots, does mean that a sense of realism is lost. In this way the technique could in fact be a step backwards, becoming less realistic and more symbolic than even montage. <fnote>Bazin André "The Evolution of the Language of Cinema" in André Bazin What is Cinema Vol. 1 trans. Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967) pg 35 </fnote><fnote>Comolli, Jean Louis, 'Machines of the Visible' in Theresa de Lauretis and Stephen Heath (ed.) The Cinematic Apparatus (London: Routledge 1985) pg 135 </fnote><fnote>Comolli, Jean Louis, 'Technique et Ideologie: Camera, Perspective, Profondeur de Champ' cited in Christopher Williams' 'The Deep Focus Question: Some Comments on Patrick Ogle's Article' Screen 13:1 (Spring 1972) pg 74 </fnote><fnote>Toland Gregg, "Realism for Citizen Kane", American Cinematographer (Feb 1941) </fnote>Bazin continues, however and claims that deep focus is a system of representation which replaces montage and is interested in the 'continuity of dramatic space and of course... its duration' and that is it 'far superior to anything that could be achieved by the classical "cut".' This is an entirely debatable statement as the two styles are so very different. In my opinion these are two different styles suitable for totally different situations. Bazin himself points out that Welles' pictures are 'difficult to analyse because of their baroque excess." Deep focus may well be a fantastic way to allow the audience access to detail which they were previously denied, but if the mise-en-scene is too cluttered then this asset is wasted. The audience is left overpowered, suffocated by detail which exhausts them as they try to take it all in. Classical editing may deny a certain splendour in the scenes but allows the audience to have complete understanding of what they see in front of them and what it is supposed to mean. Bazin claims that when used skilfully, the deep focus shot makes it impossible to miss significance, and that the same result via montage editing would require a detailed succession of shots. But it seems to me that trying to take a deep focus shot and render it in montage would be ridiculous. Deep focus is used to a different effect than montage, but this difference does not give one a higher value than the other. Yet Bazin continues saying that the films of Welles or Wyler have an advantage in that unlike films which use classical or montage editing it does not 'sacrifice the specific effects that can be derived from unity of image in space and time." This is true, but what deep focus sacrifices is the specificity and lack of ambiguity that can be derived from using such a system of editing. The two appear to be direct opposites and should therefore not be compared but used in their own right. Bazin admits that montage has made a considerable contribution to the evolution of cinematic language, but cannot help but place deep focus at a superior level. <fnote>Bazin André "The Evolution of the Language of Cinema" in André Bazin What is Cinema Vol. 1 trans. Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967) pg 34 </fnote><fnote>Bazin André "The Evolution of the Language of Cinema" in André Bazin What is Cinema Vol. 1 trans. Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967) pg 35 </fnote>He continues to praise the economy, subtlety and realism which he says, quite rightly, affects the interpretation made by the spectator. Here there is no singular interpretation for the scene and on this point I agree with Bazin. Deep focus most certainly forces the viewer to be more mentally aware of the image in from of them and encourages them to make their own judgement about what they see, rather than having a director point it our for them. This is essentially what validates the quote in discussion. Deep focus' effectiveness and status as an important step forward in the language of cinema clearly relies heavily on its impact on the audience and their relation to it. Here a step is taken in a new direction. The viewer is released in a sense, to make whatever he wants out of the vast image in front of him. If reflects an entirely different way of understanding and communicating with an audience. But again I would emphasise that different does not mean better or worse than any other method of interacting with an audience. So Bazin's' argument does have merit, but he spends so much time contrasting deep focus with other methods of editing which fulfil completely different purposes, he skims over some of the problems with deep focus as a language of realism, and also disregards one particular fact: deep focus photography did not make a long-lasting impact. Few films after Citizen Kane used it with such consistency and there is clearly a reason for that. He also ignores the possibility that rather than being a revolution in cinematic language, deep focus was more the result of excessive creative license on the part of people such as Greg Toland and Orson Welles, and that it is little more than a piece of spectacle when used to such excess, a display of what can be done with the newest technology to be found. Rick Altman picks up one of the major flaws in deep focus cinematography. He highlights the fact that deep focus sound, in Citizen Kane in particular, is very problematic when referring to the whole system as realistic. He quotes many critics who praise the accurate relationship e.g. 'precise correspondence of visual and aural space' created between sound and space in the film. However Altman argues quite convincingly that this is not the case. Using many examples, particularly the Colorado sequence, he shows that often the sound scale does match the image scale, highlighting the incredible depth of the sequence, but as the audience becomes more aware of this they are also able to distinguish points when volume levels are sustained for the sake of dialogue, or changed in accordance with character emotions. Altman also notes what he terms 'bookends', striking sound events that occur at the beginning and end of sequences, giving a sense of chapters and reinforcing the narrative. <fnote>Cook, David A History of Narrative Film 2nd ed. (New York: Norton 1990) cited in Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg 95 </fnote>If deep focus is to be seen as a more realistic mode of representation then surely this must involve a realistic continuity in the sound as well? The creation of realistic, deep space must be aural as well as visual. Additionally Altman claims that the sound used in Citizen Kane in fact involves 'manipulation of audience reaction'. This goes entirely against Bazin's theory that it should leave the spectator with a sense of freedom in deciding what is important in a dramatic sequence and how to read its relevance. I would argue that what emerges here is the traditional Hollywood value that narrative must be the most important aspect of the film. The dialectical leap which deep focus makes in freeing its audience visually is restricted by the overriding idea that the story much be told at all costs, and as Altman observes, sometimes the cost of this is Citizen Kane is the reproduction of accurate sound space 'the continued reverb and volume belie any attempt to reproduce the sound space faithfully." Altman comes to the conclusion that 'deep focus cinematography presents too many problems to be applicable to dialogue sequences' and that this problem did not receive adequate consideration. <fnote>Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg 98 </fnote><fnote>Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg99 </fnote><fnote>Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg 104 </fnote>So perhaps here is where deep focus fits into the language of cinema. It has its place ad is effective in certain types of filming, but its sound problems are restricting and even though it does not force the audience to view a film in the way that classical editing does, it is still under the influence of classical Hollywood narrative rules. Indeed Altman challenges Bazin's view that deep focus is 'diametrically opposed to the shot-reverse-shot style of classical Hollywood cinema." He points out that shot-reverse-shots are in fact used in deep focus, and that what makes them work is the fact that volume levels remain the same across cuts. So deep focus images must eventually be worked into the system but the sound must be sacrificed. The technique has too many problems to work effectively on its own. It can, paradoxically, only change aspects of the Hollywood system if it works within the system itself. <fnote>Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg 105 </fnote>He also offers the idea, also suggested by Bordwell, Thompson and Staiger that deep focus was merely a source of technological spectacle rather than a serious step forward in cinematic language. 'Hollywood has eagerly employed spectacle and technical virtuosity as means of artistic motivation... in the sound cinema, depth of field'. However Altman suggests that it is the sound problems which cause this, 'the difficulties of consolidating Hollywood sound conventions with the deep focus style eventually turn deep focus into something of a special effect: a labour intensive flourish or ornament that may provide an aesthetic plus but cannot possibly support the weight of full dialogue scenes." This is an argument that can be applied to many technological advances, that it is only being used as a sort of self-conscious display of what the latest special effects can achieve. Deep focus could be seen in this light, especially since unlike technology such as sound or colour it did not become standard practice in film making, in fact after Citizen Kane it was pushed very much out of the limelight 'the general excitement about Kane's use of deep-focus photography was muted by the difficulties of copying Kane's style. To be sure deep-focus photography thrived... but almost always in shots featuring immobile and more to the point silent foreground objects or characters." This can be seen in The Little Foxes where deep focus shots are far more subtle and infrequent than in Kane. It appears that Toland has learnt a lesson, that deep focus shots, although effective, should be used sparingly, at appropriate moments. Deep focus therefore appears to be less a technique which changed the face of cinema, as Bazin seems to suggest, but one that did provide directors and cinematographers with another colour to add to a palette of effects. Christopher Ogle points out that it becomes 'one possible means of conveying experience' and that 'the primary contribution of Toland and others in developing deep focus may have been in demonstrating that such a choice exists." When one looks at the very different treatment of deep focus in Citizen Kane and The Little Foxes, this appears to be perfectly true. Ogle also reasons in the same article that one of the issues holding back the development of deep focus was that it simply was not fashionable and that cinematographers were notoriously conservative. During the 1930s softer and more diffused images were in style, so even with the evolution of faster film stock and lighting which lent itself to deep focus photography, cinematographers used it, but most underdeveloped it to keep with the trend. This was obviously not such a grand piece of technology that it would immediately sweep the industry. It was quietly experimented with by a few but its merits were not immediately obvious and it did not, as Bazin suggests, transform the language of cinema on its own. It required people who were willing to go against the grain and experiment with it in order for it to break through. <fnote>Bordwell, Staiger, Thompson 'The Classical Hollywood Style' Chpt 2 in The Classical Hollywood Cinema: Film Style and Modes of Production to 1960 (London: Routledge 1985) pg 21 </fnote><fnote>Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg 113 </fnote><fnote>Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg 113 </fnote><fnote>Ogle, Patrick 'Technological and Aesthetic Influences upon the Development of Deep Focus Cinematography in the United States' Screen 13:1 (Spring 1972) pg 71 </fnote>However, having contradicted Bazin, Altman does make a comment that supports the quotation in question. He says 'the reintroduction of deep focus photography... creates a disturbance in the very identity of cinema' partly in that it 'foregrounds the artificiality of Hollywood sound space conventions." This would suggest that it does indeed attempt to push cinema in a different direction. It may not be able to rectify the artificiality of sound space reproduction, partly because its own sound system is fundamentally flawed and partly because it cannot escape Hollywood conventions. However the fact that it clearly does highlight these issues does suggest that cinema needs to rethink its way of communicating sound space to the audience. The level volume treatment of dialogue does not fit with the more realistic sound/image scaling, and the use of both in Kane points this very valid problem of trying to fit realism in with Hollywood codes. <fnote>Altman, Rick, 'Deep Focus Sound: Citizen Kane and the Radio Aesthetic' in Ronald Gottesman (ed.) Perspectives on Citizen Kane (New York: G.K. Hall 1996) pg 107 </fnote>This reflects the overall validity of Bazin's argument. Deep focus is clearly an important innovation in film technology and therefore film history. It creates and speaks in a new way to a new kind of audience, one that is alert and free to create its own interpretations. But it is not a technique without flaws, most notably in its treatment and sound, and neither is it one that can take cinema in a new direction without being held back by classical Hollywood norms and rules. Comparing it to montage in the way that he does is fairly fruitless because these are in effect two different languages, two different ways of conveying different types of meaning, and the fact that it is not a technology which is used universally in the industry, points out that although it important, it was an addition to cinematic forms of representation, rather than a replacement for them. 