<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This material selection report consists of two parts and will be focused on materials, shape and process selection with the use of the Cambridge Engineering Selector. In the first part A, there is a case study on fresh-water heat exchanger tubes material selection and it explains how judgement with the use of CES selector leads to high conductivity copper be selected as material used for fresh-water heat exchanger tubes. The first part B will be another design study regarding process and material selection this time and will explain how judgement and decision with the help of CES selector affect our final choice on both process and material selection and appreciate the final selection- Second Part concentrates on shape selection and tends to give reader an idea how secondary design factor M affects selection result. It also contrasts and compares each shape candidates' characteristics in order to obtain a final selection from a range of short listed shape. This report involves basic knowledge of CES selector and decision to identify the best candidate from a shortlist of candidates, which may have similar properties. </abstract><heading>REPORT 1-MATERIAL SELECTION FOR FRESH-WATER HEAT EXCHANGER TUBES</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>Heat exchangers have been used to provide heat for domestic hot water and other commercial and industrial applications for many decades. In developed, developing and some of the undeveloped countries, the escalating cost of energy has increased due to increasing demand of exhaustible energy fuel. The use of heat exchangers helps extract and conserve energy that was previously wasted which is very important to both industrial and domestic users. The theory behind heat exchangers is energy transfer, which will be introduced in detail in Theory. The purpose of this part of the report is to produce a short list of suitable candidate materials for heat exchangers tubes, which plays a crucial part in energy transfer in heat exchanger, and to identify their weakness and strength. <heading>Theory</heading>A heat exchanger utilizes the fact that heat transfer occurs when there is a difference in temperature between two mediums. In a heat exchanger, there is a stream of a higher energy and a stream of lower energy. One of them flows through a set of tubes which are immersed in a chamber through which the other flows. The two streams are separated by a thin, solid wall of tubes. The wall must be thin and conductive in order for heat exchange to occur. The wall must be strong enough to withstand any pressure caused by pressure difference between two fluids and have to be fairly corrosion resistible to fluids used. Copper seems to be one of a common choice for construction. Here is a simple flow diagram showing how heat transfers in a heat exchanger. <figure/><heading>Method</heading>There are a few boundaries in the task given. The heat exchanger tubes specification is as follows: Working medium: It is used in a fresh-water heat exchanger so one or both of the mediums is water Bulk non-Mechanical property- Maximum service temperature: It must have a maximum service temperature of 150 degree Celsius or higher to avoid rapid drop of physical strength Bulk Mechanical requirement- Ductility: Elongation must be larger than 20% of its original length as the tubes have to be bent Chemical property- Corrosion resistance: It must have very good corrosion resistance in fresh water as the tubes are in contact with water. Non-Mechanical property- Thermal Conductivity: Must be as large as possible such that the tubes are efficient enough conducting energy transfer. A short list of suitable candidate materials can be found by inputting different criteria to CES selector program. Stage 1 Materials passing this stage must have adequate ductility and have maximum service temperature no less than 423K Stage 2 Materials passing this stage must have very good corrosion resistance in fresh water and have very high thermal conductivity After stage 1 and 2, there are only 6 materials left on the shortlist as the rest, failed in the previous stages, have been filtered. They are Copper/Alumina Composite, Gold, Commercial Purity, High Conductivity Copper, Silver Magnesium Alloy, Silver Nickel Alloy and Silver, Commercial Purity. These materials meet the minimum requirement and it might be essential to identify the most suitable material from the shortlist by inputting additional criteria. Bulk Mechanical property- Compressive strength: It is believed that heat exchanger tubes have to be strong enough to withstand pressure difference between mediums or else they will either crash or change shape, which engineers try to avoid as it may affect the efficiency or may even shorten its life span. Profitability-Price: Cost could be another important factor in this matter as this directly affects retail price and manufacturing cost. Taking these two criteria into account, Stage 3 will shortlist materials that are not too expensive and have high compressive strength. Stage 3 Materials passing this stage must have at least 10MPa compressive strength and cost no more than 80GBP/kg (This is to filter those unrealistically expensive materials) After Stage 3, Gold has been filtered out because of its cost. Only Copper/Alumina Composite, Commercial Purity, High Conductivity Copper, Silver Magnesium Alloy, Silver Nickel Alloy and Silver, Commercial Purity are in the shortlist. <heading>Analysis/Conclusion:</heading>After 3 stages of selection, materials in the shortlist are suitable to be used in fresh-water heat exchanger tubes manufacturing. However, more criteria can be used to pick the most suitable material. Criteria below together with those introduced before affect selection of a suitable material. Bulk mechanical Property- Hardness: In heat exchanger, hardness may be very important because it can resist change of shape in fluid flow. If its hardness is not adequate, the tubes may collapse. Hard materials can therefore withstand failure in extensional, impact or flexural stress. Bulk Mechanical Property- Fatigue Also flow of fluid may cause fatigue on tubes so it may be useful to consider fracture toughness in order to obtain a material that can absorb energy of deformation with breaking, which is a show of strength. The best material can be found by comparison on criteria introduced. Properties of Copper/Alumina Composite, Commercial Purity, High Conductivity Copper, Silver Magnesium Alloy, Silver Nickel Alloy and Silver, Commercial Purity can be found in appendix. With the properties data, a suitable material can simply be spotted by picking the one that performs best on criteria described. <table/>From the table above, it shows that Copper/Alumina Composite, Commercial Purity has highest hardness strength but poor fracture toughness. Therefore it should be in consideration list. The remaining materials have similar properties on these criteria. Thus, factors like cost have to be considered to find the most suitable material. High Conductivity Copper is chosen in this report as its cost is far lower than any of the remaining materials. Even though it has a moderate fracture toughness, its low would definitely favour production. Therefore, we can conclude that the most suitable material for Fresh-Water heat exchanger tubes is High Conductivity Copper due to its  corrosion resistance against water, high maximum service temperature, high ductility, good thermal conductor, high compressive strength, good hardness performance, moderate fracture toughness and its  incredible low cost.  <heading>REPORT 2- Selection for Column Spacers under a Varying Compressive Load</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>In manufacturing industry, use of spacers is very common. They are used to separate two surfaces or plates. Though spacers are nothing complicated, it is not as easy when it comes to manufacturing as factors such as cost, tolerance, etc have to be considered. In this part of the report, it is going to have a look on criteria that affect selection of material for spacers. <heading>Theory</heading>Column spacers are under varying compressive load. They can fail either by buckling or be being crushed due to the pressure exerted. It may be important to notice that they do not happen at the same time as only one or the other will cause failure. If the column is slender, the spacer will buckle long before the material crushes. This is a failure that is very likely to happen in small to medium columns. Very short, fat columns, though not likely to buckle, is in danger of crushing. In industry, slender columns are more often used than fat, short ones as they are believed not to interfere as much as the fat ones do due to water wave behaviour(  URL  ) - diffraction. Diffraction is the propagation of a wave around an obstacle. Unlike refraction (which depends on a wave's response to a change of speed), wave diffraction depends on the interruption of the wave by an obstacle. Therefore, the bigger the obstacle(fat spacer), the more diffraction it causes to water flow. Thus, big spacers are avoided in some manufacturing industries. Having found that buckling is more likely to happen in slender spacers, which are more often used, it is important to find a solution to its weakness-buckling. Buckling can be predicted by Euler Buckling equation:  FORMULA , where <list>Fe= Euler Buckling Force Le2= Euler equivalent length I=πr 4/4</list>Fe indicates the maximum load a system can take before buckling and the value is dependent on the physical character of the material used. To link buckling force and materials physical strength, simply rearrange Euler Buckling Load equation:  FORMULA  It suggests radius of spacers and Young Modulus directly affect the maximum buckling force a spacer can take but as proved earlier, r is tried to be kept small and constant and leaving Young Modulus the only variable in this equation. Therefore, material used must have very high Young Modulus. Spacers selected must also have adequate ability to resist fatigue as force exerted is periodically changing because of water wave's property. Endurance limit can be used in this case as it measures the maximum stress operates indefinitely without failure on any given material. This should be considered as one of the most important factors that would affect the results. Thermal distortion is another criteria that is worth consideration. Thermal distortion is a measurement of mechanical deformations of the test article due to temperature in combination with vacuum condition and must be minimized to avoid failure of systems. Corrosion resistance strength must be taken into account. Without adequate corrosion resistance, components often fall short of the expected design life. Corrosion is due to generally slow chemical reaction between materials and surroundings. Stable materials are less likely to be damaged by corrosion than instable ones. Acid is one of the strongest corrosives as it has a free proton flowing around reactive. These protons combine with electrons and thus corroding the original material. Organic solvents could be corrosive as they have reactive groups, like hydrocarbons. Water, comparatively, has less corrosive strength as it contains less reactive flowing group. Even so, it could cause slow corrosion which has to be aware of. Therefore, selected material has to be strong enough in terms of corrosion resistance strength. <heading>Method</heading>There are a few limitations on this selection for spacers. The basic requirements are as follows: Bulk Mechanical Property- Elastic Moduli: The material must have very high Young Modulus to avoid buckling as proven previously Electrical Property- Electrical Conductivity: The material should be a bad electrical conductor. Bulk Mechanical Property- Thermal distortion: The material thermal expansion should be as low as possible Chemical Property- Corrosion Resistance: The material must have very high corrosion resistance strength to water and organic solvents and high resistance strength to acid <heading>Method</heading>Stage 1 Material passing this stage must have very high Young Modulus (It has to be set above 80GPA as this sufficiently removes a lot of useful materials) and must have very high resistivity conducting current ( Its minimum limit must be set to 1e12 as this is the typical resistivity an electrical insulator has. Stage 2 Material passing this stage must have small thermal distortion ability( Its minimum is set to be 1e-6/K as this removes a right number of materials ) and at least very good resistance against acid. Stage 3 Material passing this stage must have very good resistance to water and organic solvents. After the four stages, only 4 materials remain. They are Boron Nitride(Hot pressing), Diamond, Glass and Non Machineable Glass Ceramic. They all have high Young Modulus, high electrical resistivity, low thermal expansion and stable chemical state. Spacers have to deal with periodically changing pressure. Material of low endurance limit is very likely to fail. Cost is also very important in manufacturing as expensive materials are replaced with cheaper ones that have similar properties. Bulk Mechanical Property- Endurance Limit: Materials must have endurance limit must have very high endurance limit to avoid failure. Cost: Materials chosen cannot be too expensive or else it would not be profitable making these spacers. Setting cost as low as possible (1000GBP/kg chosen in this case as this cost is reasonable) to filter unrealistic materials. Stage 4 Material passing this stage must have high endurance limit(50MPa or above) and cost no more than 1000GBP/kg) After the additional stage, Only Boron Nitride (Hot pressing) and Non Machineable Glass Ceramic satisfy all the criteria. Spacers made by both materials altogether less than 55mm diameter according to Euler's equation. Ductility and elastic limit also affect design of spacers as they have to be made thin and thus have to be considered. Hopefully, by comparing their ductility and elastic limit would give the most suitable material. <table/>Since Non Machineable Glass Ceramic has higher ductility, it should be selected as the final materal. <heading>Method</heading>Below is the limitation: Production rate It is known that 25 sets of spacers (in the other word, 175 spacers are sold) are expected to be sold each year (A spacer is manufactured every 50 hours). It is necessary to filter out those too-slow processes as they would not be helpful. Tolerance The maximum tolerance is given in specification, i.e. 0.015mm. Any processes that cannot give accurate finish would not be considered. Cost It is known that the retail price would be £80,000. In order to make profit, the cost of manufacturing (including assets cost) should never be above the retail price. Since the retail price is the price for a set of spacers, therefore each spacer retail price would be £11428.5 (It should not be rounded off). Cost of manufacturing spacers should be below £11428.5 Stage 1 Processes passing this stage must have production rate higher than 50hr -1 and has maximum tolerance no bigger than 0.015mm Stage 2 Processes passing this stage must have capital cost less than £11428.5 <heading>Results/Analysis</heading>There are 5 materials passing the three criteria above and they are Centreless Microgrinding, Micromachining (Manual), Micropolishing (Automated), Micropolishing (Manual) and Polishing (Manual) <heading>FINAL SELECTION:</heading>Material: Out of the 3 candidates, Non-Machineable Glass Ceramic is chosen because of its high Young's Modulus strength and compressive strength, which ensure neither buckling nor crushing is likely to happen. Moreover, it has high endurance limit, which makes sure spacers are not likely to happen. It also has high ductility and elastic limit, which is very helpful in making slender spacers. Process: Centreless Micro grinding and Micromachining (Manual) cannot be used to manufacture non-machineable Glass Ceramic spacers leaving only 3 possible processes. Micropolishing(Manual) is chosen because of its long designed life span and it is specialised in making conical, cylindrical, flat and spherical surfaces. <heading>REPORT 2: SHAPE SELECTION FOR A STRUCTURAL ROOF MEMBER</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>A roof can have two functions. It can be a roof for shelter and also acts as a path for the level above. This design can be found everywhere, like a shopping mall, a subway and even in houses. Though it is very useful, it takes extra care when it comes to designing as a mistake could cause loss of lives. The technical reasons that must be considered will be introduced in Theory. This part of the report is intended to select a suitable shape for the task given. <heading>Theory</heading>The most important factor needed to be considered in roof constructing is deflection. It can be defined as the displacement of a structural member or system under load. A roof can be treated as a simply supported beam while anything on the roof can be treated as loads. The maximum deflection of a beam is given by:  FORMULA  , where q=load in N/m, L=Length of beam and EI=flexural stiffness of beam Lateral Torsional buckling is twisting buckling about the minor axis which encourages the compression flange to bend further and is another factor that has to be considered in a simply-supported beam with a uniform bending moment. This can be avoided by high torisional rigidity that resists torsional bending. <heading>Method</heading>In this task, the followings have to be considered: Bulk Mechanical property- Deflection of roof on load It is known that the maximum deflection cannot be bigger than 25mm so any shapes that cannot limit deflection to 25mm or less are filtered. Bulk Mechanical property- Torsional Rigidity It is known that torsional rigidity can stop lateral torsional buckling and any suitable shape would have high torsional rigidity to avoid failure. Recycle Fraction Given that environmental impact has to be minimised, the ideal shape should have high recycle fraction. Energy Content It has to be minimised to lower environmental impact. Stage 1 Setting deflection as X axis while inputting secondary design considerations(M) on Y axis. M can be defined by (Torsional Stiffness)*(Recycle Fraction)/(Energy Content). It is essential to obtain M as large as possible as it means that the shortlist comes out at the end will have very high Torsional Stiffness, recycle fraction but very low energy content. 210 unit of M is set as the minimum because having done that would leave us only few suitable materials. Taking gear limitations into account. It has to be converted into kg and then into kg/m simply by dividing it by the length of the beam, which is 10m Therefore,  FORMULA  Then  FORMULA  <heading>Result/Analysis</heading>After completing stage one, a shortlist of shapes will be given. <list>Glulam Softwood rectangular sectionHot Fin Steel(Y.S 355MPa) Circular HollowHot Fin Steel(Y.S 355MPa) Rectangular HollowHot Rolled Steel(Y.S 355MPa)Univeral Beam-[203×102×23]Hot Rolled Steel(Y.S 355MPa)Univeral Beam-[254×102×25]</list>By comparing and contrasting candidates in the shortlist, the best shape would hopefully found out. It can be done by comparing the values of M. <table/>Having looked at the table, it is seen that Hot Fin Steel Circular and Hot Fin Steel rectangular are more appropriate to be used as they got high M value. However, Hot Fini Steel Rectangular has significantly higher torsional stiffness which is believed to be the most important factor in M. Therefore, the chosen shape is Hot Fin Steel Circular. <heading>Different forms of M</heading>Different forms of M would directly affect the search results. M is a value that is made up by factors that influence the designed shape. It is believed that safety factor, major bending stiffness and price are crucial when it comes to selection. A new M can be constructed and be explained below. An ideal shape must have very high M new value It can be obtained by high bending stiffness and safety factor High price is not favoured so it should be kept as low as possible Therefore, to obtain a high M new  FORMULA  With new M, a different shortlist will be obtained. With new M, a different shortlist will be obtained. <list>The shape shortlist is as follow:Hot Rolled Steel Universal Beam-[178×102×19]Hot Rolled Steel Universal Beam-[203×102×23]Hot Rolled Steel Universal Beam-[203×133×25]Hot Rolled Steel Universal Beam-[254×102×22]Hot Rolled Steel Universal Beam-[254×102×25]Hot Rolled Steel Universal Beam-[305×102×25]</list>Again, by comparing and contrasting the remaining sections a final choice can be made. <table/>Hot Rolled Steel(Y.S. 355MPa) Universal Beam[254×102×25] would be the most appropriate shape to be used even though its M New is not the highest. The main reason behind the choice is because it has very high major bending stiffness strength but at the same time it does not cost as much as Universal Beam- [305×102×25]. It is thought that Major bending stiffness strength is as important as cost but in [254×102×25] it has sufficient Major bending stiffness strength. Therefore, cost is considered as more important in this case. 