This essay investigates drag in the design of airplanes and ships. Using Buckingham Pi method could derive the key parameters relating to drag <heading>a. </heading>Let D be drag force, ρ be the density, U be the velocity and A be the area and π be the drag coefficient  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,  FORMULA  Since there are four variables (n) and only purely mechanical effects are involved, m (basic dimension) = 3, n = 4 and n-m = 1, therefore  FORMULA  and since  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  By comparing coefficients, a=1, b=2, c=1 Therefore,  FORMULA  <heading>b. </heading>There are three different types of drag that may be experienced by a body in a flow and 3 other types specially found in ships and aircraft. Skin friction drag- occurs because of viscosity. The entire skin friction drag occurs within the boundary layer. Form drag- also known as wake and pressure drag and is due, indirectly, to viscous forces in that they modify the pressure distribution acting on the body , thus giving rise to a resisting force and is often determined by body shapes. Profile drag- is the sum of skin friction and form drags. The amount of form drag is generally related to general size and shape. <heading>c. </heading>Induced drag- is drag due to the production of Lift. This could come from a wing of finite length which adds downwards momentum, thus changing the pressure distribution or arises at the wingtips, which causes higher pressure below the wing and lower pressure above it will cause the air to "roll around" the wingtip, creating a vortex which is shed behind the aircraft. Pressure drag- a drag which is a sum-up of profile drag and form drag and can be calculated by integrating the pressure force over the entire body surface (form drag) and resolving the resulting force in the direction of motion (induced drag) Wave drag is a sudden and very powerful form of drag caused by shock waves. It appears, often, on aircraft flying at high-subsonic speeds and boats. They can also form at much lower speeds at areas on the aircraft where the Bernoulli effect accelerates local airflow to supersonic speeds. This can be reduced by designing shapes as close to Sears-Haack body as possible and the most common solution nowadays is to use as wept-wing which is bent back at some angle, instead of sticking straight out from the fuselage. <heading>d. </heading>For bodies of very high Reynolds numbers, it is common to assume that turbulant boundary layer is throughout the body surface. A turbulent boundary layer produces a greater skin-friction drag but a reduced wake drag. It is surprising since the higer flow speeds associated with turbulent boundary layer have been expected to be associated with an increase in drag when compare to the lower-flow-laminar boundary layer. At high Reynolds number, wake drag can far exceed skin-friction drag. Because of that, the best regime for flow over a wing during normal flight would be best associated with turbulence as this can dramastically reduce wake drag which is far exceed skin-friction drag during normal flight. <heading>e. </heading>Pressure drag is to do with the turbulence created and is dependant on the reynolds number and waves drag is negligible as bow waves are created at the front of the ship and if they are shorter in length than the ship they have no effect The only drag factor is the pressure drag given by the reynolds number. Assuming that the tank is 15m x 10m and u is the kinematic viscosity  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Looking up the moody chart, it is found that the drag coefficient is 0.002. Substituting this result into drag coefficient = D / (ρ U2 A)/2 The drag force is 4062N ( assuming that the tank is 15m x 10m ) Power required = (4062) (5.14) = 20879 W <heading>f. </heading>Increase of roughness in hull can never be underestimated as it could result in an increase of skin-friction drag, which would require additional power with increased consumption of feel to maintain the vassel speed and can be given by the equation below:  FORMULA  where R is the drag, Δ C F is the drag coefficient increase, C T is the total drag coefficient, k 2 is roughness on a rougher surface and k 1 is roughness on a less rough surface. Studies showed that ships generally get tougher due to mechanical damage such as corrosion, cracking, blistering, etc. of the hull surface. Foul released technology products (e.g. paint) can be used to avoid fouling (drag caused by living creatures on the ship) by providing a slippery surface which would inhabit growth of marine organisms and oxidation by avoid contact between water and the hull surface. Skin friction caused by roughness is also important to aircrafts. Roughness would cause friction between the skin of the surface and the air flow. It is obvious that if the surface is dirty, has frost, ice or other obstructions, drag will increase. Effects of skin drag can be reduced by smooth surfaces and flush riveting in the design, and by keeping the surface clean and waxed. <heading>g. </heading>Scale models can be used in designs instead of life size ones as it is cheaper in the modelling stage as fluids behave same on small and large scales. However, the testing environment for scale models is not always the same as life size ones, which might cause errors. <heading>h. </heading>Nowadays, computer softwares like Matlab can model boat and airplane designs. They are very easy to access and do not cost as much as real models Moreover, it is very simple to change the input conditions without rewriting the program but at the same time they may not be very accurate as there are lots of assumption to be made 