<list></list><heading>ANALYSIS</heading><heading>Fresh Breath</heading>Prof. Mel Rosenberg spent more than a decade researching a mouthwash that can remove bad breath effectively. In 1992, his prototype two-phase aqueous-oil mouthwash was tested with Listerine, one of the biggest mouthrinse brands and was proved that its special formulated mouthwash is superior to Listerine in long-term reduction of bad breath. In 1996, Philip Stemmer acquired the right to introduce that special mouthwash to Britain and he set up a separate company, Fresh Breath, to introduce this special mouthwash to the British market. The resulted product, Dentyl pH, dominates 7% of the British market and its sales will reach £3m. No doubt that Fresh Breath has a very healthy income through the sales of Dentyl pH but now they have the ambition to enter a much bigger market- a market that has sales of 280m altogether a year. <heading>Current Campaign</heading>Dr Philip Stemmer has noticed the huge sales in toothpaste market every year and he patented new toothpaste that includes the powerful antibacterial agent, CPC and that is done by suspending the agent in microscopic capsules that burst on brushing. Its selling point is inclusion of CPC, which has been proved inhibits microbial activity in the mouth and increase self life of the product <heading>Toothpaste Market</heading>Toothpaste market by far is the biggest in the oral-care market and in Britain its last year annual sale was estimated to be £280 million. There are 7 brands dominating the market at the moment and they are Aquafresh, Arm&Hammer, Colgate, Crest, Dabur, Euthymol and Green People. Out of these 7 brands, some of them are brands of multinationals, such as Colgate Palmolive, Pfizer and Procter&Gamble. <heading>Market Future</heading>British toothpaste market has a very promising future as in the last 20 years, people in the UK are willing to spend more on toiletries according to surveys and most of the people put quality before price nowadays. When it comes to toothpaste, consumers compare functions of different brands rather than prices. Using Colgate, the biggest toothpaste brand worldwide, as an example, they have 3% increases every year in terms of unit volume grew in the past 8 years. In their 2003 annual report, their sale is reported to have grown up by 16% in the United Kingdom. Therefore, toothpaste market in Britain should have a very bright future with steady grow in the next 10 years. <heading>Fresh Breath in Toothpaste Market</heading>Fresh breath is a company made up of 5 members of staff and they all have other full time duties. Fresh Breath at the moment does not have enough funding to enter the toothpaste market despite their healthy income from Dentyl pH. <heading>Team members</heading>Dr Philip Stemmer (Director)- has been working in dentistry for over 25 years and well-known in his working industry. He is also a director of a separate company, Fresh Breath Centre. He set up Fresh Breath to make Dentyl pH under license six years ago and has done lots of research under the name of Fresh Breath Centre. Prof. Mel Rosenberg- an oral-microbiologist. He is a professor at the Maurice and Gabriela Goldschleger School. He helped Philip Stemmer set up his Fresh Breath by selling a very special formula to him. He is also one of the directors of Fresh Breath and he helps Stemmer in lots of research projects. He has a highly respected status in the industry Sara Pearson (Director)- an investor of Fresh Breath who is also a director in a public-relations firm. Her knowledge, experience and contact could be very important. Michael Storfer (Director)- an investor of Fresh Breath and an experienced chartered accountant. He is also a lawyer and auditor. Clare Spence- an office administrator who is responsible for the company's every day general tasks. <heading>Rivalry companies</heading>The market is dominated by multinational companies and they have established their position in the market for years. It is important to understand their marketing strategies and their financial situation. It is very hard to obtain accurate UK toothpaste market information but we can roughly estimate their strength by interpreting one of our major competitors, Colgate's financial report and it may be useful to look at the US toothpaste market since all the multinational companies have their home market in US. <heading>Colgate in UK toothpaste market</heading>UK is one of the Colgate's biggest markets away from America. They maintain a healthy 3% volume growth since 1995. Last year their sensitive toothpaste helped them drive record toothpaste sales in the country. They have the biggest variety of toothpaste in the market, currently having 11 different kinds of toothpaste out in the UK in order to penetrate the market. Even though they have secured a unbeatable position in the market, every year they use their ongoing margin increases to fund advertising in support of new products as operating profits. To increase their profit, they have been employing experts to reconstruct the company's structure every year to obtain a higher profit margin and increase its productivity. <heading>Colgate worldwide</heading>In 2002, their profit margin climbed up to 21.7%. Colgate achieved its eight consecutive year of double-digit earnings per share growth in 2003(More figures can be found in appendix) Their market value is estimated to be 10million US dollars and still growing. Their healthy cashflow allows them to keep expanding their business worldwide. They have their own factories, teams and technology to stand strong in the market and they will be our strongest rival in the toothpaste market as they have upper hand in terms of technology, finance, independence and contacts in the market. <heading>Marketing Plan</heading>In this section, business theories will be used to forecast the future of Fresh Breath, interpreting Fresh Breath weakness and problems Fresh Breath might face once entered in the market. <heading>Porter's Five Forces</heading><figure/>Porter's Five Forces model explains there are five forces that determine industry future, attractiveness and profitability. The five forces are <list>Threat of new entrantsThreat of substitutesBuyer's PowerSupplier's PowerLevel of intensity of rivalry between competitors</list><heading>Threat of new entrants</heading>This can be determined by how easy a new entrant enters the market. This is known as barrier of entry and business speaking, an industry tends to protect firms of high level profit and inhibits entry and growth of additional new comers. Generally speaking, an industry adjusts its level of barriers with time. If an industry is growing, additional firms are expected to enter the market to take advantage of the growing profits. When an industry is declining, some of the firms are expected to leave the market to cut the loss. The level of barriers could also be affected by the following factors: <list>Governments policyCost advantages (e.g. patented technology)AssetsEconomies of scaleAccess to distributionSwitching costs for buyers</list>How well does or will Fresh Breath do in this area? UK toothpaste industry is still growing strongly as living standard keeps rising and government adopts a free market policy. Conventional Toothpaste making is no longer a commercial secret nowadays and Fresh Breath new patented formula might enable them to stand out from traditional toothpaste. With their old contacts in the market, Product Chain, and in manufacturing industry, distribution and manufacturing would not be a very big problem. Fresh Breath might not do very well in Economies of scale criteria because as a small-sized company, they would not be able to afford manufacture in large scale to lower the cost. Thus other brands might be cheaper alternatives. In general, Fresh Breath does/will do fairly well in this force of Porter's Five Force <heading>Threat of substitutes</heading>This determines how well companies could capture their customers. Relative price and quality of other products There are a few toothpaste claiming to be 'breath-freshening' in the market and they would be our main rivals in the market. Colgate even claims all their 7 'breath-freshening' toothpastes fights against bad breath for 12 hours. And their prices are very low. A 50ml toothpaste cost about 85p nowadays and this is definitely one of the criteria Fresh Breath have to think about seriously. <heading>Buyer's Power</heading>It determines the impact customers could make in the industry. <list>Number of buyers relative to sellersBuyers' threat of backward integration (Only applies to companies that buy Fresh Breath products as a supply of their manufacturing)Sellers' threat of forward integrationImportance of the products to buyers</list>There are a lot of toothpaste companies out there in the market, the biggest seven brands, nine small ones plus brands owned by supermarkets and pharmacies. Buyer's power is high as Fresh Breath do not manufacture their products themselves and have to rely on others in manufacturing and retailing. Though toothpaste is essential in everyone's daily life, it may not weaken buyer's power enough as Fresh Breath has to compete against other brands for customers. Therefore, Fresh Breath do very badly in this area. <heading>Supplier's Power</heading>It determines the impact suppliers could make in the industry. This applies to all industries that require supply in any form (labours, materials, etc) Suppliers could influence industries in lots of ways, e.g. raising the price of raw materials. <list>Suppliers concentrationSubstitute inputsCost to change suppliersSuppliers threat of forward integrationImportance of the industry to suppliers</list>Unfortunately, there is no suppliers' concentration information available. And it will be very hard to find substitutes when Fresh Breath toothpaste is formulated. It is assumed here that Fresh Breath would carry on as a 'virtual' company once it enters the toothpaste market and thus cost of changing suppliers would not be very high as competition is fierce in the market and suppliers' threat of forward integration would not be likely as there are great risks they have to take. Suppliers have to spend a lot of money on assets and they are specialised in making toothpaste and toothpaste companies would be their only clients. Therefore it is believed that suppliers' power threat to Fresh breath would be medium to low. <heading>Level of Intensity of Rivalry</heading>This indicates how great the competition in the market. The following industry characteristic could change the level of intensity of rivalry. It can also be affected by advantage pursuing of companies (More of this would be mentioned in Recommendation) <list>Number of CompetitorsIndustry growth rateFixed cost versus variable costStorage costSwitching costProduct DifferentiationStrategic StakesExit barriersIndustry stake out</list>There are already lots of competitors in the market and the industry growth rate is estimated to be around 2%. Fixed cost would be low as Fresh Breath is assumed to not to manufacture their toothpaste themselves and storage cost could be high in this country. Switching cost and product differentiation is low as explained above. Exit barriers would not be great as the patented formula is the only asset of the company. Industry stakeout is another problem Fresh Breath have to consider as 'No Industry keeps on growing forever' and growth will slow down or stop one day if not declines. That would lead to fierce competition and price war. In general the UK toothpaste market is between moderate to intense in the next 10 years. <heading>SWOT Analysis</heading>A Chinese proverb says 'Understanding both strength and weakness of ourselves and our enemies, winning is 'inevitable'. After looking at the toothpaste industry's likely future, problems have been estimated, it is important to identify Fresh Breath's strength and weakness to encounter the problems they may have to face. SWOT Analysis can be divided into External and Internal factors. External factors (i.e. Opportunities and Threat) have already been covered by Porter's Five Force; this part of analysis will concentrate on internal factors i.e. Strength and Weakness, <list><heading>Strength</heading>Patented Formula Old contacts in the marketing industryNo expensive assetHealthy income from Dentyl pHExperienceGood team membersEasy exit from industryInfluence in the dental community</list><list><heading>Weakness</heading>Size of the team and its simple structureWeak bargaining power with suppliersInsufficient capitalLack of commitmentLack of planDifferentiation of their own productsNo contact with the communityVery low profit margin if to fight against other brands</list><heading>RECOMMENDATION</heading>After reviewing of Fresh Breath, we recommend the following procedure: <list>Raise fundResearch/Modify the formulaPatent the new formulaExpand the team. Employ experts in different areas (e.g. Computer expert, marketing expert, etc)ManufacturingEnter the marketMarketing campaignFurther research (if allowed)License the formula/ franchise Fresh BreathExit the industry</list><heading>Raise Fund</heading>Though Dentyl pH would generate a very healthy income for Fresh Breath, a lot more money would still be needed as start-up capital. It is expected a £10million would have to be raised if Fresh Breath want to see through the tough time they might have to face in the beginning. Church&Dwight is a very good example. They had raised $55 million to start off with when they entered the market to fight off fierce competition in the US market against old favourites like Colgate and Crest. The £10million raised should be divided into four like Church&Dwight. It is recommended that £2million spent on initial research purpose, £2million spent on marketing, £1 million spent on paying for stocks and the rest on expenses. Taking loans from bank should not be a problem as Fresh Breath maintains a healthy income from the sale of their mouthwash. <heading>Research/Modify the formula</heading>It has been seen that Fresh Breath patented formulated toothpaste does not have a distinctive function. Lots of other toothpaste out in the market has claimed to be 'breath-freshening' and some of them even claim to be able to fight off bacterial growth up to 12 hours. Without a distinctive function, its unlikely for a new toothpaste brand becomes successful as its reputation is unknown in that area. Since Fresh Breath does not have any reputation in this area, it has to be 'specific' and be the first no. 1 over specific segments so customers can always remember. <quote>'In most cases, it is so much harder to remember the No. 2. No one remembers the name of the second person in space. But most Indians remember that name of the first Indian in space, although he was the nth person in space' quoted from Samit Sinha, COO, Mudra Communications. </quote>Therefore, to do well in the toothpaste market, further research has to be done to make the toothpaste stand out. Toothpaste with small granules has been very successful in Japan and still has been introduced in this country yet and that could be an additional feature of the new toothpaste. <heading>Patent the new formula</heading>Patenting the new formula would protect other companies using the new formula. It may also need to trademark a slogan that describes the new formulated toothpaste; to describe it is the best toothpaste. A good slogan could capture customers' memory subconsciously. Like Carlsberg's beer's slogan 'Probably the best beer in the world' captures so many people memories. Whether Carlsberg is the best beer in the world is not important, they are successful and that is what they want out of their slogan. A patented distinctive formula and a stand-out trademarked slogan would put Fresh Breath in a very good position in the market. <heading>Expanding the team</heading>To compete against companies, the number of staff of Fresh Breath has to increase to deal with increasing business, daily tasks, orders, research, etc. Fresh Breath has already had a basic structure of a company and it can be divided further. Each member of new staff could be given a more specific role in the company and that would increase the efficiency of the company and lower the work load of the old staff. People whose works are similar and related could be grouped together as a department headed by a member of our old staff who is specialised in that certain area. Advertising and marketing experts who have experience are also worth consideration as their contacts in the industry, experience and knowledge could be proved crucial. A good team creates the foundation of success. <heading>Manufacturing</heading>Fresh Breath should carry as a virtual company i.e. not manufacturing products themselves. This would provide an easier exit strategy and easier start-up. Buying manufacturing assets would be unwise as they would cause a lot of money and would be hard to resell when Fresh Breath want to exit the market. To start off with, Fresh Breath should order a certain amount of stocks as this is used as a test and would not waste too much money if the product is found unsuccessful. Fresh Breath bargaining power is weak according to Porter's Five Force as they are small-scaled. To encounter this problem, Fresh Breath could order stocks from China, the biggest manufacturing country, as this would provide a cheaper option and Fresh Breath could even make a huge profit over the currency exchange as china has been refusing to raise the value of Yenminbi despite American urges. This policy would greatly benefit Fresh Breath as this means they could spend less money on more products. <heading>Enter the market</heading>Typical start-up problems new firms have are insufficient fund and insufficient time allowed i.e. rushing into the market. Providing sufficient fund is raised and have had enough time to predict risks, recruit a big enough team, etc, then it is time to think about enter the market. As a new comer in a highly competitive market, it is important that the brand quickly establish its presence. Using the old contacts in the industry and experience of the team, it is hoped that the new toothpaste would be able to make a breakthrough and companies would start stocking the new product. <heading>Marketing campaign</heading>This should be followed right after entering the market. Once negotiations with companies willing to stock the new toothpaste start, marketing campaign should begin. The launch strategy should focus on the new patented toothpaste's striking point of difference and the slogan supporting the product. Most of the £2million budget should be spent on television advertising campaign, which is by far the most effective way to advertise products. Then the first shipment of toothpaste will appear in test markets. <heading>Further research</heading>If the toothpaste is welcome in the market, Fresh Breath will then have to increase their stocks order from their supplier. Income from the toothpaste would be ploughed right back into advertising to make the new toothpaste more well-known. Part of the income from Dentyl pH will be used to advertise mouthwash and the rest would be used to carry on further research on toothpaste. It does not necessarily have to be researching new functions or improving the toothpaste formula. It could be testing toothpaste of other brands and find out their weakness and then publish the test results. With Philip Stemmer's recognition, reputation and influence in the industry, the test report would cause serious damage on our rivalry brands. <heading>Licensing the formula/ Franchising </heading>If the toothpaste becomes successful in the market, Fresh Breath could be able to pay off the loan and start planning how long they are willing to stay in the market. There is no industry that keeps growing forever and big rival companies like Colgate would not just sit and give up their interest in the UK market. Competition could not be avoided. Fresh Breath could think about licensing the patented formula to other brands outside the country as this would increase the cashflow without benefiting any of the rival companies. Or they could franchise the company outside UK. This would not only increase Fresh Breath cashflow by selling the patented formula at a higher price to them but also expand our influence in the toothpaste market outside the country. Additional cashflow from licensing the formula/franchising could be used against rival companies in price war or etc. <heading>Exit the industry</heading>Fresh Breath as a virtual company would find it hard to compete against their big rivals. As directors remain committed to their own business interests and their rival companies market value are worth 100-1000 times more than Fresh Breath, it may be the time to think about exiting the industry after making a huge profit. Like gambling, the longer you stay the biggest the chance you will lose money. There are many risks that have to be taken in toothpaste industry like making a crucial mistake. Since the directors are not willing to give up their own business interests and concentrate on the growth of Fresh Breath, the future of Fresh Breath at this stage is very unclear. Exiting is probably the best option and we would recommend selling off most of the shares to new buyers. Directors would receive a huge amount of one-off money from the sale plus they would still be benefited from further growth of the company. Moreover, they could concentrate on their own business duties without worrying about the future of Fresh Breath. Or they could sell of the formula of both the toothpaste and mouthwash to other brands and end the business of Fresh Breath if there are no buyers as the price of buying off the company would be too high. This would bring the whole business to an end and directors would expect a smaller one off payment from the sale of the formulas of the mouthwash and toothpaste. This move is not recommended unless Fresh Breath business is going down sharply and any delay in exiting the market would cause a big loss of money. 