<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Within all human beings there is a great desire and need to feel accepted. This is mainly because we are social beings and we tend to interact with others around us, as Schacter's study on affiliation shows we need other human contact, Atkinson (2000). We do though interact differently with certain types of people; the form of interaction may vary depending on how well we know the person. Such as if they were a family member or close friend. However our need to be accepted is most prominent when interacting with people we do not know. This is where self-conscious emotions are important as these are related to how we feel others view us. The self-conscious emotions of embarrassment, shame and guilt can occur in a number of situations. We usually feel them when we feel we have done something wrong and seem inadequate. They are difficult to analyse though as they can overlap in meaning, as one persons embarrassment can be another person's shame. When considering the links between self-conscious emotions embarrassment is usually linked more closely with shame. Whilst shame is seen as the most intense of the emotions, much more than guilt which is more of a passing emotion. Shame can lead to more long-term feelings of regret and depression. Guilt is similar but is more of a nagging feeling that who have done wrong and is therefore not as intense. Embarrassment on the other hand is related to feeling foolish or like an idiot, after having said or done something of this nature such as falling over. The emotions of shame and guilt or more morally significant than embarrassment, possibly identifying why they are more closely linked. They are more personal and usually originate from an action that has affected someone else; the person usually feels they have done something morally wrong. The emotions we are considering then are obviously impossible to put into categories of which results could be placed into, as they overlap too much. Therefore this experiment was carried out in a qualitative manner. In the hope of finding links and differences between shame, guilt and embarrassment. Hoping to identify situations in which these emotions occur by studying participant's examples of the three emotions. <heading>METHOD</heading><heading>PARTICIPANTS</heading>There were 30 participants that took part in this investigation but only 12 examples were used in this particular experiment. The examples used were anonymous but all participants were undergraduate psychology students from  University. There was a mixture of male and female participants. <heading>MATERIALS</heading>The materials involved a piece of paper on which the instructions for the experiment were outlined. There were three sections on the paper, firstly embarrassment, then shame and finally guilt. Each section had three spaces to fill in their examples. <heading>DESIGN</heading>Independent and dependant variables cannot be determined as the investigation is qualitative. Each emotion was compared separately however the description of all three of the emotions by the participants was also looked at. Therefore the experiment was a mixture of between participants and within participants. This gave us the greatest amount of data possible. <heading>PROCEDURE</heading>All members of the Psychology Practical class were asked to fill in the sheet that was provided to them. On this they were asked to give three examples of embarrassment, shame and guilt, they were also asked to state their sex though this was the only piece of personal information submitted. Therefore the answers remained anonymous. The examples given could be from real experiences or situations that could occur in which these self-conscious emotions could arise. This would allow for a greater amount of in depth analysis on the answers, as the use of real or hypothetical events is interesting. People were then put into groups of three to discuss and analyse the responses. Each group were given 12 sheets to analyse, so there was an even distribution of the 30 sheets. <heading>RESULTS SECTION</heading>Our method within this experiment was to record the data by using an interpretative framework and then attempting to decode it. The decoding of the data seems to suggest that when discussing embarrassment people are much more likely to discuss personal experiences. The most common example of this is falling over in front of a large number of people. With 9 of the 12 participants using the phrase "falling over" when giving an example of an embarrassing moment. The examples within embarrassment also tended to be in front of strangers. The phrase's, 'large crowd', 'large audience', 'in public' came up extremely often as well as more specific examples such as "in front of around 50 people". Examples of embarrassment were also quite personal with 11 out of the 12 using the phrase "when I" at least once and 7 using it at least twice. The examples of shame and guilt, which are more closely linked, tended to be linked to affecting people we know and care about such as family or friends. They also tended to be much more personal than examples of embarrassment. The phrase "when I" was used by all participants when describing shame and guilt and with 9 participants it was used for every example. Guilt though tended to have responses to feeling the person had let themselves down such as, "Passing up an opportunity" and "When I leave my work" and "skip lectures". These are things people can get over much quicker and are easier to recover from. The examples of shame tended to have much more deep rooted feelings, they directly affected people close to the participant. Examples given on a frequent basis were, 'lying', 'cheating', 'upsetting', 'stealing' and being 'aggressive'. <heading>DISCUSSION</heading>The human need for acceptance is clearly shown in the results coming from the examples given concerning embarrassment. They nearly all relate to making a fool of yourself in front of strangers. It is in front of strangers that we feel the most intense need for acceptance. Embarrassment is a feeling that we do not want to happen to us. It is related to feeling singled out, self esteem and is unexpected. It draws negative attention towards ourselves and more importantly makes us feel less intelligent. This is important as Buss found in his cross-cultural study what people universally find most attractive about human beings is intelligence, Eysenk (2001). Shame and embarrassment are shown to be much more personal emotions with a greater use of personal experience being used to describe them. They are remembered much longer than embarrassment therefore personal experience is going to be much more likely. Shame is seen to be much more specific and much more intense, it is almost certainly attached to how we feel we have behaved towards other people. More specifically towards people we know and care about. It is linked to self-image and is associated with lying, betrayal and being false. It can in some senses be confused with embarrassment as it is a kind of deeper and much more long-term form of embarrassment. Guilt seems to be less intense and appears to be easier to recover from, as you feel bad for yourself and how your actions have affected you rather than other people. The findings tend to agree with that of Tagney (1996), that embarrassment is something that we do not want to happen to ourselves whilst we feel bad when we have guilt or shame as it has directly affected someone else we care about. A much larger study with more specific categories would have to be done to gain more specific and viable data. 