<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The current study examined whether exposure to a stimulus emphasising the link between Arab-Muslims and terrorism increased an automatic negative association with Arab-Muslims, and also examined the relationship between this automatic attitude and self-reported prejudice. 40 Non-Arab-Muslim undergraduates were presented with either a presentation of various news reports depicting Arab-Muslim terrorists or a neutral stimulus about animals. Implicit prejudice was measured with the Implicit Association Test and explicit prejudice was measured with a self report questionnaire. Results revealed that participants in both conditions showed implicit prejudice towards Arab-Muslims, and this was unaffected by the terrorism stimulus. There was also no relationship between implicit and explicit prejudice. </abstract>Social psychologists have been aware that people cannot be relied on to give truthful reports of their attitudes towards different racial groups ever since LaPiere's classic study (1936, cited in Hogg & Vaughn, 2002). He demonstrated the discrepancy between what restaurateurs said about their attitudes towards Chinese people and what they actually did. People's ability to control the presentation of their attitudes is a long standing problem, however in recent years psychologists have made significant progress in developing new ways of measuring attitudes (Banaji, Lem, & Carpenter, 2001). A lot of evidence has been found for the presence of automatically activated attitudes, which suggests that people may be hampered in truthfully reporting their attitudes because there is a significant unconscious component in attitudes which lies outside their awareness and control (Banaji et al., 2001). The unconscious component of attitudes is very important to understand as it is activated automatically when evaluating members of the target group (Lepore & Brown, 1997, cited in Banaji et al., 2001) and it influences judgment in a way that cannot be known by the actor (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995). This unconscious cognition then has an effect on the behaviour of the perceiver (Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 1996, cited in Banaji et al., 2001) so it is a pervasive factor and in order to understand prejudice we must understand the processes that occur both outside and inside conscious awareness. Previously these automatic attitudes have been conceptualised as immutable (Devine, 1989, cited in Dasgupta & Greenwald, 2001), however recent research has challenged this. Dasgupta and Greenwald (2001) produced evidence suggesting that negative automatic attitudes towards blacks could be reduced by exposure to stimuli of admired black people and infamous white people. They posited that negative automatic attitudes are created by constant exposure to negative associations with black people, and claimed that by changing the social context they could weaken these negative associations, and thus diminish negative automatic associations. Other researchers have similarly found that it is possible to weaken or even eliminate negative automatic attitudes by various methods, such as training via a computer simulation that was set so that race was unrelated to the stereotyped behaviour (carrying a weapon) (Plant, Peruche, & Butz, 2005), and engaging in counterstereotypic mental imagery (Blair, Ma, & Lenton, 2001; Carpenter, 2001). Despite the mounting evidence suggesting how negative automatic attitudes might be decreased, little is known about the processes by which negative automatic attitudes strengthen, even though this is an important theoretical question and has important practical implications. The present research aimed to investigate this by measuring automatic attitudes towards Arab-Muslims and testing whether exposure to a stimulus promoting the association between Arab-Muslims and terrorism would increase negative automatic attitudes compared to a control condition where they were exposed to a neutral stimulus designed to have no effect on race associations. <heading>Overview of the Implicit Association Test</heading>Among the techniques being used to study automatic attitudes, the Implicit Association Test (IAT; Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998) has attracted a lot of attention for its adaptability, large effect sizes and good reliability (Greenwald, Nosek, & Banaji, 2004). It works on the principle of associative learning that it should be easier to make the same response to concepts that are strongly associated than weakly associated. Participants have to categorise names as being members of either racial group 1 (G1) or racial group 2 (G2), and words as representing attribute 1 (A1) or attribute 2 (A2). When categories are combined, participants who find it easier (represented by shorter response latencies) to categorise into the paired categories G1A1 and G2A2, compared to categorising into G1A2 and G2A1 are revealing stronger associations between G1+A1, G2+A2 relative to G1+A2, G2+A1. In our study we expect a negative automatic attitude towards Arab-Muslims, and this translates to an expectation that participants will find it easier to categorise into pairings of Arab-Muslims with the attribute 'bad' and 'other people' with 'good', than Arab-Muslim with 'good' and 'other people' with 'bad'. The most significant challenge posed to the IAT's construct validity was the suggestion by Karpinski and Hilton (2001), and Arkes and Tetlock (2004) that the associations revealed by the IAT reside only in the culture, and not in the person. This was based on an understanding that the IAT scores did not predict actual discriminatory behaviour, or have any relationship with explicit measures of prejudice. The IAT's supporters have countered these arguments with new studies providing much better evidence of a relationship between implicit and explicit measures (Nosek & Hansen, 2004; Hoffman et al., 2005; Poehlman et al., 2005). There is also evidence that automatic race attitude predicts discriminatory behaviour (McConnell & Leibold, 2001), and physiological responses (Poehlman et al., 2005). It has been suggested that among the factors that affect the strength of the relationship between implicit measures and explicit measures is a social desirability effect occurring when the attitude object is a social group (Greenwald et al., 2005). Poehlman and colleagues (2005) also found that for attitudes towards a racial group explicit measures were affected by social desirability so that the correlations with implicit measures were lower, whereas for attitudes of consumer habits where there was no social desirability effect correlations with implicit measures were higher. Therefore, we expected that as our study also examines attitude towards a social group, there will be social desirability effects and the relationship between the IAT score and explicit prejudice score will be weak. To sum up, the present study aims to examine whether a stimulus aimed at altering people's automatic associations to the Arab-Muslim group could strengthen their negative automatic association to this group. <heading>Method</heading><heading>Participants</heading>Undergraduate students (N = 40; 22 male, 18 female) were recruited by opportunity sampling. None of the participants were Arab-Muslim, 35 described themselves as white British, 1 white + black African, 1 white + black Caribbean, 1 ½ British ½ Greek, 1 white Hungarian. Participants were randomly assigned to conditions so that there were 20 participants in the terrorism association condition and 20 in the control condition. <heading>Materials</heading>Creation of the exposure conditions. The terrorism association condition was operationalised by constructing a Microsoft PowerPoint presentation including text and pictures containing factual information about terrorist atrocities committed by Arab-Muslims such as 9-11 and the Madrid bombings. This included personal information and pictures of the terrorists. All the information and images for this presentation were obtained from mainstream news sources such as the BBC and Reuters. The control condition was created by making a PowerPoint presentation of equal length and level of detail, with text and pictures about animals. Both of the presentations took approximately 10-15 minutes to watch. Automatic attitude measure. The IAT was tailored to our study to measure an automatic negative association with Arab-Muslims. Arab-Muslims were represented by ten Arab-Muslim first names (e.g., Hakim, Yousef), and the category 'Other People' was represented by 10 first names belonging to other nationalities (e.g., Takuya, Marcelo). None of the Arab-Muslim names had been featured in the terrorism association condition. The attributes were represented by seven pleasant and seven unpleasant words (e.g., wonderful / terrible - see appendix for a full list of exemplar names and words). The IAT was run on Inquisit laboratory software. Explicit prejudice questionnaire. The explicit prejudice measure was constructed by adapting Pettigrew and Meertons' (1995) Anti-Arab-Muslim scale for use in our study - participants answered how much they agreed with certain statements that were designed to reveal prejudice towards Arab-Muslims. There were 20 questions answered on a 5 point Likert scale, and half of the questions were reverse coded. <heading>Procedure</heading> Exposure to terrorism / control stimulus. Participants were not told the precise aims of the study as we didn't want knowledge of this to affect performance on the attitude measures - although this applies more to the explicit measure as there is evidence that it is much harder to fake performance on an IAT than on a questionnaire (Steffens, 2004). Hence the stimuli were presented as though part of a memory task which would be tested on later, to encourage participants to take in the information. Some parts of the presentation, especially images, were set to automatically progress after a few seconds to stop participants skipping through them. Other parts required the participant to read a box of text so they were instructed to press spacebar when they had finished reading to move on. IAT. After finishing viewing the presentation, participants completed the IAT. Participants were given fully automated instructions and time at the start if they needed it to familiarise themselves with which names belonged to which category. In the IAT, category labels are situated on the top-left and top-right of the screen, and names or words appear in the centre of the screen and are categorised by pressing either the D or K key respectively. Errors are indicated and participants need to press the correct key to continue. Participants practise categorising names as either being Arab-Muslim or 'Other People', and then words as being either good or bad. Then categories are combined, so that words or names have to be categorised as either Arab-Muslim or Bad, or Other People or good (congruent pairing). Participants then practise categorising with the categories switched spatially, before completing the other pairing of Arab-Muslim or good, or Other People or bad (incongruent pairing). There can be significant order effects in the IAT, in that people tend to reveal a stronger association in the first of the combined tasks, other things being equal (Greenwald et al., 1998). This was counterbalanced so that in both conditions half of the people did the congruent pairing first and half did the incongruent pairing first. When concepts are strongly associated, people are faster at categorising them using the same key, so a faster performance at categorising the congruent pairing (Arab-Muslim and bad) than the in-congruent pairing (Arab-Muslim and good) indicates a more negative automatic association with Arab-Muslims compared to 'other people'. Explicit attitude measures. Finally, participants filled out the questionnaire on attitudes towards Arab-Muslims. As with the other stages of the experiment participants were alone in a testing booth in laboratory conditions until they finished. <heading>Design</heading>The experimental design was a 2 (type of presentation: terrorism association, control) x 2 (type of attitude measure: IAT, self report questionnaire) mixed factorial. The first factor was varied between participants and the second was within participants. <heading>Results</heading><heading>Data Preparation </heading>As recommended by Greenwaldal. (2003) we used the data from the practise blocks for the paired categories as well as the test blocks, but deleted the first trial from each block as response latencies were consistently longer. Latencies less than 300ms and more than 3000ms were recoded as 300ms and 3000ms respectively, to protect against anticipatory responses and momentary inattention. <heading>Results from the IAT</heading>As shown in Figure 1, responses to the incongruent pairings were slower than responses to the congruent pairings in both conditions. These differences were also statistically significant, in both the control condition, t(19) = 3.08, p = .006, and in the terrorism association condition, t(19) = 3.16, p = .005. This means that participants took significantly longer to categorise in the Arab-Muslim/good pairing than in the Arab-Muslim/bad pairing. The average difference between these two times is called the IAT effect, and is taken as an indicator of differences in the automatic evaluations of the categories. The difference between the IAT effects for the control condition (IAT effect = 115.0ms; d = 0.72), and the terrorism association condition (IAT effect = 120.7ms; d = 0.84) was not a significant difference, t(38) = -0.109, p = .91. These effect sizes were calculated by dividing the IAT effects by the pooled standard deviations. <heading>Results from the explicit measure</heading>The possible range of scores on the questionnaire was 0-80, with a higher score indicating stronger explicit prejudice. Participants in the terrorism association condition averaged at 27.1 (s.d = 8.5), whilst participants in the control condition averaged at 25.3 (s.d = 9.2). This was not a statistically significant difference, t(38) = -0.875, p = .39. Also, The correlation between the IAT measure and the explicit measure was found to be not significant, r = -.065, p = .69. <figure/><heading>Discussion</heading>We found that participants in both conditions found it harder to categorise into pairings of Arab-Muslim/good and other people/bad compared to using the pairings of other people/good and Arab-Muslim/bad. Greenwaldal. (1998) state that this kind of discrepancy occurs when there is a difference between the automatic associations of two concepts, so in this case it would mean that our participants had stronger negative automatic associations attached to the social category 'Arab-Muslim' than they did to 'Other People'. We also found that this automatic attitude towards Arab-Muslims was not affected by a stimulus designed to promote negative associations with the Arab-Muslim group, i.e. information about Arab-Muslim terrorists. In addition, the explicit measure was unaffected by the terrorism association stimulus and was found to have no relationship to the implicit measure. IAT results must be interpreted with caution as they can only ever test one's unconscious attitude to something relative to something else (Greenwald et al., 2005). Therefore we can only validly say that our participants had negative automatic evaluations of Arab-Muslims relative to the 'other people' category. Theoretically, it could be the case that our participants had a very positive automatic attitude towards the 'other people' group, and their attitude towards Arab-Muslims, whilst neutral 'by itself', came off as negative in a comparison with 'other people', however this is very unlikely, and many studies have found that negative attitudes revealed by the IAT are linked to negative explicit attitudes and discriminatory behaviour towards that particular racial group (McConnell & Liebold, 2000; Poehlman et al., 2005). This aspect of the IAT causes another problem, which is that if the terrorism association stimulus increased negative associations with the 'other people' group as well as the Arab-Muslim group, this would not be revealed by the IAT as they would relatively stay the same, although this version of events also seems unlikely. The lack of relationship between the implicit measure and the explicit measure that we found is a common finding in studies about race attitudes (Dovidio et al., 1997; Poehlman et al., 2004). A large causal factor of this is thought to be effortful self presentation influencing scores on self-report measures, especially when the attitude object is a social group (Nosek, n.d.). This is not to say that implicit measures are better than explicit measures for examining prejudice, as researchers now think they in fact measure different but related components of prejudice (Wilson, Lindsey, & Schooler, 2000; Nosek & Smith, n.d.), and so are both needed. Our participants were all undergraduate students, which means we should be careful in generalising our findings to other age and demographic groups as undergraduates may have attitudes which are not typical of the rest of the population, and their attitudes may be less crystalised (Sears, 1986). However there is evidence that implicit racial prejudice is remarkably stable through development (Baron & Banaji, 2006) and that patterns of automatic race attitudes are similar across different cultures (Dunham, Baron, & Banaji, n.d.) Whilst other research has found it possible to reduce implicit prejudice by exposing them to stimuli that challenge their negative automatic associations (Dasgupta & Greenwald, 2001), our procedure failed to demonstrate that the opposite is also possible. More research is needed to test different kinds of stimulus that might increase negative associations, including stimuli being absorbed over a period of days instead of minutes, before we can make any firm conclusions about this aspect of the malleability of automatic attitudes. Further research should also examine the processes by which negative associations can be caused to emerge with a concept that previously had no such associations. It may be the case that it is actually not as easy to increase negative associations as it is to decrease them. Negative associations are built up over a long period of time by persistent and subtle negative stereotypes portrayed in the media (Greenwald et al., 1998), and the concentrated stimulus used in our study emphasising negative characteristics of members of a group may be insufficient to have a significant effect on one's automatic attitude towards that group. We tentatively speculate that whilst negative automatic attitudes may be easy to reduce by challenging the unconscious associations that cause them, merely confounding pre-existing automatic attitudes may have little effect. Increased understanding of the malleability of automatic attitudes will have far-reaching and important applications. It is only when we understand the processes of how these negative automatic attitudes are formed and strengthened, as well as how they can be reduced, that we will be able to seriously tackle the unconscious component of prejudice. This is essential in order to overcome prejudice in general, which will improve relations between people - which in the end must be the aim of social psychology. 