<abstract><heading>Summary</heading>This report covers the analysis of the performance of Renold. They are a company that specialises in the design and manufacture of power transmission components including chains, gears and coupling, and also automotive and machine tool and rotor products. The performance of the company was analysis using ten performance ratios and the information contained in the annual report for the year ending 31 st March 2005. An analysis regarding the prospects of the company for the next year is also included in this report. Renold suffered a bad year ending 31 st March 2005 with a pre-tax loss of £6.8m. This was the result of large increases in raw materials, particularly steel which rose by 40%. The company also had significant exception items expenses and also a goodwill impairment of £2.4m in relation to the Jones and Shipman acquisition. Shareholders received only an interim dividend of 1.5p share, no dividend was paid at the end of the year. The prospects for the year ending 31 st March 2006 look better than for the year just gone. Renold have taken steps to combat cost increases by shifting production to lower cost countries such as Poland where a manufacturing facility has recently been established. Negotiations are in place with a Chinese manufacturer to gain a stake in the company with a view to gain a controlling stake in the future giving much better access to the Far East market. With a strong order book for the second half of the year Renold should see a return to profit for the year ending 31 st March 2006, however share dividends are likely to be modest at best. </abstract><heading>1.0 Introduction</heading>This report sets out an analysis of the company's performance using ten performance ratios based on the figures from the accounts set out in the company's annual report for the year ended 31 st March 2005. The 10 ratios have been selected in order than a reasonable conclusion can be reached about the performance of the company over a five year period. The resources available include the annual reports for the years 2001-2005 and also the Fame database. There are hundreds of financial ratios that can be used to assess the performance of a company. In order to interpret the accounts the ratios that will be used must give something meaningful in each of these four categories: <list>ProfitabilityLiquidityEfficiencyInvestment</list>From the point of view of an ordinary shareholder the investment ratios will be of particular importance but if an accurate assessment of the company's performance and likely prospects is to be reached each category of ratio must be utilised. The following ten ratios will therefore be used in the analysis: <list>Return on Capital Employed (ROCE)Return on Shareholders Funds (ROSF)Gross ProfitCurrent AssetsStock TurnoverTrade Debtor Collection PeriodTrade Creditor Payment PeriodDividend YieldEarnings Per Share (EPS)Price/Earnings (PE)</list>The list of ratios contains three profitability, one liquidity, four efficiency and three investment ratios. The weighting towards efficiency ratios as the most utilised category is based on the fact that efficiency is the root towards profitability and success. It is far more likely that an efficient company will have higher profits and therefore a higher dividend for its shareholders than an inefficient company. The objectives of this report are to use the ten ratios outlined above in conjunction with the annual report to provide an assessment of the company's performance for the year ended 31 st March 2005. The analysis will be a five year review from 2001 to 2005. The report will be scrutinised so that an assessment can be made as to whether or not the annual report gives a true and fair view of the financial performance of the company. The change to the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and its affects on the company's accounts will also be considered. A recommendation to an ordinary shareholder will be made based on the finding of the ratio analysis. The future prospects of the company for the year 1 st April 2005 to 31 st March 2006 will also be considered by use of the annual report for the year ended 31 st March 2005, the interim statement for the half year ended 30 th September 2005 and other publicly available information. <heading>2.0 Analysis of Past Performance</heading>An initial glance at the financial summary for the year ended 31 st March 2005 suggests that the year was not a successful one for Renold. Although turnover was up £4.9m on 2004 to £197m from £192.1m, the company recorded a pre-tax loss of £6.8m compared with £4.7m (restated) pre-tax profit in 2004. This is due to a significant increase in the cost of exceptional items that was incurred in 2005 compared with 2004 and also the goodwill impairment of £2.4m associated with the acquisition of Jones and Shipman. The major factor that is highlighted in the annual report however is the significant rise in the cost of raw materials compared with the previous year. Steel prices rose by approximately 40% and have since stabilised at this higher level of cost. The result of this has been very damaging since, for example, the chain division uses almost entirely steel for the manufacture of their products. Other factors that are mentioned include the relative weakness of the US Dollar compared to both the Pound and the Euro. There has also been very little growth in the European market. <heading>3.0 Ratio Analysis</heading><heading>3.1 Profitability</heading>Figure 1 shows the change in ROCE (in three forms) for the last 5 years. 2001 is the high point and since then there has been a decline in the value of ROCE, 2002 and 2005 being particularly poor years. There was a slight recovery in 2003 and 2004 before the fall to in 2005. In general the trend appears to be downward, which is not a good sign for the company or its shareholders. <figure/>Figure 2 shows the return on shareholders funds for the 5 year period. It should be pointed out that the change in accounting policy in 2005 to adopt FRS 17 "Retirement Benefits" makes a comparison between the years 2001-2003 and 2004-2005 (2004 figures have been restated to make a comparison between 2004 and 2005 meaningful). <figure/>As with ROCE the trend is generally downward with the negative performance in 2002 and 2005 split by a temporary recovery in 2003 and 2004. 2005 has a very poor value for ROSF and shareholders should be concerned by the trend since the high of 2001. Petrofac Facilities Manage is a company in the same sector as Renold and of a similar size. They have an ROSF ratio of 71.88% compared to 7.88% for Renold for the same point in time (2004). Renold are struggling to match their competitors. Figure 3 shows the change in gross profit. The 2004 and 2005 values take account of the change in accounting policy so they look worse than they really are compared to 2001-2003. <figure/>Figure 3 show a similar pattern to both figures 1 and 2. Renold is not a profitable as it was in 2001 and on two occasions it has recorded a loss for the 5 year period. The trend in profitability appears to be downward although 2005 was a year in which exceptional items were high compared to previous years and the cost of raw materials significantly higher. 2005 looks like a bad year but Renold still made a £3.7m pre-tax profit before goodwill and exceptional items are taken into account. It would be prudent to suggest that while the current situation in regard to profitability is not favourable, the company is not in severe difficulties yet. <heading>3.2 Liquidity</heading>Figure 4 shows the current assets ratio. It is suggested in some textbooks that a value of 2 would be the average although this may vary for different industries. Renold have a current assets ratio of 1.7 for 2005. This is slightly higher than in was in 2001 when they had a very good year. This would suggest that Renold do not have a huge problem converting assets into cash despite the apparent difficulties they appear to be in at the moment. <figure/>The acid test ratio which is very similar to current assets is round about 1 for the period 2001-2005. This is a reasonable value. Given that on 31 st march 2001 the net current assets is given as £48.7m, and net assets including pension liability is £40.3m, it is fair to say that the company does not have a cash problem and is not about to go into liquidation even if the £6.8m loss for the year might lead us to conclude otherwise. <heading>3.3 Efficiency</heading>The stock turnover ratio for the period 2001-2005 is very stable with a value of approximately 4 for each year. This means that in general, Renold have about three months worth of sales in stock. The fact that they consistently have a similar level of stock suggests that the company does not have a problem shifting or producing an appropriate level of stock and is therefore reasonably efficient. Figures 5 and 6 show the trade debtor collection period and the trade creditor payment period respectively. "The United Kingdom experience is that median debtor collection period is about 50 days". Renold's debtor collection period is shown to be about 60 days give or take a few days. It is not a rising trend which is a good thing but it is above the average for the UK which suggests that the company is not as efficient as it could be at collecting debts owed to them. <fnote>JR Dyson "Accounting for non-accounting Students" p260, 6th edition, 2004 Prentice Hall. </fnote><figure/><figure/>Whilst it appears that Renold takes longer than average to recover debts owed to them, there is an upward trend in the time it takes for the company to pay its creditors from 42 days in 2001 to 48 days in 2005. This means that cash is remaining in the business for longer which is a good thing. It could also however be a sign that the company is having difficulty in finding the cash to pay its creditors. It could be argued that this is unlikely though given that the value of the company's net assets is relatively healthy. <heading>3.4 Investment</heading>Figure 7 shows a large drop in the dividend yield over the period 2001-2005. Starting with a high of about 10% (which is quite good) it has plummeted to about 2%. A final dividend was not paid out for the end of the year (31 st March 2005). This ratio suggests that the shareholders are not getting a good return on their investment. <figure/>This is a very important ratio for ordinary shareholders and the dramatic fall in the dividend yield since 2001 is alarming. Figure 8 shows the EPS. The chart follows a similar pattern to some of those seen previously. The picture is quite erratic, which is never a good thing. Again the trend appears to be downward from 2001 which is also not a good thing since a steady growth in EPS from year to year is the ideal scenario. <figure/>Finally we look at the Price/earning ratio which figure 9 shows to be negative in both 2002 and 2005. The current situation is not good although the drop in 2002 was well recovered in 2003 and 2004 so there is no certainty that things will be as bad in 2006. It is interesting to note that PE is much higher in 2003 and 2004 than it was in 2001 despite 2001 being the most successful year in the period we are investigating. <figure/><heading>4.0 Summary of Past Performance</heading>The year ended 31 st of March 2005 was not a good year for Renold. The company had to cope with a large rise in the cost of steel (up to 40%) which is a major raw material for the production of their products. The company also has much higher exceptional item expenses this year and a goodwill impairment that have all contributed towards the £6.8m loss for the year. Shareholders received only a small interim dividend of 1.5p per share on 28 th January 2005. The Financial Times reported that no end of year dividend would be issued at all. <fnote>Financial Times (London) 07 April 2005, Lisa Urquhart, p26 </fnote>It has not been a good year for ordinary shareholders. Their investment has not yielded a significant return. They did however receive a small dividend which was available from retained profits from previous years. The company has become much less profitable over the period analysed but remains in reasonable financial help. Cash is not a major issue for the company as it has more than enough total assets to offset its liabilities. The company has had a poor year but is not about to go into liquidation. There is every possibility of a recovery in the future. <heading>5.0 Reliability of the Report</heading>The Financial accounts were audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and it was stated that the annual accounts do represent a true and fair view of the state of the company at 31 st March 2005. 2005 was the first year in which the accounts made allowance for FRS 17 "Retirement benefits". The accounts for 2005 are therefore slightly different in their representation than the previous years in the period investigated. The report does however provide restated figures for 2004 so that a meaningful comparison can be made between this years performance an last years. There are several adjustments that have been made to the accounts that affect the numbers presented to the public in the profit and loss account and the balance sheet. Depreciation is one such adjustment that has been made and this affects the value of the fixed assets owned by the company. On page 38 of the annual report (Notes on the Accounts section) it is stated that the depreciation of fixed tangible assets for the year was £8.7m. There is however no further notes as to how this valuation was achieved. This affects the operating cost as it appears that the depreciation value has been included as an ordinary operating cost in the profit and loss account. Other adjustments include prepayments and accrued income. On page 30 of the annual report (Notes on the Accounts section) the value of prepayments and accrued income is stated as £1.2m. This affects the value of current assets, and can be recorded as profit in the profit and loss account. Stocks are also and item in the accounts, which is subject to adjustment. The closing stock must be estimated since a figure must be arrived at for presentation in the accounts for the actual closing date. The figure that is chosen for closing stock represents the opening stock for the next financial year. I believe it is reasonable to conclude in agreement with the auditors that the report does represent a true and fair view of the state of the company. <heading>6.0 Recommendation to an Ordinary Shareholder</heading>The year ended 31 st March 2005 was not a good year for shareholders given that there was no end of year dividend. The five year period that has been analyses leads to the conclusion that the time to sell shares was way back in 2001. In 2002 the company made a £5.6m pre-tax loss but recovered in 2003 to make a profit. The 2005 loss was £6.8m but the company is not about to go into liquidation. Its net assets including pension liabilities at the end of the year was £40.3m and cash and short term deposits were £16.7m. The company therefore has cash at hand. There is no evidence that the company is in deep financial trouble so there is no great urgency to sell shares. It would perhaps be prudent to hold onto shares but not make any further investment in the company as there is also no clear evidence that there will be a major recovery next year, although steps have been taken to offset the increased operating costs, the goodwill impairment of £2.4m associated with the acquisition of Jones and Shipman was a one off payment for the year and past performance has shown that a recovery can be made in a year (i.e. change from 2002 to 2003 performance). There is evidence that 2005 was always going to be a poor year so the company have decided to take some hits this year so that things will be better in the future. In light of this the best option is to hold onto shares rather than sell them or invest in any more. <heading>7.0 Future Prospects for the year ending 31st March 2006</heading>The annual report for the year ended 31 st March 2005 explains the many reasons for the poor performance that year in the various statements that precede the accounts. There are also several points that can be taken from these statements that give a clue as to what they company is doing to sort out the problems it faces and hence give a clue as to it prospect for the next year. The report outlines several cost cutting measures to combat the high raw material prices. These measures include outsourcing of components from low cost economies and also the movement of manufacturing to lower cost countries. An example of this is the plant that is being set up in Poland. This will give the company a manufacturing base in eastern Europe where the costs of running the facility are significantly lower than in Britain. This will help them to combat the issue of competition from low cost suppliers in Europe. Renold are currently involved in consultations with a Chinese manufacturer regarding to possibility of taking a stake in the company. The Ultimate view is to gain a controlling stake in the Chinese manufacturer. If Renold can achieve this it will give them much better access to the market in the Far East. The sale of the Burton Site will yield gross precedes of "at least £7.7m with a potential of up to £8.65m subject to satisfactory site survey and planning permission being obtained." <fnote>Renold Interim Statement for the half year ended 30th September 2005 </fnote>The interim results for the half year ended 20 th September 2005 show that the Renold are still in the red. Although turnover was up to £106.9m compared with £95.3m for the half year ending in September 2004, the loss for the period was £2.0m. <fnote>Obtained form the campany's website  URL  </fnote>The earnings per share figure of -2.8p is not encouraging. The company's total assets total assets are down since 31 st March 2005 due to an increase in liabilities but remain relatively healthy. The interim statement claims that a strong forward order book will boost performance in the second half of the year. This is inline with several contracts that are mentioned in the previous annual report. The Alstom/New York City Transit Authority multiyear contract was expected to build up in 2005/2006 along with shipments for the GM in Shanghai contract commencing at the end of 2005/2006. Current share price as reported in The Times is 60.5p. This is a recovery from the low experienced in the previous year of 39.5p. Figure 10 shows the share price history for Renold since 2002. <figure/>The chart shows a small recovery since the low of 39.5p however the market does not as yet value the company as highly as it did in 2004. In April 2005 the company issued its second profit warning in as many months with the share price at 59p. As stated it fell to 39.5p in the following months. The writer of the article (see footnote) believes that Renold should be in the black by the end of the year but the dividend will take further time to recover. He also impresses that the venture in china needs to be completed as soon as possible. <fnote>Financial Times (London) 13 December 2005, David Blackwell, p25 </fnote>The interim statement informs us that no interim dividend will be paid this year and depending on the end of year results shareholders will find out what return they are going to get on their investment for the year in March 2006. The change to IFRS will have an impact on Renold financially. They will have to train their accounts in the use of the new standards and also restructure the system that the company currently uses in regards to recording the day to day finances. It is not simply a case of continuing as if the UK GAAP system was in operation and then converting all figures into IFRS for the annual report. The interim statement is the first set of accounts that the company have produced entirely to the new standards. The terminology is slightly different in many cases and also the way in which certain figures are reached. The result is a set of accounts that differ greatly from those previously published. The figures for the year ending 31 st March 2005 have been restated to the new standards and are very different to those presented in the annual report. The change to the new standards will make comparisons to previous years very difficult. <heading>8.0 Summary of Future Prospects</heading>The first half of the year has not gone well for Renold but it has been no worse than the previous year. There is a strong forward order book as several contracts begin to build up which will help to improve the results for the second half of the year. The company is still suffering from the high raw material costs and measures to offset these costs have not yet taken full effect but are ongoing. Shareholders are not getting any significant dividends and are not likely to until at least the end of the year ending 31 st March 2006 (possibly not even until 2006/2007) when the company should see a return to profit due to the strong second half of the year that is expected. For the current situation to change they need to press though the cost cutting changes that have already been initiated and also secure a foothold into the Far East market by concluding the negotiations with the Chinese manufacturer regarding a stake in a facility in China. It is difficult to see that any significant success will be achieved though like that of 2001, 2003 and 2004 given that raw material prices are so high and do not look like falling. In general, the year ending 31 st March 2006 looks likely to be more profitable than the year ending 31 st March 2005. 