<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> is a 49 year old hypertensive with a 6 month history of fatigue, shorteness of breath and leg swelling. She presented at the  as an elective admission for renal biopsy on the . <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint. </heading><list>Shortness of breathFatigueLeg swelling</list><heading>History of Presenting Complaint. </heading>Shortness of breath:  had been experiencing progressively worsening shortness of breath in the 6 months prior to the current admission. She last remembers being 'completely well' about 8 months ago. Dyspnoea was described as "not being able to catch my breath". She is finding it increasingly difficult to climb stairs and becomes easily fatigued on walking short distances of approximately 50 yards. She walks unaided and has no associated cough or known respiratory disease. She has had no wheeze or haemoptysis. Her dyspnoea is currently unassociated with chest pain or palpitations. She did however, experience a number of episodes of sharp pain around her heart in . This didn't radiate and was unaffected by exertion or rest. An echocardiogram revealed a small pericardial effusion which was thought to be related to her hypothyroidism. Her shortness of breath is unaffected by lying flat in bed (orthopnoea) and does not wake her at night (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea). Breathlessness is relieved only by rest and unaffected by allergy trigger factors. Fatigue:  has become increasingly fatigued since  and reports having difficulty performing typical tasks with which she previously had no difficulty e.g. washing and dressing. She has no difficulty getting off to sleep and sleeps well apart from experiencing increasing frequency of nocturia. Her fatigue has been unassociated with dizziness or blackouts. Leg Swelling:  has noticed swelling of her ankles and legs since . Swelling is worst at the end of the day and evening and currently does not reside entirely overnight. She has noticed a progressive worsening in severity of oedema. At the time of the current admission,  presented with pitting oedema to the knees in both legs. She experiences pain due to the sheer accumulation of fluid, is unable to wear tight fitting shoes or boots and is becoming increasingly uncomfortable when sitting or lying. Prior to , she had never experienced any similar swelling. Thyroid and kidney function tests carried out in  indicated proteinuria (+++) for which she was referred to the care of a nephrologist for further investigation.  doesn't experience any dysuria. She has noticed recently a decrease in urine production during the day; rarely passing water at all but has little difficulty at night with frequency of up to 4 times. She has noticed no change to the urine stream or any haematuria. She reports occasionally experiencing a sharp abdominal pain on urination but this is infrequent. She has in addition noticed the appearance of a number of skin lesions over the past few months which seem to be confined to her trunk and upper limbs. These are extremely itchy and the resultant excoriation has left a number of scars on her trunk. The lesions are typically small, of maximum diameter 1cm, red in colour, non-pustular and seem to last for a couple of weeks and then reside. Frequency of emergence of new lesions is approx. 2-3 per week. Itching is unaffected by moisturing creams but relieved slightly by piriton tablets which she is currently not taking. She has had no previous skin disease. <heading>Past Medical History. </heading><list>Hypertension - 6 month history.Hypothyroidism - 8 month history.Bronchitis - , single episode.</list>No epilepsy, asthma, other current respiratory disease, diabetes, jaundice, strokes, rheumatoid arthritis, cervical arthropathy, obstructive sleep apnoea or acromegaly. No history of myocardial infarction, angina or stroke. No past history of rheumatic fever or tuberculosis. <heading>Surgical History. </heading>Sterilisation - , no postoperative complications experienced. <heading>Systems Review: </heading>No significant findings to note other than presenting symptoms. No other symptoms correlating to cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, abdominal, urinary or neurological systems.  has noticed no change in appetite or weight. She has not experienced any night sweats, heartburn, indigestion, nausea, vomiting or joint stiffness/pain. She has not experienced any dizziness or fits. She has noticed no bowel disturbance or rectal bleeding. <heading>Medication. </heading>Furosemide 40mg PO BD - loop diuretic, pulmonary oedema due to left ventricular failure. Ramipril 4mg PO OD - angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, inhibits the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Used in the management of hypertension. Atorvastatin 40mg PO OD - statin, competitively inhibits HMG CoA reductase, enzyme involved in cholesterol synthesis especially in the liver.  takes no other alternative or over the counter medication. <heading>Allergies: </heading>No known allergies. <heading>Family History: </heading>There is no known family history of any medical condition. Mother is still living and the father died in his 70's. <heading>Social History:</heading> owns her house in , she is divorced and lives alone. She is fully independent and manages all her personal needs herself with no difficulty. She has 2 sons aged 20 and 22 years, both of whom are fit and well and do not live locally. She is employed full-time as a carer and has been in her current position for 10 months. She is an ex-smoker with a 30 pack year history, having given up last year. She drinks on average 3-4 bottles of lager or glasses of red wine in a week. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Myocardial Infarction. A reasonable diagnosis as chest pain was crushing and described as "like a band stretched across the chest". The most severe episode of pain came on at rest in bed, lasted for a period of 1 hour and was unrelievable. This description is characteristic of that associated with myocardial infarction as opposed to that of angina pectoris which is typically precipitated by exercise, anxiety or fear, relatively short-lived and can be relieved by rest or nitrates . In addition, the pain radiated down the left arm and was associated with sweating, shortness of breath and nausea at the time of onset.  has suffered recurrent NSTEMI, he has inoperable multiple coronary artery disease and it is reasonable to assume this is a further such infarct. <heading>Cardiovascular. </heading>Angina pectoris - pain is classically also crushing and tight across the centre of the chest but can be relieved by the factors above. Pericarditis - although also sharp or crushing in nature, the pain of pericarditis is not usually associated with any radiation. <heading>Respiratory. </heading>Pulmonary embolus - sudden onset of pain as seen here but pleuritic pain is typically sharp in nature and unassociated with radiation. There was in addition no associated cough, haemoptysis but some shortness of breath. Pneumothorax - see above. <heading>Gastrointestinal. </heading>Peptic ulcer - pain typically burning rather than crushing, radiates to the throat rather than limbs. Pain associated with peptic ulceration is commonly relieved by food and antacids and typically accompanied with excessive wind. <heading>Musculoskeletal. </heading>Costochondritis - Pain typically sharp in nature and radiates to to the arms or around the chest to the back. Apart from the musculoskeletal pain, the affected individual otherwise looks well. Fractured rib - as above. <heading>Neurological. </heading>Herpes zoster - sharp pain typically localised to a specific dermatome with accompanying rash again of specific dermatomal distribution. Findings on physical examination which may support a diagnosis of myocardial infarction are: the patient may look anxious or distressed. They may be breathless suggesting pulmonary oedema. A pale, sweaty, clammy skin is indicative of cardiogenic shock. The pulse may demonstrate tachycardia secondary to either left ventricular failure or anxiety or bradycardia in the case of an inferior MI where occlusion of the right coronary artery impairs functioning of the atrioventricular node. Blood pressure may be raised in anxiety or decreased in cardiogenic shock. Elevation of the jugular venous pressure is indicative of congestive cardiac failure or infarction of purely the right ventricle. <heading>Physical and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>A middle-aged man who appeared short of breath. He was receiving oxygen at 2 L/min via a nasal cannula and was not obviously cyanosed nor jaundiced. He was cannulated, fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively though became breathless on changing position in bed. <heading>General. </heading><heading>Hands. </heading>No pale palmar creases or signs of peripheral cyanosis. No palmer erythema, clubbing, cyanosis, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, kolonychia, liver flap. <heading>Face. </heading>pale palpebral conjunctivae - suggestive of anaemia. No signs of jaundice (icteus) or cyanosis. Xanthelasma - indicative of hypercholesterolaemia. <heading>Mouth. </heading>No cyanosis No ulcers Not dehydrated <heading>Neck. </heading>No lymphadenopathy. Temperature - 36.5ºC - absence of systemic infection e.g. pericarditis. <heading>Cardiovascular system. </heading>No signs of peripheral or central cyanosis Mild bilateral pitting oedema - indicative of congestive cardiac failure. Pulse 85 bpm - tachycardia, Blood pressure 155/81 - known hypertension of long duration, indicative of current reasonable control. Radial pulse palpable, rate 88 bpm - (tachycardia resulting from possible anxiety), regular, radial and carotid pulses normal strength All other peripheral pulses palpable JVP normal Heart sounds I and II normal No murmurs or displacement of the apex beat. Blood glucose (non-fasting) - 14.8 mmol/l <heading>Respiratory system. </heading>Respiratory rate 28/min - tachypnoea Oxygen saturation 93% on air - degree of impairment of respiratory function Breathing appeared shallow No cough, sputum, tracheal deviation Equal chest expansion, normal vesicular breath sounds Bilateral basal crackles - indicative of pulmonary oedema <heading>Abdomen. </heading>Symmetrical No spider naevi, caput medusa or obvious abdominal distension Liver, Spleen, kidneys and bladder impalpable No renal angle tenderness - infection unlikely No ascites or shifting dullness or palpable masses Abdomen soft and non-tender on palpation, percussion resonant, normal bowel sounds. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Myocardial Infarction. Findings from the history and examination which support this diagnosis are: Pain severe in nature Pain of more than 30 minutes duration Pain was described as 'crushing and tight' in nature with associated radiation to the left arm, sweating and breathlessness. The chest pain came on at rest and was not relieved by GTN spray or rest. Such a diagnosis can be confirmed from electrocardiogram tracings and levels of cardiac enzymes such as troponin T. Myocardial infarction may be divided into ST elevation and non-ST elevation (NSTEMI) types. In NSTEMI infarction, necrosis is confined to the sub-endocardial tissue. NSTEMI is a diagnosis made several hours after a patient presents with chest pain. Such a diagnosis is dependent frequently on identifying cardiac muscle trauma through serial blood levels of cardiac enzymes such as troponin T over the 8-12 hour period post-infarction. Sub-endocardial infarcts are associated with a good intial prognosis, incidence of cardiac failure and death is less than with transmural infarcts. Risk of subsequent arrythmias and reinfarction as with  is however higher. Risk factors contributing to myocardial infarction as seen in this case include hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes, smoking, and positive family history. Acute myocardial infarction refers to cell death secondary to ischaemia. Reduction in the diameter of coronary arteries as a result of atherosclerotic deposition is the most common cause. Rupture of such an atherosclerotic plaque and the subsequent formation of thrombus over the rupture site or haemorrhage within an atheromatous plaque results in rapid occlusion of the vessel. Acute myocardial infarction is the most serious of a range of clinical conditions resulting from plaque rupture. Degree of severity of such conditions is determined by both the rate of vessel occlusion and also the degee of such occlusion. Acute myocardial infarction accounts for one of the most common causes of mortality worldwide accounting for approximately 6.3 million deaths in 1990. Of the 900000 people in the USA who experience a myocardial infarct each year, 225000 die. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical: 's progressive ischaemic heart disease and heart failure have inevitably impacted significantly on his physical exertive capacity. He is able only to walk a matter of 30 yards before having to stop and catch his breath and is virtually unable to climb stairs. He is able to sleep relatively comfortably at night when free from chest pain. He is frightened by his recurrent heart attacks, when they will happen, their resolution and has little idea when an attack is imminent. He has yet to come to terms with the reduction his health has placed on his physical capacity. Psychological:  has experienced repeated episodes of myocardial infarction with increasing frequency between episodes. The psychological impact of what he described as 'waiting for the next' shouldn't be underestimated. In addition, he has been told that his heart disease is inoperable, a state he did not appear to have really accepted at the time of interview. He appeared fairly angry at the limitations his cardiac function place on his live and his ability for independent living. Social:  has a close relationship with his wife, a crucial source of support in his future care. He also maintains regular contact with local friends. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading><table/>Low Hb concentration indicates normocytic anaemia as seen in renal disease. A low lymphocyte count may be seen in uraemia. <table/>The deranged results above demonstrate chronic renal failure. <table/>The above results demonstrate impaired renal function, presence of increased urinary protein indicative of glomerular damage. Cardiac enzymes: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay is used to detect troponin T and troponin I, proteins forming part of the myocardial cell structure which when present in the bloodstream indicate myocardial cell damage. Their levels rise within 6-14 hours of an MI, and remain elevated for up to 14 days.  Troponin T 2.54 (high) indicative of NSTEMI. Creatine kinase (MB isoenzyme) is derived solely from cardiac muscle and begins to increase approximately 4 hours after infarction, decreasing 72 hours post-infarction. Electrocardiography - ST segment depression in leads II (1mm), V 4-V 6 demonstrating LV hypertrophy. Broad complex in lead V 6 indicating left bundle branch block. Echocardiogram - indicated the left ventricle was not dilated, however there was moderate impairment of left ventricular systolic function. The mitral valve was thin and opened well. Moderate mitral regurgitation was demonstrated. Mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation. No vegetation seen. Renal tract ultrasound  - generalised increased echogenicity of the renal cortex consistent with chronic renal disease most likely of renovascular origin. No renal obstruction seen. Normal bladder and prostate. <heading>Reassurance and explanation</heading>The chest pain you have experienced is due to some damage to your heart. The narrowing of 3 of your heart vessels that was discovered in the angiogram you had last year reduces the blood supply to the muscle of the heart. This results over a period of time in a heart attack as has happened to you on 2 occasions previously. The ECG you had taken and then the subsequent one in the ward have indeed shown you have suffered another heart attack. This was confirmed by one of the blood tests you also had taken on admission. Whilst in hospital, we aim to monitor and treat any complications of this heart attack which may emerge such as a disturbance in the rhythm of your heart and also to optimise your breathing which seems to be troubling you at present. We will consider discharge when your breathlessness is reduced and you are no longer experiencing chest pain. If you should have any questions whilst in hospital don't hesitate to ask. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention</heading>Close monitoring of renal function and electrolyte balance is crucial in all individuals who have had a MI especially so for . Renal function may be deranged or worsened as a result of reduced renal perfusion in cardiogenic shock. Acute MI may precipitate cardiac arrythmias, this compounded by hypokalaemia. Monitoring full blood count is also useful as a leucocytosis is common following acute MI. For individuals with angina, anaemia has been shown to precipitate acute MI. This must be adressed in anaemic . <list><heading>In A+E:</heading>Frusemide 80mg IVClexane 80mgTirofiban 20ml/hr IVClopidogrel 300mg POOxygenMorphine 5-10mg IV</list><list><heading>Plan, commenced on the :</heading>Continue O2As indicated by renal impairment omit ramipril for 48 hoursNot for recatheterisationAdminister GTN, morphine, metoclopramide, cocodamol as requiredRepeat bedside echocardiogramOptimise hydration and seek renal opinion to optimise renal function</list><heading>Observation</heading> was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit and then to a general cardiac ward A+E where he should receive regular ECG monitoring and observations including oxygen saturation and heart rate. His respiratory, cardiovascular and renal function needs to be optimised prior to discharge. His pain relief should be adequate to keep him comfortable whilst in hospital. He should be closely monitored for complications of myocardial infarction e.g. emergent arrythmias, cardiogenic shock, emboli and exacerbation of his existing cardiac failure.  is well nourished and hydrated and is unlikely to require special supplementation during his hospital stay. <heading>Referral and team working</heading><list>GP - post-discharge monitoring and supportCardiologist - optimise cardiovascular function and assess exercise toleranceNephrologist - optimise renal functionDietician - dietary advice and support regarding cholesterol content of dietHeart failure nurse led team</list><heading>Advice and Prevention</heading>A low-fat, high-fibre diet is recommended Increase daily fluid intake Regular exercise of a tolerable intensity Continue use of GTN as required Consider future use of home oxygen <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> is uncertain as to his discharge date. He was relieved as to the explanation concerning his current infarction and felt he had been fully informed regarding his condition and the treatment he is receiving. Recent blood tests show a stabilisation in his renal function and no emergence of arrythmias or emboli following his NSTEMI. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Aims for treatment of  are to (i) relieve pain, (ii) restore/optimise blood supply to the heart, (iii) reduce incidence of complications, (iv) prevent or reduce frequency of recurrent ischaemia and infarction, (v) reduce mortality and (vi) minimise the side-effects associated with medication. Concerning the management of acute NSTEMI: Aspirin: Systematic review evidence has shown that aspirin reduces mortality, reinfarction and stroke at 1 month post-infarct when compared to placebo 1. Regarding harm, no significant difference was found in rates of cerebral haemorrhage or those bleeds requiring transfusion between the two treatment options. ß-blockers: both systematic review and randomised controlled trial evidence has shown that ß-blockers produce a reduction in mortality than when compared with placebo. Metoprolol for example, if administered immediately reduces rates of reinfarction and chest pain 6 days post-infarct compared to if treatment is delayed but has no significant effect on mortality at either 6 days or 1 year 2. ACEIs: Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors have been shown to reduce mortality 6 weeks post-infarct when compared with placebo if administered within 14 days of acute myocardial infarction. However caution is required in individuals such as , as they may increase renal dysfunction or persistent hypotension 3. Nitrates: Evidence concerning efficacy of nitrates is conflicting. For those with acute myocardial infarction prior to thrombolysis, nitrates have been shown to reduce mortality when compared to placebo. Randomised controlled trial evidence however, in the same circumstance, no significant difference between nitrates and placebo 4. Eplerenone: systematic trial evidence has shown that in patients with severe heart failure the addition of eplerenone (aldosterone receptor antagonist) to standard medical treatment including ACEI, angiotensin receptor antagonists, diuretics and ß-blockers decreases mortality when compared to placebo. When compared with thrombolysis, primary percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty has been shown to reduce mortality, non-fatal re-infarction and stroke 5. Early invasive cardiac revascularisation providing the distal grafts are in adequate condition as is unfortunately not the case for SB reduces mortality at both 6 and 12 months post-infarct when compared with medical treatment alone in those individuals who have developed cardiogenic shock within 48 hours of acute myocardial infarction 6. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>The National Service Framework for Coronary Heart Disease 2000 7 was published as a guide to the treatment of heart disease in the UK today. Of relevance to heart attacks are the following aims, (i) people should receive defibrillation from a trained individual within 8 minutes of calling for help if required, (ii) those individuals thought to be suffering from a MI should be assessed professionally and if required receive aspirin, (iii) each NHS trust should put in place agreed protocols so that appropriate assessment may be offered to an individual and treatment of proven clinical and cost effectiveness, decreasing the risk of disability and death. Clearly, in this case the presenting acute myocardial infarction required secondary specialist hospital based care. Chronic, heart disease can however be effectively managed with hospital direction (i.e. specialist heart failure and cardiology input) in the community/primary care setting incorporating a multidisciplinary led team care approach.  is extremely anxious about the possibiltity of having further infarctions. Manipulation of his treatment regime in order to extend the time to re-infarct must be explained to him in a format he is able to understand and absorb. Facilitating the self-management of heart disease has diffuse future healthcare implications. For example, helping a patient 'take ownership' of their disease e.g. taking regular blood pressure readings and offering smoking-cessation support can help with acceptance of a chronic disease and alleviate resource strains on the NHS. Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. His family could contribute towards care and as such should be involved in his treatment and diagnosis. 's health needs to be optimised to enable him to maximise independence and quality of life. Currently evidence concerning the use of positive inotropes such as dobutamine, pulmonary artery catheterisation, ventricular assistance devices and cardiac transplantation in the management of acute myocardial infarction is limited 8 and is clearly an area to address with future research. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading><list>Aetiology and natural progression of ischaemic heart disease.Factors determining prognosis.The importance of a multi-disciplinary team in patient care.Management of both chronic and acute heart disease.Impact of diagnosis of a chronic illness and unsuitability for surgery.Biopsychosocial model of health.</list>