<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading>A 32 year old male with 7 month history of episodes of 'blankness' admitted on the  for elective ambulatory EEG monitoring . <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting complaint. </heading> has a 7 month history of episodes of 'blankness' which have been occurring with frequency of 3-4 times a day since October . The episodes were described as 'deja-vu' like and can last from a few seconds up to approximately 15 seconds. The longest episode was witnessed, unresponsiveness was timed at between 3-4 minutes.  can be having a conversation and then suddenly stop and not remember what was being discussed on coming round. He is able to hear voices during these periods but is unable to make out what the voices are saying. He has been told by witnesses that his arms and legs go stiff during these episodes, he goes pale, the colour drains from his face and he puckers his lips or stares straight ahead. The episodes are unassociated with loss of consciousness, fits, tremor, aura, sickness, visual impairment, incontinence, tongue biting or injury. There is no recent history of trauma to the head. He feels completely 'normal' both before and after an episode. He does not feel the episodes are triggered by tiredness or excess alcohol but feels stress does have some impact. Episodes are never experienced at night. He suffered no seizures as a child. He self-presented to his GP in  and was prescribed first Epilim (sodium valproate) 500mg BD and then Lamotrigine both of which he feels provided some benefit in decreasing seizure frequency. Since his anticonvulsant has been stopped recently however in an outpatient clinic, episode frequency has increased once again.  has been informed as of the DVLA regulation concerning seizures and is currently not driving. He is also not operating any machinery at work. <heading>Systems review : </heading>no symptoms of significance affecting cardiovascular, abdominal or respiratory systems. No recent disturbance of either bowel or bladder function. Prior to , he reports being 'fit and healthy'.  has suffered with poor sleep for the past 3 months and attributes this both to worry about his health but also as a result of stress at work. He reports being unable to relax and is becoming increasingly aggressive, moody and short-tempered with his friends and family but doesn't describe low mood. He has felt more tired than usual in the month prior to admission and on a number of occasions has felt light-headed but has never fainted. <heading>Past Medical History :</heading><list>Agoraphobia - longstanding history, severity peaked in his 'early 20's'.Depression - ongoing, receiving medication.Anxiety attacks - since childhood, triggered by open spaces.</list>No asthma, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, TB, rheumatic heart disease, rheumatoid arthritis, stroke, MI, jaundice. <heading>Surgical History : </heading>no recent surgical history. <heading>Medication on admission. </heading>Fluoxetine 20mg OD - selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor. Management of depressive illness.  is receiving no anticonvulsant medication during the current admission. He takes no other over the counter or alternative medication. <heading>Allergies : </heading>No known drug allergies. <heading>Family history : </heading>both his mother and father have longstanding history of anxiety and depression. Father has received ECT in the past. Both are alive and otherwise well. <heading>Social history : </heading> lives with his wife and young daughter in . Prior to admission he was fully independent and managed all cleaning, cooking and personal care. He works as a garden shop supervisor and experiences a significant degree of associated stress. He has never smoked and drinks 42 units a week (lager). Intake has increased significantly since Christmas , attributable to stress. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Given the presenting complaint of episodes of blankness in an otherwise fit young man, the most likely single cause of 's presentation is complex partial seizures. In such a case, the history from a witness is crucial for diagnosis as neurological examination is most often normal in epilepsy. Examination may however indicate underlying pathology and a clinical diagnosis e.g. papilloedema and hemiparesis in a tumour affecting one of the hemispheres. A seizure is a convulsion or transient abnormal event resulting from spontaneous, uncoordinated discharge of cerebral neurones. Epilepsy is the continuing tendency to have such seizures. In a partial complex seizure as proposed here, the uncoordinated neuronal activity is coming from a focus within the brain, i.e. the seizure is localized, and causes some loss of awareness. <heading>Factors favouring a diagnosis of recurrent complex partial seizures and thus epilepsy are :</heading>Some stereotyping of episode e.g. arms and legs go stiff each time. Responded to anticonvulsant medication, both sodium valproate and lamotragine. Some indication of automatism e.g. lip puckering, staring. <heading>Factors going against such a diagnosis :</heading>No aura, episodes are sudden in onset,  feels perfectly 'normal' prior to each episode. Episodes are brief, often only a few seconds long. Episodes not fully stereotyped - variable length and reports varying experiences i.e. doesn't always phase out of conversations. Unusual to have daily seizures if have never had them before the age of 30 years. If are experiencing daily seizures it is unusual not to have experience a tonic-clonic seizure. Given the number of factors going against a diagnosis of complex partial seizures the following differentials may also be considered: Alcohol excess - chronic alcohol abuse is a common cause of seizures.  has been drinking heavily for a number of months as a mechanism to cope with his current high level of stress. Anxiety -  has a longstanding history of anxiety attacks and depression. Possible given the high levels of stress, which he finds himself experiencing at work and elsewhere in his life. He certainly describes symptoms of both anxiety and depression e.g. tiredness, irritability and aggressive behaviour. Fluoxetine - SSRIs such as fluoxetine should be used with caution in people with epilepsy as they may cause convulsions. Whilst unlikely to the primary cause of his symptoms fluoxetine may serve to perpetuate his seizures. Metabolic abnormality - e.g. hypocalcaemia, unlikely given chronicity of symptoms and lack of progression in frequency and severity of episodes. <heading>Physical examination and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>A young man who appeared fit and well.  was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely. He was attached to an ambulatory EEG recorder. <heading>General. </heading>Hands: No pale palmar creases, No peripheral cyanosis. No palmer erythema, clubbing, cyanosis, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, kolonychia, liver flap. Face: No pale palpebral conjunctivae or signs of jaundice or cyanosis. Mouth: No cyanosis, ulcers, dehydration. Neck: No lymphadenopathy. Temperature - 35.9°C, apyrexial. Blood glucose (fasting) - 5.6 mmol/L. GCS 15/15 <heading>Neurological examination. </heading>Right upper and lower limbs smaller than left - since birth. <table/>Gait - normal width, speed, pace length and arm swing. Cranial nerves - fields intact, pupils equal and reactive. All cranial nerves normal. <heading>Respiratory system. </heading>Respiratory rate 18 bpm No cough, sputum, tracheal deviation Equal chest expansion, normal vesicular breath sounds, no crackles <heading>Cardiovascular system. </heading>Pulse 80 bpm, regular. Blood pressure 134/80 No peripheral/sacral oedema, no peripheral/central cyanosis JVP normal Heart sounds I and II normal, no murmurs or displacement of the apex beat. <heading>Abdomen: </heading>No organomegaly No renal angle tenderness No ascites, shifting dullness, spider naevi, caput medusa Abdomen soft and tender in right upper quadrant A PR exam was not performed at the time of examination, as supervision was unavailable. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Following physical examination, the principal diagnosis still remains unclear. Neurological examination was unremarkable as is often the case in epilepsy.  right upper and lower limbs are smaller than the left. A CT scan performed in  showed that his left cerebral hemisphere is smaller than the right. It was suggested this might have occurred as a result of a large infarct at birth, which could possibly predispose him to seizures. The corticospinal tract decussates in the spinal cord, activity thus originating in the cerebral hemisphere will influence the contralateral side of the body explaining why disruption of the nervous activity originating in the motor cortex of the 'infarcted' left hemisphere impacts on the right side of the body (decreasing muscle size) in this patient. He has in addition an arachnoid cyst in the left hemisphere which most likely bears no relevance to his presenting symptoms. Increased tone in right upper and lower limbs - associated with smaller limb size, ? possible additional contribution of anxiety. Upgoing/extensor plantar response (right) - insignificant as isolated finding but combined with hypertonia on the right side, possibly suggestive of an upper motor neurone lesion, pathology on left as discussed above. Clearly,  presents with a 7 month history of repeated episodes in which he feels he 'blanks out'. As previously stated, factors suggesting these episodes are complex partial seizures are that they appear to be responsive to anticonvulsant medication, he demonstrates some signs of automatism and as indicated by CT scan, he does have some infarctive damage to his left hemisphere which may predispose him to seizure activity. However, he has extensive past history of anxiety and more recent heavy alcohol abuse. Both these factors and their contribution to his current condition certainly shouldn't be underestimated. His episodes are extremely brief and frequent. For an individual having seizures of such frequency one would expect some at least to be of greater severity i.e. tonic clonic seizures. Seizures furthermore aren't clearly stereotyped. The fact that he has responded to anticonvulsant medication in the past indicates that this is probably sufficient indication to continue treating his episodes as seizures despite not having concrete evidence of their aetiology. <list><heading>Aetiological and precipitating factors of epilepsy include:</heading>Genetic predispositionTrauma and surgeryDevelopmental e.g. hamartomas, neuronal migration abnormalitiesIntracranial mass lesionsPyrexiaVascular e.g. cerebral infarction, arteriovenous malformationDrugs and drug withdrawalEncephalitis and inflammatory conditionsNeural degenerative disordersMetabolic abnormalities e.g. porphyria, hypocalcaemiaProvoked seizures e.g. photosensitivity, sleep deprivation</list>Clearly, these precipitating factors lend little weight to a diagnosis of epilepsy for . He does have some developmental damage but the relevance of this to his symptoms is uncertain. Pathology: In a normal brain, synchronous neuronal discharge occurs in restricted groups whose controlled discharges produce the normal EEG rhythms. Spread of activity between cortical neurones is usually restricted. During a seizure, larger groups of neurones are activated repetitively and hypersynchronously. Additional loss of inhibitory synaptic contact between neurones causes the spike and wave EEG activity characteristic of epilepsy. An area of brain becomes epileptogenic because neurones have a predisposition to hyperexcitability either (i) due to abnormal migration patterns in utero or (ii) an acquired tendency e.g. due to trauma or brain neoplasms which alter seizure threshold. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical:  has experienced recurrent 'blank' episodes for the past 7 months, which although cause altered awareness have not resulted in complete loss of consciousness or injury. Psychological: He has become increasingly concerned and anxious about the cause of his symptoms over the 2 months prior to admission and is keen to receive a diagnosis. He has a long history of anxiety and depression and these conditions certainly appear to be exacerbated by the uncertainty concerning the aetiology of his episodes. Social:  is extremely close to his wife and her family. Their support and involvement in his treatment and care on discharge are essential in optimising compliance and prognosis concerning both his physical and mental health. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading><table/>Raised vitamin B12 and folate are unlikely to be of significance in isolation. The vitamin B12 may be attributed to alcohol abuse and a degree of liver impairment but biochemistry is all normal. Repeat future monitoring of FBC and these parameters whilst an inpatient will help further assessment.  CT scan head - smaller left hemisphere due to large infarct at birth. Arachnoid cyst in left hemisphere.  EEG - no epileptiform activity. Intermittent low frequency activity from left temporal deviation, relates to left sided structural pathology. <heading>Reassurance and explanation: </heading>As has already been mentioned to you, a possible explanation for your 'blank' episodes is that you are having recurrent small seizures causing your level of consciousness to become slightly disrupted. A seizure is caused by excessive, uncoordinated activity of the cells (neurones) in one area of your brain. An individual who experiences a number of these seizures is said to have epilepsy. There are some features of your symptoms, which support this diagnosis such as the fact that you are witnessed to pucker you lips or stare, behaviour common in some seizure types. You have also in the past responded to medication used in the treatment of epilepsy. There are however other features which are unusual in epileptic seizures. Your seizures are very brief and frequent. An epileptic often has a 'warning/aura' before a seizure and you haven't described anything which resembles such an experience e.g. a funny taste or a headache. Whilst I appreciate your anxiety and concern about the cause of your episodes it is important we make the right diagnosis. As you have continued to experience episodes in the weeks prior to admission it is important you continue to refrain from driving and also operating machinery. We have asked you to come into hospital this week so that you can have a test called an ambulatory EEG performed. This involves as you have had before, electrodes being placed on your scalp to record the electrical activity of your brain continuously for a week. The activity will be stored in a recorder which you will carry with you at all time so that any abnormal activity occurring when and if you experience a seizure will be noted. If possible, it would be useful if you could continue noting your episodes down in your diary as when they occur. Depending on the results of this weeks tests we will be in a better position to advise you on a diagnosis and future treatment if appropriate. If you have any questions, please don't hesitate to ask. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention. </heading><list>Ambulatory EEG - 5/7 day recording period.Continue Venlafaxine 20mg OD.Regular FBC, U+Es and LFTs whilst an inpatient.Consider psychology referral to help address anxiety issues and management.</list><heading>Observation : </heading> was admitted to the general neurology ward and attached to an ambulatory EEG recorder. He understood the purpose of the EEG and what it was recording. He should receive daily observations and requires no special/additional nutrition or hydration.  appeared a highly intelligent man reasonably informed about his health. He was keen to receive any information concerning his condition however such information when given, should be provided in both an appropriate environment and format. Opportunity should be made for further discussion post-diagnosis delivery should he have any additional questions. <heading>Referral. </heading>GP - post discharge monitoring and support. Neurology outpatient clinic - for review of condition, symptoms and medication as appropriate. Epilepsy nurse - he may benefit from further advice and information concerning prognosis, seizure management and social consequences e.g. DVLA regulations. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> was discharged on the  having been given a neurology outpatient follow-up appointment. Whilst in hospital despite experiencing a number of self-recorded, unwitnessed episodes no epileptiform activity was demonstrated on EEG recording. He was happy to go home and discharged on lamotrigine. It was felt despite the lack of clinical evidence and doubt arising from the history given supporting a diagnosis of epilepsy he had responded to anticonvulsant medication in the past and this shouldn't be overlooked. For an individual such as  with significant history of depression and anxiety the long-term psychological impact of experiencing such episodes and associated uncertainty concerning their aetiology must be acknowledged. He was happy to take medication and accepted the social implications of being treated for epilepsy such as the driving restrictions. His symptomatic progression, development and response to medication should continue to be reviewed in an outpatient setting in the future. Future further EEG monitoring should be considered. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>As the single most likely explanation for the presenting symptoms in this case, I have chosen to present evidence for the management of epilepsy. Epileptic seizures are classified by whether their onset is focal (partial) or generalized. Partial seizures are further subclassified as simple partial seizures (consciousness retained throughout) or complex partial seizures (consciousness impaired at any stage). Partial seizures may become generalized. Classification is important as the different seizure types are managed differently. Up to 1% of the general population suffer from active epilepsy with 20-50 new cases per 100000 being diagnosed each year. Approximate annual death rate for epilepsy is 2 per 100000. Treatment of epilepsy aims to (i)reduce risk of subsequent seizures and improve prognosis of seizure disorder, (ii)if in remission to withdraw antiepileptic drugs without causing seizure recurrence, (iii) minimise any adverse effects of treatment. Effects of monotherapy in newly diagnosed partial epilepsy: there are no placebo controlled randomised controlled trials available looking at the effects of carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin or sodium valproate as monotherapy in partial epilepsy, this is clearly an area for concern, however placebo controlled trial are now considered unethical. Systemic reviews comparing sodium valproate and carbamazepine have demonstrated carbamazepine has a higher 12 month seizure remission rate 1. When comparing phenytoin and carbamazepine, phenytoin is more likely to be withdrawn from use with side-effects including confusion, dizziness and headache 2. Effect of adding a second line drug in drug resistant partial epilepsy: adding a drug such as lamotrigine to the usual treatment has been shown in systematic reviews to decrease seizure frequency when compared to adding placebo 3. There is however, an associated increase in frequency of adverse effects. There is no available evidence concerning the best second line agent to select, this is an area for future research. Should single seizures be treated? : recurrence of seizures after a 2 year period of remission following a single seizure has been shown by randomised controlled trials to be reduced when compared to receiving no treatment. There is no evidence to show that long-term prognosis is altered in any way. There are however, well known adverse effects of long-term antiepileptic medication such as cognitive impairment and teratogenesis. Factors increasing risk of relapse on withdrawal of treatment: suggested by a single randomised controlled trial include age, number of antiepileptic drugs being taken, type of seizure, whether seizures have continued since starting anticonvulsant medication and length of remission before withdrawal of medication 4. Educational programmes: one randomised controlled trial assessing the impact of a 2 day programme covering current knowledge and understanding of epilepsy and its management improved compliance with treatment, acceptance and adjustment to living with epilepsy and psychosocial functioning when compared to control 5. The impact of such programmes must be assessed further prior to application for widespread implementation of similar interventions. Future research could address the impact of psychological interventions e.g. CBT and relaxation therapy in the management of epilepsy as evidence concerning such interventions is scarce. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>This case demonstrates the ethical issue of labelling an individual with a diagnosis when there is clinical doubt as to its applicability. Clearly whilst it is in the best interests of an epileptic to treat them with anticonvulsant medication, the burden of receiving a diagnosis of epilepsy isn't insignificant. It carries huge social implications such as the restrictions placed on ability to drive by the DVLA if experiencing current seizures or employability.  is an individual with moderate psychiatric comorbidity who has experienced a 7 month period of possible seizures, the aetiology of which is causing him increasing anxiety. For such an individual for whom antiepileptic medication has had some benefit in the past, then surely it is in his best interests to continue this and treat him as an epileptic than prolong and exacerbate both his chronic anxiety and depression. His recent alcohol abuse suggests a tendency to adopt maladaptive coping mechanisms. Epilepsy is a condition which can be managed effectively in the community with a combined care package comprising primary care (GP), specialist secondary care (neurology outpatient clinic, epilepsy specialist nurses). The balance of healthcare provision between these 2 settings will vary with the stage of the disease. Diagnostic interventions and exacerbations e.g. status epilepticus will require management purely in secondary care for example. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading>Use of multi-disciplinary team led care in patient treatment. Complexity of comorbidity and its impact on management. Interplay between clinical impression, physical examination and investigations. Need for outpatient follow-up on discharge. Management of a chronic disease in both secondary and primary care. The biopsychosocial model of health. 