<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> was in the  hospital for an elective Anterior Resection of the rectum with a covering Ileostomy.  was referred to Mr  at the  General Hospital from her General Practitioner (GP) after presenting with what she believed to be haemorrhoids and lumps of blood on the sides of her stool. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting complaint</heading>On presentation to 's GP, she had a 2-3 month history of blood on the "sides of her stools".  had no other symptoms; she had no pain, no weight loss, no diarrhoea and no change in the consistency of her stools until closer to her hospital admission when she experienced constipation. There was no change in bowel habits on presenting to her GP. <heading>History of Presenting Complaint</heading> had been experiencing the above symptoms for 2-3 months but prior to that she had not experienced any of the problems before. On arrival at the hospital,  was constipated but actually had no bleeding or discharge.  had never experienced feeling any rectal protrusions.  experienced no back pain or ankle swelling and she had had no urinary problems.  had not had haemorrhoids before and consequently visited her General Practitioner for treatment. Her GP performed a rectal examination and consequently referred  to Mr .  was subsequently found to have an adenocarcinoma in the mid-rectum diagnosed by flexible sigmoidoscopy and biopsy. <heading>Past Medical History</heading><list>Known hypertensionHysterectomyCholycystectomyAppendectomyNo history of diabetes, thyroid problems, rheumatoid arthritis, epilepsy, asthma or stroke</list><heading>Current Medication</heading><list>Bendrofluazide 2-5mg odCaptopril 25mg bdZopiclone 3.75mg nocteClexane 20mg od</list>No known allergies. <heading>Family History</heading> father died at 80 from a myocardial infarction. There was no familial illness. <heading>Social History</heading> lives at home with her husband and has 1 adult son who does not live at home.  is retired. She does not smoke and drinks no alcohol. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Based on the symptoms experienced by , at time of presentation to her GP, her symptoms may have been consistent with the following causes of fresh rectal bleeding - diverticulitis, colorectal cancer, colonic polyps, piles, trauma, fissure-in-ano, inflammatory bowel disease, angiodysplasia and rectal carcinoma. As stated previously, following investigations  was found to have a mid-rectal adenocarcinoma. Had  undergone radiotherapy, her symptoms may indicate possible radiation proctitis. In view of 's age, her presentation with persistent rectal bleeding without anal symptoms and with no obvious external evidence of benign anal disease is a situation that requires an urgent referral. In light of the bleeding  was experiencing over a number of months, it is possible that  was anaemic on presentation (microcytic anaemia). On physical examination anaemia may present pale palmar creases and pale conjunctiva. The site of the tumour can be linked to the findings on per rectum (PR) examination; if the carcinoma is present on the left-hand side, bleeding on PR or and/or the location of a mass is typical. It is also common for the passage of mucus to be seen on PR in rectal carcinoma. Physical examination may also reveal a tender abdomen. <heading>Physical examination and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>On general examination,  was alert and orientated and comfortable at rest.  was a thin lady. There were no signs of jaundice, anaemia, clubbing, cyanosis, oedema or lymphadenopathy. There were no xanthelasma present in the eyes. <list><heading>CVS - </heading> Pulse 64 regular Blood Pressure 172/71 Temperature 37 oC Heart Sounds I + II + 0 JVP - not raised Respiratory rate 14 per minute</list>Respiratory System - Chest was clear, with no wheeze or crepitations and vesicular breathing was present. Abdomen - No distension, no tenderness No palpable masses/no organomegaly Bowel sounds were normal and present A PR examination was not performed on this patient due to unavailable supervision. CNS - Grossly intact <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>At the time of interview  had been admitted for elective surgery in light of her diagnosis of mid rectal carcinoma. Colorectal carcinoma causes rectal bleeding and stenosis, causing the symptoms of increasing abdominal obstruction seen as an alteration in bowel habit and a colicky abdominal pain. Rectal bleeding was the only presenting symptom in  but as mentioned, this is treated urgently with regards to her age. Clinical examination can often be unhelpful in such cancers, as it was in this case; there was no abdominal mass palpable transabdominally and unfortunately a PR could not be performed. It is important to note that there was no hepatomegaly on examination, which is an indication of whether there are liver metastases present. To confirm this ultrasound of the liver could be performed. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical - 's only physical problem was bleeding on opening her bowels and following her surgery this will be resolved.  was not in any pain as a result of her rectal carcinoma and did not feel she had physical problems. Psychological -  found it difficult to accept that she required surgery. Initially  was not "keen on surgery" but having been given the appropriate information and having spoken to the Stoma Nurse, she began to feel able to cope with the stoma bag.  was happier knowing the details of her surgery and the possibility of having her ileostomy reversed pleased her. Social -  had support at home from her husband and son and was confident that she would be able to cope with the stoma bag once she was discharged from hospital. The risk factors of smoking and alcohol intake was not an issue for . <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading><table/>Red numbers indicate results pre-surgery (), blue number indicate results post-surgery () <table/>Red numbers indicate results pre-surgery (), blue number indicate results post-surgery () These results indicate that  was at the lower limit of a normal haemoglobin count pre-surgery and post-surgery was profoundly anaemic. This result could be due to the loss of blood during the surgery or an indication that there is blood loss continuing from the surgery. <heading>Reassurance and explanation</heading>Before deciding on whether to proceed with surgery for Mrs , it is important to discuss with her the meaning of her diagnosis and the options available for her as treatment. Due to her apprehension regarding surgery it is important to explain in a way that she can understand what the surgery would involve and what her recovery may be expected to be. The use of a stoma bag can be very daunting at first so it is also important to allow  to meet with a Stoma Nurse so that she can be shown what they are and how they work.  needs to be advised on changes that may need to be made in her diet following the surgery and what activities she may have to stop whilst she is recovering. It is also important to discuss with her the option of reversing the ileostomy to remove the stoma bag if it is a viable option. <heading>Prescription/medical intervention</heading>On admission to hospital,  was undergoing elective surgery and she needed to undergo the pre-operative assessment on her arrival. <heading>Observation</heading>Following surgery,  needs to undergo the relevant post-operative care. This includes admission to a High Dependency Unit (HDU) bed in order for her fluid balance to be continuously assessed, her temperature to be monitored and her pain to be properly controlled. Whilst in HDU,  should have an arterial line, an internal jugular line (to monitor filling pressure), transfusions of blood, fluid access, epidural setup and continual monitoring of her blood saturations. Once out of HDU,  was kept on the surgical ward for further monitoring of her fluid balance, monitoring of a possible ileus, blood pressure, respiratory rate, temperature and pulse. <heading>Referral and team working</heading>Prior to surgery  will have been referred to the Stoma Nurse who will continue to meet with  following her surgery until both  and the Nurse are happy with the changing of the stoma bag. Referral to the dietician may also be necessary to discuss changes that may need to be made to her diet. On discharge, a letter should be sent to her GP informing them of how 's surgery had gone and how 's recovery was from the operation was. The GP should also be notified of any medication changes. <heading>Advice and Prevention</heading> should be advised about the foods she should include in her diet and she should be made aware of any possible complications with using a stoma bag so that she can monitor how her ileostomy is working.  should be encouraged to go to her GP if she has any queries or worries once she is home and  should be seen in clinic after her surgery on a regular basis. Having had a rectal carcinoma,  will be asked to come to clinic regularly now until the end of her life. Regular endoscopic and ultrasound surveillance will also monitor for recurrence and metastases. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading>Following the surgery,  remained on the surgical ward for 2 weeks. She was discharged by Mr  and the Stoma Nurse once the team were happy with the working of the ileostomy and 's ability to change the stoma bags. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>In the UK approximately 35,000 people are diagnosed with bowel cancer every year (1). In England and Wales, this number is increasing by 1% every year for men (it is staying the same for women) (1). Approximately 16,000 people will die of the disease every year, making it the second most common cause of cancer death in the UK (lung cancer being the most common of all) (1). Survival rates in the UK have improved over the past 25 years; it is now estimated that half of the people diagnosed with bowel cancer will survive for 5 years or more. Some of the risk factors for this cancer have been mentioned previously and include: Age - Colorectal cancer can occur in younger people, but over 9 out of 10 people who get it are over the age of 50 years. A previous polyp or colorectal cancer - Not all types of polyps increase the risk of bowel cancer, but a type called adenomatous polyp does. Personal history of chronic bowel inflammation - Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease will slightly increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer. Diet - A diet that is high in red meat and fat and low in vegetables, folate and fibre may increase the risk of colorectal cancer. Exercise - Moderate exercise may help prevent colorectal cancer developing. Obesity - Being overweight or obese may increase the risk of colorectal cancer developing. Smoking and alcohol - Although not as strong a risk factor as for other cancers, smoking may also increase the risk of colorectal cancer, particularly in heavy drinkers. Alcohol consumption may increase risk, especially in those with low levels of folate in their diet. Family history - Less than 1 in 10 cases of colorectal cancer are due to an inherited gene defect. However, there are certain families who have an increased risk of developing colorectal cancer due to a variety of conditions including familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC). Personal history of colorectal cancer - Having had colorectal cancer before increases the risk of a new cancer developing. The relevant risk factors for  were her age and possibly her diet. Reducing the incidence of cancer is a long-term Government initiative to reduce cancer mortality and this is hoped to be achieved with the use or screening programmes. Where screening is possible, it is an important method of detecting abnormalities at an early stage, allowing treatment when the cancer is most likely to be curable, or in some cases, even before it develops. The National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme is due to start in April 2006 Bowel cancer is a major public health problem. It is the second most common cause of cancer deaths in the United Kingdom. Research has shown that screening for bowel cancer can help reduce death rates by finding and treating bowel cancer early. It is predicted that deaths from bowel cancer could drop by 15% as a result of screening. Nationally, screening for bowel cancer could save approximately 1,200(2) lives each year. Patients whose cancer is discovered early have more treatment options and a better long term outlook. The treatment of rectal cancer is usually by surgery. Radiotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy are used palliatively where the tumour is inoperable. Colorectal carcinomas are relatively unresponsive to chemotherapy but palliative chemotherapy in patients with locally advanced or metastatic disease has been shown to reduce death and progression at 12 months (1). The findings translate into a 16% absolute difference in survival and a 25% increase in progression free survival (increases in 3.7 months in median survival and 6 months in median progression free survival) in patients treated with palliative chemotherapy e.g. 5-fluorouracil alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents. The choice of operation depends on the height of the lesion above the anal verge, it's configuration, gross extent and degree of differentiation, and the patient's general condition. A colostomy may be required and this should be discussed with the patient. Four principal operations are used: local resection: if the patient is too old or frail to withstand a major operation anterior resection of rectum: for growths more than 10 cm from the anal verge but below the recto-sigmoid junction. abdomino-perineal resection of rectum: for growths less than 10 cm from the anal verge Hartmann's procedure: if the tumour is unresectable. An anterior resection of the rectum is used to treat rectal carcinoma where it is more than 10 cm from the anal verge but below the recto-sigmoid junction. It is an extensive operation since the rectum must be mobilised within the pelvic musculature. The tumour is resected with a satisfactory distal margin - typically 5 centimetres - and the anastomosis performed between the rectal stump and the left side of the colon. A protective transverse loop colostomy may be also be carried out. <heading>Prognosis </heading>The staging of colonic carcinoma is the most important determinant of survival rate and is normally expressed via Dukes classification. The overall 5 year survival rate is 35%: 1. operation for cure can be performed on about 70% of patients: 10% of lesions not resectable at operation 20% have liver or other distant metastases 2. operative mortality rate is 2-6% 3. 5 year survival rate for curative resection is 55% Complications such as obstruction or perforation adversely affect survival. Patients should be followed for recurrent, metastatic, or metachronous lesions. Faecal occult blood should be tested every 6-12 months and colonoscopy performed 1 year after operation. Surgical resection for recurrent lesions should be considered. Once colorectal cancer has metastasised, the average survival duration without chemotherapy is 3-9 months (1). Systemic chemotherapy is rarely curative in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer except, sometimes, where metastatic disease is confined to the liver and potentially resectable after chemotherapy. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>Important issues raised in this case include the Colorectal Screening Programme, the issue of stigma with regards to stomas and the importance of taking thorough histories with regard to symptoms such as rectal bleeding, even when the presenting patient may not feel unwell. The Colorectal Screening Programme is currently only set up for those patients who are at a particularly high risk of colorectal carcinoma (such as familial polyposis). With the incidence of colorectal carcinoma increasing it is important to look at the public health issue of introducing a screening programme for more individuals. The drawback of such a screening programme however is the issue of engaging individuals in sending stool samples to be investigated. The stigma of having such major surgery and resulting in a stoma bag may also need to be addressed. Initially  was very apprehensive about having an operation and a stoma bag and perhaps part of this may be resolved by educating individuals about the diseases involved and stomas themselves. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading>The importance of diagnosing a rectal carcinoma in its early stages has been highlighted to me in this case. The importance of a correct cancer diagnosis, staging and grading is important in order to be able to make the most appropriate treatment choice. The importance of giving the patient time to recover from major surgery and adjust to a new lifestyle following that surgery has been illustrated. 