<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading> was referred to  Hospital Medical Admissions Unit (MAU) on  by his General Practitioner (GP) due to a history of weight loss, anaemia and a change in bowel habits.  had previously been investigated for this presentation but his care had not continued due to loss of appointments in the outpatient department. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint </heading>On presentation to MAU,  had lost a 1 stone in weight over the last year, which he had not been able to increase.  also gave a 6 month history of a change in bowel habit. Three weeks prior to admission,  had also been diagnosed with anaemia. <heading>History of Presenting Complaint </heading> complained of unexplained weight loss over the last year, which he described to be unrelated to a reduced intake in food. Over the preceding 6 months,  had also noticed a change in his bowel habits; his motions had become looser and darker in colour. described his stools as "free-flowing".  had no problems passing urine. Over the past 3 weeks, 's motions had become very frequent and he was now going to the toilet 3-4 times per day and up to 3 times at night.  has a 6 month history of dark blood mixed with the stools and described there being blood in the toilet pan sometimes. There was no obvious mucus in the stools.  had no associated abdominal pain or nausea and vomiting.  had never been constipated over this period. Associated with his weight loss,  had a loss of appetite over the same length of time. There was no history of dysphagia, dyspepsia or jaundice. Over the last three weeks,  had been feeling very tired.  was not breathless at rest. There was no family history of bowel disease. History of  foreign travel was 30 years ago. <heading>Past Medical History</heading><list>HypertensionHypercholesterolaemiaIschaemic Heart DiseaseHistory of Ulcerative ColitisCoronary Artery Bypass Graft - Colonoscopy - Blood transfusion - 4 units - No history of diabetes, thyroid problems, rheumatoid arthritis, epilepsy, asthma, myocardial infarction, stroke or TB. </list><heading>Current Medication</heading><list>Aspirin - 75mg odAtorvastatin - 20 mg odMesalazine - 400mg bdPerindopril - 4mg odMezapine </list><heading>No known allergies</heading><heading>Family History</heading>No significant family history <heading>Social History</heading> is married and lives in a 2-storey house with his wife. He is a retired gardener.  is an ex-smoker for 25 years, before which he smoked approximately 40 cigarettes a day.  drinks approximately 4-5 pints of beer per week (8-10 units per week). <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading> has a long-standing history of weight loss and a change in bowel habits and had been investigated previously with a colonoscopy in . On admission,  was presenting with this history and associated anaemia.  had a chronic history and the differential diagnoses of these presenting complaints need to be considered. These include: Diverticulitis/diverticular disease Colorectal carcinoma Colonic polyps Angiodysplasia Infection (e.g. viral, bacterial, protozoal or parasitic) Malabsorption (e.g. Ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn's disease, Coeliac's disease, pancreatic disease) The most likely single cause of 's presentation is carcinoma until proven otherwise given his age and his symptoms. Another likely differential includes diverticular disease. An  acute exacerbation of ulcerative colitis is also possible because of his history and his prominent diarrhoea, where he passes up to 8 loose stools per day, with the presence of blood in his stools. Accompanied with his diarrhoea,  also presented with weight loss and anorexia, which are typical of both carcinoma and UC. Crohn's disease more often presents with abdominal pain, which  has never suffered from. It is also important not to rule out a carcinoma as a cause for 's symptoms. On physical examination, findings to look out for include abdominal distension/tenderness, lymphadenopathy, signs of anaemia in the eyes and skin pallor and a rectal mass on PR examination. If  had severe UC, he may present with tachycardia, a fever (>37.5oC) and abdominal pain and tenderness. <heading>Physical examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>On general examination,  was alert, orientated and comfortable at rest. There were no signs of jaundice, clubbing, cyanosis or lymphadenopathy.  had pale conjunctiva and pallor, indicative of anaemia.  did not look cachexic. <list><heading>Gastrointestinal System</heading>Abdomen was soft and non-tender. No organomegaly. No masses were present. Bowel sounds present. No ascites. No mass found on rectal examination. </list><list><heading>Cardiovascular System</heading>Pulse 76 regularBlood pressure 148/79Temperature 36.8oCHeart Sounds I + II + 0JVP - not raised</list><list><heading>Respiratory System</heading>Respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute. No wheezes present. Mild basal crackles bilaterally. Good air entry bilaterally. Vesicular breath sounds were present. </list><heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Physical examination confirms initial thoughts for possible causes for 's symptoms. There were no signs of abdominal tenderness, no masses and no lymphadenopathy, indicating there is a reduced possibility of the diagnosis being advanced carcinoma. There was no blood seen of PR examination, indicating that the blood seen in the stools is not rectal blood but blood from higher up in the colon. UC characteristically begins in the rectum and primarily affects the sigmoid colon. You would therefore expect to see some blood on the glove following PR. 's pale conjunctiva and pallor are indicative of anaemia, confirming reduced levels of haemoglobin, most likely as a result of blood loss. The most likely diagnoses still remain: <list>Colorectal CarcinomaDiverticular DiseaseAcute exacerbation of Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's and UC)</list>A 79 year old individual with a history of weight loss, PR bleeding and altered bowel habits has a differential diagnosis of cancer until proven otherwise. Diverticular disease is also commoner than new onset UC within this age group, however, in the case of  he has a history of UC.  has presented with an acute exacerbation of his existing ulcerative colitis. A significant point to mention is that UC greatly increases the risk of developing colorectal carcinoma and the risk is cumulative, i.e. the risk increases further every year after diagnosis and some patients have a prophylactic colectomy 20-30 years after the initial diagnosis because of the high cancer risk. If  doesn't have a carcinoma, his weight loss will primarily be due to dehydration secondary to profuse diarrhoea and reduced appetite. Another confounding factor is the presence of dark (altered) blood in his stool, this is indicative of an upper gastrointestinal problem, i.e. not the colon, therefore the differential diagnosis of an ulcer must be considered. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical - 's physical health has been quite good in the last 6 months, prior to feeling progressively more tired and unable to carry out his daily tasks.  finds himself getting more tired following quite simple tasks like shopping and feels that he has physically become much weaker in himself over the last 6 months. Psychological -  has become very worried about his health. He is anxious about his weight loss and worries about the number of times he has to go to the toilet.  was becoming upset that he was "being a problem" for his wife. Following admission,  was undergoing treatment and his diarrhoea was improving,  became much happier in himself and looked forward to getting home. Social -  has been restricted socially because of the number of times he has needed to go to the toilet.  said he felt he was always thinking about where he would be able to go if he was out of the house and he didn't feel that he could cope.  has been supported by his wife but was becoming very isolated by the state of his health. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading><table/>'s reduced haemoglobin and MCV values are indicative of microcytic anaemia, suggestive of iron deficiency anaemia from chronic blood loss. With associated rectal bleeding, these values can indicate a diagnosis of carcinoma or inflammatory bowel disease. Low urea in this clinical picture is indicative of malabsorption or malnutrition but  has slightly raised urea, a pattern seen in dehydration or in the presence of malaena. Raised CRP (an acute phase reactant) can be seen in the first 6 hours following the initiation of inflammation in Crohn's or UC. Low albumin levels may indicate a more severe disease form. A colonoscopy in  reported some inflammation of the rectum and sigmoid colon. Following this recent admission in August, a repeat colonoscopy () revealed active UC in the sigmoid and transverse colon. No mass was found and biopsies were taken, which confirmed active chronic UC with adenomatous lesion in the rectum. An ultrasound of the abdomen reported a normal liver, gall bladder, CBD, spleen and both kidneys. <heading>Reassurance and Explanation</heading>To appropriately reassure , I would say: "As you know, when you had the camera tests in , we found some inflammation in the lower part of your bowels. The camera test we have just given you, your blood results and the story you have given us confirm that you have an inflammatory bowel condition called Ulcerative Colitis. This condition can be treated with steroids and other drugs to help reduce the inflammation in your rectum and colon, which will improve your diarrhoea. The course of this disease is variable and it can be controlled but it can also cause relapses in most people. We would like to keep seeing you in our clinics so that we can monitor you but you will be able to go home once we have your current symptoms under control". To explain the nature of the disease: "Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory bowel disease, which affects the lining of the colon and rectum causing chronic inflammation. We do not know what causes this disease. You have experienced the main symptoms of UC, with bloody diarrhoea, weight loss and loss of appetite. It is common for the attacks of UC to happen in intervals of a few months and your history of 6 months is a more chronic attack that we need to get under control. UC can also lead to anaemia, which we have found in you, which explains partly why you have been feeling very tired recently". To describe the management plan: "We have carried out camera tests and an ultrasound to look inside your bowels and have confirmed the extent of your UC. There are a number of ways in which we will manage your problems; firstly, we will prescribe you a course of steroids in order to control your diarrhoea and hope to reduce the inflammation in your bowel. Whilst you are in hospital, we will give you fluids to help re-hydrate you following your diarrhoea and you will receive a blood transfusion to try and increase your haemoglobin levels. Once we have gained control of your symptoms and you are feeling well we will consider/discuss discharging you. We will keep you on a cause of steroids when you are discharged and gradually reduce down the dosage so that you come off the steroids eventually. IF we find that the steroids become less effective at resolving a relapse or if you are frequently relapsing we will have to consider another medical therapy which suppresses your immune system. If your UC becomes unmanageable with medical therapy we will have to look into surgical resection of your bowels, but that is a long way in the future and you may never reach that point if we can get the steroids to keep you in remission from an acute attack. However, it may be necessary to remove some of your colon because the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis increases the risk of you developing a cancer in the bowel". <heading>Prescription/Medical Intervention</heading>Mesalazine (aminosalicylate) was prescribed which is used in the treatment of mild to moderate UC and maintenance of remission.  was given intravenous fluids, intravenous blood and analgesics whilst he was admitted. <heading>Observation</heading>Observation whilst  remains an inpatient will include monitoring his haemoglobin and urea and electrolyte levels to make sure that they do not lower further, to monitor the effectiveness of the blood transfusion and to monitor for dehydration. Following the start of treatment, it is important to monitor its effectiveness and whether 's diarrhoea reduces using a stool chart. It is also important to check for side effects of the treatments. This will also be a long-term observation. Monitoring the amounts of blood in the stools is also important, as a reduction in blood will indicate a reduction in inflammation in the bowel. Long-term observation will continue on a regular basis for  in the form of out-patient clinic appointments, where the effectiveness of the treatment, recurrence of his symptoms and continuing management will be discussed. Outpatient clinic appointments also provide an opportunity for  to ask any questions that he may have regarding UC and his treatment. <heading>Referral and Team Working </heading> was placed under the care of the gastroenterologists when he was first admitted. He will remain under their care as an outpatient and the clinic appointment outcome will be shared with 's GP. Information on the severity of his condition will be relayed to his GP along with information about the medication he is now on, in order for 's GP to prescribe repeat prescriptions if necessary. Future referrals may be to the colorectal surgeons if  reaches a point in which his medical therapy fails or if he develops complication such as toxic megacolon or perforation. <heading>Advice and Prevention </heading> must be given advice about the importance of taking his medication to keep his UC in remission. If  is given steroids he also needs to be made aware about the importance of gradually reducing the dose of the steroids. Advice should also be given about being aware of episodes of further bleeding in the stools or increases in stool frequency in order that he can get back in touch with the gastroenterologists if these symptoms re-appear. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading> was diagnosed with a mild to moderate attack of UC, which was confirmed on colonoscopy and biopsy on . He was treated with an aminosalicylate to reduce the acute inflammation and maintain remission. His symptoms of bloody diarrhoea, anaemia and lethargy improved and his stools became more formed.  was discharged from the ward 7 days following admission, with a follow-up appointment arranged in the outpatient department. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Ulcerative colitis is characterised by diffuse mucosal inflammation limited to the colon and rectum. Broadly, UC can be divided into distal (colitis confined to rectum (proctitis) or rectum and sigmoid colon) or more extensive disease (colitis up to the spleen or hepatic flexure). The incidence of UC is approximately 10-20 per 100,000 per year (1). The aetiology of UC remains largely unknown and the consensus is that the disease is a response to environmental triggers (infection, drugs or other agents) in genetically susceptible individuals. The clinical picture of UC primarily involves bloody diarrhoea, with associated symptoms of colicky abdominal pain, urgency or tenesmus. A severe attack of UC is potentially life threatening and the clinical course of UC is marked by relapses and remission. About 50% of patients with UC have a relapse in any year (2) but a minority of patients have a frequently relapsing, chronic, continuous disease. About 30% of patients ultimately undergo a colectomy. The diagnosis of UC is confirmed by clinical evaluation and a combination of biochemical, endoscopic, radiological and histological based investigations. Macroscopic findings on sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy support the diagnosis of UC. The medical management of UC depends on the disease activity and the extent of its effect. Patients with a severe disease require hospitalisation and those with mild-moderate disease can generally be managed as outpatients. It is recommended that for active left-sided or extensive UC, treatment should be with oral aminosalicylates or corticosteroids to give prompt relief of symptoms (1). Active distal colitis should be treated with topical Mesalazine or topical steroid combined with oral Mesalazine or corticosteroids to give prompt relief of symptoms. Severe UC should be managed jointly by a gastroenterologist in conjunction with colorectal surgeon (1). Patients should be kept in informed of treatment and prognosis, including the possibility of needing a colectomy. Patients with UC should normally receive maintenance therapy with aminosalicylates, azathioprine or mercaptopurine to reduce the risk of relapse (1). Long-term treatment with steroids is not desirable and patients who have a poor response to steroids can be divided into steroid-refractory and steroid-dependent. Steroid refractory disease is active disease in spite of an adequate dose and duration of prednisolone (>20mg.day for >2weeks). Steroid dependence is a relapse when the steroid dose is reduced below 20mg/day or within 6 weeks of stopping the steroids. Such patients should be considered for treatment with immunosuppression if surgery is not an immediate consideration. Such immunomodulators include azathioprine (1.5mg-2.5mg/kg/day) or mercaptopurine (0.75-1.25mg/kg/day), methotrexate (25mg weekly) or infliximab (5mg/kg). As previously mentioned in this case, the differential diagnosis of a colorectal carcinoma was an important consideration. Some of the risk factors for this cancer include: Age - Colorectal cancer can occur in younger people, but over 9 out of 10 people who get it are over the age of 50 years. A previous polyp or colorectal cancer - Not all types of polyps increase the risk of bowel cancer, but a type called adenomatous polyp does. Personal history of chronic bowel inflammation - Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease will increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer. Diet - A diet that is high in red meat and fat and low in vegetables, folate and fibre may increase the risk of colorectal cancer. Exercise - Moderate exercise may help prevent colorectal cancer developing. Obesity - Being overweight or obese may increase the risk of colorectal cancer developing. Smoking and alcohol - Although not as strong a risk factor as for other cancers, smoking may also increase the risk of colorectal cancer, particularly in heavy drinkers. Alcohol consumption may increase risk, especially in those with low levels of folate in their diet. Family history - Less than 1 in 10 cases of colorectal cancer are due to an inherited gene defect. However, there are certain families who have an increased risk of developing colorectal cancer due to a variety of conditions including familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC). Personal history of colorectal cancer - Having had colorectal cancer before increases the risk of a new cancer developing. The relevant risk factors for  were his age, history of inflammatory bowel disease, diet, exercise, history of smoking in the past and alcohol consumption. Reducing the incidence of cancer is a long-term Government initiative, included in this is the goal to reduce cancer mortality and this is hoped to be achieved with the use of screening programmes. Where screening is possible, it is an important method of detecting abnormalities at an early stage, allowing treatment when the cancer is most likely to be curable, or in some cases, even before it develops. The National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme is due to start in April 2006. <heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>Important issues raised by this case include the issues of continuing patient care once they have left the hospital and the importance of organising follow-up appointments and investigations.  was in the unfortunate position that he was lost in the out-patient system because he was unable to attend some of the appointments that he had once he underwent investigations in . As a result he did not receive any follow-up until he presented with an acute attack of his colitis and required admission to control the episode. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading><list>Chronic presentation of diarrhoea and its differentials in an elderly patient. Investigations into bowel symptoms including biopsy on colonoscopy. Acute presentation and management of UC. Comparison of UC versus Crohn's disease. Impact of such symptoms on a patient's life, both psychologically and socially. Presentations of colorectal/upper gastrointestinal malignancies and their investigations. </list>