<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading>Ms  was referred to  Hospital Medical Admissions Unit (MAU) by her General Practitioner (GP) on . The referral was made on the basis of obvious jaundice in the sclera and skin and a history of hallucinations for several nights. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>Presenting Complaint</heading>Ms  had an acute presentation of jaundice and a history or hallucinations for 3 days prior to admission. Ms  had also been experiencing "body aches" over the past 5 days. Ms  had a 1 day history of vomiting. <heading>History of Presenting Complaint </heading>Ms  had a 23 year history of chronic alcohol drinking and she had stopped drinking 5 days prior to admission to MAU. Ms  had a 3 day history of nausea, hallucinations and obvious jaundice. The hallucinations occurred at night, where she was found to be walking the streets in the early hours of the morning. Ms  had been vomiting 3 days ago; there was no blood present. Ms  had associated aching limbs and no associated abdominal pain. Her bowels were regular and the stools were formed. The stools were not pale and had no blood in them. Ms  had normal coloured urine. Ms  had no chest pain, no shortness of breath and no cough. Ms  had no history of fits, no history of recreational drug use, no intravenous drug abuse and no history of blood transfusions. In , Ms  took an Ibuprofen overdose and has a long-standing history of depression. <heading>Past Medical History</heading><list>History of depression. Pernicious AnaemiaNo history of diabetes, thyroid problems, rheumatoid arthritis, epilepsy, asthma, myocardial infarction, stroke or TB. </list><heading>Current Medication</heading><list>Escitalopram - 10mg odParacetamol - 1g bd</list>Allergic to silver. <heading>Family History</heading>There was a family history of depression. <heading>Social History</heading>Ms lives alone and is separated from her husband. Ms  is a business analyst. Ms smokes 20 cigarettes per day and drinks 7 bottles of wine and 2-3 bottles of vodka per week. Ms  does not use recreational drugs. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>Based on the acute symptoms Ms  presented with, the differential diagnoses of acute jaundice, with associated hallucinations and a history of excess alcohol use are: Alcohol Withdrawal: nausea and vomiting may be attributed to alcohol withdrawal per se within 6-12 hours of cessation of drinking. Late features of alcohol withdrawal usually occur within 2-3 days and include visual hallucinations. Delirium tremens can occur from alcohol withdrawal and is generally more common in heavy alcoholics. Delirium Tremens is a state of confusion arising following withdrawal or abstinence from alcohol and is accompanied by trembling and vivid hallucinations which may result in seizures and sometimes death. Alcoholic Liver Disease: hepatocellular damage may manifest as jaundice. Drug Reactions - with a history of previous overdose, it may be possible that another overdose may have been taken, which can present as nausea and vomiting. On physical examination will look for signs of alcohol withdrawal; tachycardia, reduced blood pressure, and tremors. I will also look for an irregular pulse (drug overdose) and respiratory depression (opiate toxicity). Examining for signs of chronic liver disease will also be performed (spider naevi, palmar erythema, dupuytren's contracture, caput medusae, hepatosplenomegaly and ascites), signs of anaemia, jaundice and generalised lymphadenopathy. Endocrine signs of chronic liver disease to be looked for on examination include hair loss (and in a male gynaecomastia and testicular atrophy). Neurological signs of chronic liver disease (hepatic encephalopathy due to toxic metabolites accumulating in the blood stream and crossing the blood-brain-barrier) include flapping hands, confusion, drowsiness, constructional apraxia and fetor hepaticus. It is also important to rule out the possibility of Wernicke's encephalopathy, which is due to a thiamine deficiency, often seen in alcoholics. It presents with a triad of nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia and ataxia. Ptosis, abnormal papillary reactions and altered consciousness may also occur. Wernicke's may also present with headache, anorexia, vomiting and confusion. Looking for evidence of Korsakoff's syndrome is also important. Korsakoff's is the reduced ability to acquire new memories, e.g. after Wernicke's encephalopathy, due to the thiamine deficiency. <heading>Physical examination and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading>On general examination, Ms  was alert and orientated. Ms  had nausea. Jaundice was present in the sclera and skin. Capillary refill <2secounds. There were no signs of clubbing, cyanosis or lymphadenopathy. Ms did not exhibit flapping hands. There was  no fetor hepaticus. The patient was not hallucinating at the time of examination. <heading>Gastrointestinal System</heading>The abdomen was soft and non-tender. There was  hepatomegaly but no palpable splenomegaly. There were no signs of caput medusae, spider naevi, palmar erythema or Dupuytren's contracture. Yellow pigmentation over the skin. Ascites present. No masses were palpated. Bowel sounds were present. PR was normal. <heading>Cardiovascular System</heading><list>Pulse 100 regularBlood pressure 116/76Temperature 36.6oCHeart Sounds I + II + 0JVP - raisedNo pedal oedema. </list><heading>Respiratory System</heading>Respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute. Vesicular breath sounds were present. Chest was clear - no wheeze/crackles. Saturations - 100% on air. Glasgow Coma Scale 15/15. There was no evidence of Wernicke's or Korsakoff's syndromes. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>History and examination confirm the initial possible causes of Ms 's presentation. The signs of chronic liver disease were hepatomegaly and jaundice, which suggest a diagnosis of alcoholic hepatitis. The hallucinations 5 days after the cessation of drinking suggest acute alcoholic withdrawal, possibly with delirium tremens. The signs on physical examination of alcohol withdrawal include a pulse rate of 100 and a history of hallucinations. The presence of jaundice with no other liver or bowel symptoms/presentations indicates that the jaundice is hepatic. <list><heading>The causes of hepatic jaundice are: </heading>Alcoholic Liver Disease (Alcoholic Hepatitis, Alcohol Withdrawal)Cirrhosis of the liverDrugsInfiltrationPregnancyWilson's DiseaseHaemochromatosisLiver metastases</list>The most likely diagnosis is alcoholic hepatitis and acute alcohol withdrawal. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Physical - Physically Ms  felt tired and ached all over her body since she stopped drinking 5 days prior to admission. Ms  had no specific physical problems but felt weak and unable to do things. Her history of hallucinations and walking in the middle of the night puts her at risk of physically harming herself. Psychological - Ms  described herself as "depressed and fed-up". She did not feel very positive about herself or her life and she worried about her hallucinations. Ms  also worried that she would not be able to stop drinking. Social - Ms 's social habits are the precipitating factor in her illness and she relies heavily on drinking alcohol to get her through her week. Ms  feels vulnerable and alone in her life. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading><heading>Investigations</heading>Ms 's blood biochemistry results on following admission () were as follows: <table/>'L' represents a 'Low' reading, 'H' represents a 'High' reading. Ms 's blood results following admission () were as follows: <table/>'L' represents a 'Low' reading, 'H' represents a 'High' reading. Blood film confirms previous thrombocytopenia. The raised MCV indicates a macrocytosis and in the absence of anaemia, the macrocytosis is most likely due to alcohol. There is no alcohol-related folate deficiency. An electrolyte imbalance is also seen with a reduced K+, which can be caused by chronic alcohol use. In the presence of hepatitis, a raised AST, ALT, Bilirubin and Alkaline Phosphatase will be seen; this is seen in these results. The AST:ALT ratio is thought to be a useful indicator of Alcoholic Liver Disease when in excess of 2. Elevated ALT and AST indicate hepatocyte damage. Low albumin suggests possible underlying cirrhosis and impaired synthetic function. A prolonged PTT is typical of alcoholic hepatitis due to reduced production of clotting factors by the liver; Ms 's PTT was in the normal range. Ultrasound investigation following admission detailed: <list><heading>Abdomen </heading>Liver markedly enlarged. Appearances consistent with acute alcoholic hepatitis and possibly early cirrhosis. The gall bladder was oedematous. Splenomegaly to 18cm. No free fluid. CBD, kidneys and pancreas were normal. </list><heading>Reassurance and Explanation</heading>To appropriately reassure Ms  I would say: "As you know, you have been suffering from jaundice and hallucinations since you have stopped drinking alcohol. There are a few reasons for why you may have jaundice and we would like to investigate them all. You have told us that you drink a large quantity of alcohol per week and that plays a significant role in problems with the liver, which most likely why you have jaundice. It is also quite common for people who drink a large quantity of alcohol and then stop drinking to experience hallucinations from the alcohol withdrawal. We would like to carry out some blood tests to assess your liver function and we would also like to get an ultrasound of your abdomen so that we can look to see if there is any damage to your liver. Now that you are in hospital we are able to give you some medication to help with the withdrawal effects of you not drinking". To explain the nature of the disease: "Following your blood tests and ultrasound, they confirm that you have a degree of liver damage, which is a result of excessive alcohol consumption. It is a condition known as alcoholic hepatitis. Alcohol is metabolised in the liver and if the recommended safe limits for drinking are exceeded, you are at increased risk of alcohol-related liver disease. It is also possible that you have developed early liver cirrhosis from misusing alcohol, which is later stage liver damage that is irreversible. The jaundice you have is a typical sign of alcoholic hepatitis and can occur between a few days and 4 weeks after stopping drinking alcohol. You liver function tests often help indicate the severity of liver damage. Alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis are serious conditions and they will shorten the length of your life. It is therefore very important to abstain from drinking alcohol in order to try and help your liver remain functioning". To describe the management plan: "It is extremely important that you abstain from drinking. The acute alcohol withdrawal hallucinations you are experiencing can be treated with a reducing dose of medication that we will give you whilst you are in hospital. We will also give you Vitamin B 12 and some potassium supplements because you blood results indicate that these levels are reduced in you. We would like to keep you in the hospital until your hallucinations stop, your blood results improve and you are feeling less unwell. We will also organise for you to get some counselling and advice about alcohol-related problems, which you will be able to continue to attend once you have left the hospital". <heading>Prescription/Medical Intervention </heading>Ms  was prescribed chlordiazepoxide (20mg qds) in a reducing dose. Chlordiazepoxide is a long-acting benzodiazepine, which is used to attenuate withdrawal symptoms. They do however have a dependence potential so to minimise this risk, administration should be for a limited period only. Chlordiazepoxide should not be prescribed if the patient is likely to continue drinking alcohol. Ms  was prescribed Sando-K, an oral K+ supplement for her hypokalaemia (K+ 2.8mmol/L). Ms  was prescribed spironolactone (25mg), an aldosterone antagonist used to treat ascites in cirrhosis of the liver. The severe deficiency states Wernicke's encephalopathy and Korsakoff's psychosis, as seen in chronic alcoholism are best treated initially by parenteral administration of B Vitamins. Ms  was also prescribed Pabrinex (B Vitamins) followed by oral administration of thiamine (100mg) for longer term treatment. During her admission, Ms  underwent an ultrasound of her abdomen. <heading>Observation</heading>Following admission from MAU, Ms  was required to remain as an inpatient until her jaundice had subsided and her hallucinations had stopped. During her stay, it is important to monitor her blood results and make sure that Ms 's liver function tests are not worsening. Monitoring the presence and occurrence of her hallucinations will be an indication of how well the chlordiazepoxide is working and whether the dosage is correct. Longer term observation will be monitoring Ms 's liver function tests and her abstinence from alcohol, which will be done in a primary care setting. <heading>Referral and Team Working</heading>Ms  will require referral to counselling services (the Drug and Alcohol Team) and/or a referral to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Ms 's GP should also be informed of what treatment she received in hospital and how she was when she was discharged. It is important to have a team in place to work with Ms  in order to help her abstain from alcohol and prevent further liver damage and progression of cirrhosis. <heading>Advice and Prevention</heading>Ms  should be advised that abstinence from alcohol is paramount to her recovery and preventing a relapse. Ms  should be advised to go to the counselling sessions and AA in order to help her overcome her drinking problem. Ms  should be told that to prevent another relapse similar to the current one and to prevent a worse episode from occurring, she should abstain from alcohol consumption. <heading>Outcome A description of the progress of the patient as far as possible. This should include consideration of further issues to be resolved. Where appropriate you should contact by telephone patients who have been discharged home.</heading>Ms  had a confirmed diagnosis of alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis secondary to alcohol abuse. Presenting with hallucinations is indicative of delirium tremens and is an indication of severe alcohol abuse. Ms  was discharged on  having received a reducing dose of chlordiazepoxide. Ms  was stable and her hallucinations had stopped. <heading>Evidence based care and issues for research A brief consideration of the evidence base required for the diagnosis and management of the patient's problem(s)</heading>Approximately 1% of the population are psychologically or physically dependent upon alcohol: 20-30% of these develop alcoholic liver disease. Approximately 25% of liver cirrhosis is due to alcohol (1). Current recommendations for safe alcohol consumption: 21 units for males and 14 units for females per week. 1 unit of alcohol (approximately 1g) represents a measure of spirit, a glass of wine or half a pint of beer. An intake of 20 units or more per day is associated with a high risk of hepatocellular damage. Alcohol intake is directly related to death from chronic liver disease. Alcohol produces a wide variety of liver disease, from fatty change to hepatitis and cirrhosis. Fatty change involves the production of fat in the liver from the metabolism of alcohol and the cells become swollen with fat. This fat disappears on stopping alcohol. Alcoholic hepatitis sees the infiltration by polymorphonuclear leucocytes and hepatocyte necrosis. Alcoholic cirrhosis is predominantly of the micronodular type, with nodules <3mm but found uniformly over the liver. Clinical features of alcoholic liver disease include vague symptoms, such as nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea. Such symptoms are seen in alcohol withdrawal. More extensive hepatocellular damage may manifest from jaundice to hepatic failure. Acute alcohol withdrawal is regarded as a neurological emergency and on presentation a patient's initial symptoms may include anxiety, tremor, hyperactivity, sweating, nausea, tachycardia, hypertension and mild pyrexia. These usually peak at 12-30 hours. Generalised tonic-clonic seizures may also occur during this period. Delirium tremens (a state of confusion usually arising in alcoholics after withdrawal or abstinence from alcohol) occurs in <5% of individuals usually after 3-4 days following cessation of alcohol intake. It is associated with an untreated mortality of 15%. Features include: Coarse tremor, agitation, confusion, delusion, and hallucinations. Fever, sweaty, tachycardia. Rarely lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis. Also look for hypoglycaemia, Wernicke-Korsakoff psychosis and hepatic encephalopathy. In the guidelines for the Management of Acute Alcohol Withdrawal, Chlordiazepoxide is the drug of choice, the advantages being it is long-acting, it is safer than many alternatives (2) and dependence and addiction is reduced in chlordiazepoxide. Poor nutrition is also common in patients who drink because of inadequate intake, associated chronic liver disease, chronic pancreatitis and malabsorption. Water and fat-soluble vitamins should therefore be replaced. Thiamine and vitamins are recommended as a standard treatment (3) for the management of capture alcohol withdrawal. In short, the treatment of alcohol withdrawal should include: <list>Chlordiazepoxide 20mg 4 times daily and rapidly tailed off over five days. Thiamine supplementationVitamin supplementationFluid replacement. </list><heading>Commentary A commentary on issues of health care delivery, ethical issues or disability relevant to the patient and/or problem</heading>Important issues raised in this case include the issues of addiction and the health care delivery of services to help such individuals. Ms  was known to be a heavy drinker and was being treated with anti-depressants. There is an increased incidence of alcohol abuse in those who suffer from depression and health care delivery should include advice and support to such patients about managing and overcoming their problems to try and prevent hospitalisation for alcohol-related illnesses. Ethical issues include the transplantation of livers in those individuals who suffer alcohol addiction against those patients who may require a transplant that is not related to their lifestyle behaviours, although transplantation was not a direct issue in this particular case. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading><list>Acute presentation of Alcoholic Liver Disease. Signs and symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Psychosocial impact an addiction has on an individual. Investigations necessary for Alcoholic Liver Disease. Treatment of acute alcohol withdrawal. Importance of education and support with abstinence programs. </list>