<abstract></abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The report details the investigation and measurement of the characteristics specific to an induction motor. A three-phase induction motor was connected to a test system comprising a dynamometer (an electronically-controlled brake) and a tachometer (an electrical speed-measuring device) to complete this experiment. The torque on the brake was measured by a cantilever spring fitted with a strain gauge, and the signals from this, along with the data produced by the tachometer were fed to a control box. This allowed manual control of the torque on the brake, as well as feeding back the values for torque, speed and a calculated value for mechanical power output, using: Mechanical power = torque x time, or  FORMULA  Values were tabulated with varied load applied to the motor increasing in increments of 0.5 Nm till the point that the motor stalled. Graphs were then traced showing the relationship between torque and speed, as well as another illustrating the efficiency of the motor at these varied loads. The conclusion of this laboratory serves to reinforce the need to run inductor motors at their rated power levels to obtain maximum efficiency and reduce the likelihood of damaging the motor by overloading. <heading>Theory</heading>Whilst the entirety of this section is not utilised in the calculations, below are a number of equations relevant to this report. 1. Mechanical power = torque x time, or  FORMULA  2. In the absence of a measuring unit that measures power factor (p.f), it is possible to calculate the value using:  FORMULA  or  FORMULA  where  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  For more theory see appendix 3, as well as websites listed in 'References and Bibliography'. <heading>Apparatus and Method</heading>The apparatus required for this laboratory are detailed in Appendix A1. The rated values were read and recorded from the motor nameplate (O1). The equipment was then calibrated to ensure that the measurements were traceable back to a known standard. The measuring unit was switched on by means of the switch marked (C), and the three-phase energy analyser on the measuring unit lit up as expected. The display was set up to the first measuring page, showing voltage, current, power and power factor. This page had the symbol '3Φ' at the bottom. By pressing 'PAGE' repeatedly, the display was set to page 4, showing 'V L1, L2, L3' corresponding to the voltages on the three lines relative to neutral. The switch marked (D) was switched off, the variable output control knob on the supply panel set to zero, and the output voltage selector set to 1 (three-phase). The variable three-phase outputs, L1, L2, L3 and N on the supply panel, were connected respectively to the corresponding connections on the left-hand side of the measuring unit. The switches marked (B) and (D) were then enabled. The variable output control was turned to about 25% and the values for the three line-to-neutral voltages were recorded (O2) to check they were all within 1 or 2% of one another to enable errors to be spotted and corrected, to reduce inconsistencies at a later stage. The measurement display was then changed back to page 1 and it was noted that the voltage now displayed a larger voltage. This value was the average of the three line-to-line values, and approximately √3 times the line-to-neutral voltage. These values were calculated (C1), and the values fell within the acceptable tolerance of 1 to 2%. The line-to-line voltage was increased from 112 V until the value read on the display of the measuring unit equalled the rated motor voltage (380 V) within a tolerance of 1%, and switch (D) was deactivated. The induction motor was then connected 'in star', meaning that U2, V2 and W2 were all connected together. The three terminals L1, L2 and L3 on the right of the measuring unit were connected to U1, V1 and W1 respectively on the motor. Switch (D) was then activated and the motor started. The dynamometer control box was set for manual control of torque (T manu on the selector switch) and the manual control set to zero. The speed range was also set to 200 /min and the power range to 300 W. The indicated output torque and power were non-zero but were below the accepted tolerance values of 0.1 Nm and 5 W respectively. The values of torque, speed, mechanical power output, current, power factor and electrical power input were recorded from this point, and as the load torque was increased in steps of 0.5 Nm up until the motor was running at its rated power of 300 W (Table 1). The following measurements were taken quickly as the motor was required to run at a level above its rated value, and could not be run in this state for more than two minutes. Prolonged usage at these levels would have resulted in damage to the insulation. The load torque was again increased in increments of 0.5 Nm and measurements taken as before, up to the point that the motor stalled (Table 1). The load torque was then immediately reduced to zero, but the motor was not switched off, so enabling its in-built cooling fans to cool the over-clocked motor. The motor was stopped by switching off at switch (D) after it had been allowed to cool for some time, and the oscilloscope was switched on. The current probe was clipped around one of the motor supply leads, and connected to Ch 1 of the oscilloscope and switched on. The oscilloscope was set up as follows: <list>Channel 1 Volts/div = 200 mV. Timebase sec/div = 50 msecAcquire>peak detectTrigger>'mode' to single, 'slope' to risingTrigger level ≈ 200 mVRun/stop>Armed/ready.</list>The oscilloscope was then ready to use. The motor was switched back on, with the oscilloscope now displaying the transient starting current of the motor. A copy of the oscilloscope screen was printed off (Graph 3). Full load was then applied to the motor while it was running, and the motor switched off. The motor was switched back on again to repeat the transient measurement, another readout printed off (Graph 4), and then instantly switched back off again. The steady-state no-load current was measured on the oscilloscope by pressing 'autoset', and then pressing 'measure' to set the on-screen menu to Ch1, rms. The current probe was switched off once that reading was taken. More detail regarding the connections and how to set up the assortment of equipment, refer to Appendices A2 - A6. <heading>Observations and results</heading><list><heading>O1: Electrical data recorded from the motor nameplate:</heading>Rated power: 0.3 kWVoltage: 380 VCurrent: 1.0 APower factor: 0.6 cosΦ</list><list><heading>O2: Line voltages as recorded from the measuring unit:</heading>L1: 66.2 VL2: 63.1 VL3: 65.3 V</list>Average of the three line-line voltages = 112 V as recorded from the display. This value was then calculated to be within the tolerable range of values (C1). The readings taken for torque, speed, mechanical power output, current, power factor and electrical power input as the load torque was increased incrementally are tabulated in 'Table 1.' From the results in 'Table 1,' the following were observed: The range of variation of speed with load equals 241 min -1 Power factor at no load equals: 0.23 cosΦ Power factor at full load equals: 0.86 cosΦ Power factor at rated load equals: 0.67 cos Φ The efficiency of the motor at the various loads was calculated (C2) and recorded in 'Table 2'. From this table, the efficiency of the motor was observed at the rated load of 300 W, 80.7 % efficient. The print-outs showing the initial current as the motor was switched on with no load, and secondly with full-load are attached (Figure 1 and 2). The peak current when starting the motor was read off the printout. The scale for the horizontal axis is each grid square represents 200mV, however this is because the oscilloscope could only plot voltage, and treated the signal from the current probe as such. The data from the probe was then multiplied by a scaling factor (100 mV/A), and can now the readings can be read as mA, so the scale would be, each square representing 200 mA. The maximum peak-to-peak current when switching on the motor at no load is therefore:  FORMULA  The peak current when switching on the motor at full-load was calculated using the same method.  FORMULA  The time taken to reach operating speed in each case were: <list>100 ms at no load, and150 ms at full-load.</list><heading>Analysis of Results</heading><heading>C1: </heading>The average of the three line-to-neutral voltages,  FORMULA   FORMULA  This value, multiplied by  FORMULA  should fall within 1 or 2% deviation from the recorded Line-line voltage recorded, 112 V.  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  Therefore the values fall within the accepted tolerance. <heading>C2:</heading>The efficiency of the motor was calculated for all values of load torque applied in 'Table 1', and recorded in 'Table 2.'  FORMULA  A graph of Torque against speed was plotted, 'Graph 1.' A second graph was later plotted illustrating the peak of efficiency as the motor nears its rated load (Graph 2). On both graphs the point corresponding to the rated power output (300 W) is marked. <heading>Discussion</heading>The figures quoted on the motor nameplate (O1) and the figures taken from the test results compare as follows: <table/>These are very similar with the possible exception of current. This could be largely due to the inaccuracy of the current probe, coupled with the acute inaccuracy of evaluating graphs printed out from the oscilloscope. The power factor is clearly inversely proportional to current so should be expected to deviate in a similar fashion.  FORMULA  so expected PF should  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  as read by the measuring unit. At very low levels of torque, i.e. should the motor be driving small loads, the usefulness of this motor diminishes. At these low levels, whilst the speed is high, the efficiency, as illustrated in 'Graph 2' is very low, and remains below 50% efficiency until a load torque of 0.5 Nm is applied. The efficiency then gently increases at a decreasing rate, and peaks at about 82% efficiency with a load torque of 2.5 Nm, before gradually decreasing once more as the motor is overloaded. The efficiency then starts to fall a little faster as the motor nears stalling, a little over 5 Nm. Power factor increases almost linearly from no load up till the rated power equating to 0.2 Nm of load torque. From this point, up till the point of stalling, illustrated in 'Graph 3', the power factor starts to plateau. With addition of more results, the behaviour of Power Factor as the motor verged on stalling could be better simulated. Greater insight into the behaviour of the induction motor at both the lower and higher load torque's could be achieved by increasing the load in much smaller increments, and building a greater set of results with which to plot the curve on the graphs. Instrumentation of greater accuracy should eliminate discrepancies, and decrease the tolerance levels from 1 or 2% to a fraction of 1%. Eliminating the need to read the peak current manually by counting off an oscilloscope, and instead recording a readout from a much more precise machine would produce far more accurate results. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The three-phase induction motor upon which the laboratory was conducted showed that for loads requiring power levels much lower than the rated values, the efficiency of the motor is very low indeed. This results in wasted energy and therefore increased cost with prolonged usage. The speed at which the motor rotates is also a lot higher at low torque values, possibly resulting in excessive wear to the motor. The motor performs, as is to be expected, at greatest efficiency when operated at its rated values. When the motor becomes overloaded, efficiency starts to fall, and power factor plateaus and at that point the motor stalls. When in operation at loads greater than the rated power levels, the motor can quickly overheat, so should not be used in this state for more than a couple of minutes. 