When the Spanish first discovered the Americas in the fifteenth century, they met with a culture infinitely different to their own. Columbus himself recorded that "All the trees were as different from ours as day from night" and found the native inhabitants to be 'the most exotic people he had ever met with'. Research into the history of infectious diseases has relatively recently uncovered the fact that not only the culture and environment, but also the disease pool present in this continent was distinctly different to that of Europe at the time of this "age of discovery". It is this distinctness of endemic pathogens, for factors that will be considered shortly, that led to the 'Columbian Exchange', the name given to the swapping of diseases that occurred between these two civilisations with far-reaching effects. <fnote>Crosby, Jr, Alfred W., The Columbian Exchange Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492 (Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1972), p.4 </fnote>A crucial factor to be studied in relation to the nature and effects of the Columbian Exchange is the level of isolation that the Americas held in pre-Columbus history. As Crosby points out, before the voyages undertaken by Columbus the level of contact between the Americas and the rest of the world was 'no more than a tenuous thing of Viking voyages, drifting fishermen, and shadowy contacts via Polynesia'. This almost total isolation meant that the native peoples of the Americas had experienced absolutely no contact with any of the germs present in Europe, and thus had a level of immunity at nought rendering them biologically vulnerable. Infectious diseases then which, in Europe, had become endemic, and long ceased to be killers, here entered onto this "virgin soil" to great and vicious effect. It is this 'exchange' of diseases that many historians now believe to be the most crucial factor, over and above those of gunpowder, exploitation and the like, in the European conquering of the Americas. <fnote>Crosby Jr., The Columbian Exchange, pp.3 </fnote>It is apparent from the fact that the Europeans won out in their invasion of the American continent that the Columbian exchange was in all probability a distinctly unfair one. Analysis of contemporary records suggests that the isolated native Amerindian population met with infections of European and African origin established there over many centuries including smallpox, typhus, measles and influenza (European) and yellow fever and malaria (African), to name but a few, all of which had an enormous demographic effect on the vulnerable population. They on the other hand 'were the bearers of no serious infection transferable to the European and African populations... unless, as some still think, syphilis was of Amerindian origin'. Even syphilis, while becoming a serious and geographically widespread problem in the Old World, had none of the demographic impact that transference in the other direction brought about. Equally, the link between syphilis and the discovery of the Americas is somewhat tenuous, with many arguing that it had already existed in Europe disguised as misdiagnosed leprosy. The fact that it became prominent in society shortly after Columbus' voyages is little in the way of evidence when one considers that 'Old World syphilis is already visible in biblical accounts' according to some authors. Some authors also mention a new disease in Europe that was known as the "English sweats" but this affected few and disappeared rapidly. Population growth steadily continued during this period and thus the supposed 'exchange' seems to have operated entirely in favour of the Europeans. The study of the Columbian Exchange is therefore heavily focused upon the infectious diseases inherited by the New World and the enormous effect that they resulted in, as opposed to an equally weighted "swapping". <fnote>McNeill, William H., Plagues and Peoples (New (New York: Anchor Books, 1976), p.208 </fnote><fnote>Porter, Roy, The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present (London: HarperCollins, 1997), p.167 </fnote><fnote>Cohen, Mark Nathan, Health and the Rise of Civilisation (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989), p.52 </fnote><fnote>McNeill, Plagues and Peoples, pp.229 </fnote><fnote>Crosby, Alfred W., Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), p.215 </fnote>The impact and effect of the Columbian Exchange on the Americas can be split into three major factions: the statistical, demographic effect in terms of loss of population; the cultural effect in terms of psychological impact and the disruption of established society; and the medical effect - the homogenisation of epidemic diseases. The first is a difficult and contested subject in academic study because of the lack of accurate figures recorded and of course the fact that other factors besides disease can be said to account for part of the changes. Marking a starting point at which the population level sat before Columbus landed is indeed varied, as there was no method available by which population size could accurately be measured at the time. Records are qualitative and subjective, but lead to an estimate of a population somewhere in the region of one hundred million. There is a general suggestion that overall around 90 per cent of this population was lost within fifty years of the initial meeting of the natives and Europeans, but again such estimates can only ever be treated with caution. Despite this, the fact that population declined so quickly after invasion provides evidence for the notion that it was disease over other factors that was decisive in Amerindian population decline because there would not yet have been enough time for such things as exploitation to take hold enough to so great an effect. Such estimates encompass a period in which not one but many epidemics are believed to have occurred, all of which cannot possibly be considered here. The most significant appear to have taken place in 1520, 1545-48 and 1576-80 in terms of number of deaths and severity of conditions. The first epidemic of 1520 is believed to have been smallpox, an identification based on the distribution of pustules and survival rate recorded in contemporary sources. Mortality rate is open to question but estimates suggest that a 55-80 per cent loss would certainly be plausible in an area with no former contact with the disease as was the case here. The epidemic of 1545-48 is claimed to have been perhaps 'the most disastrous ever to hit central Mexico' and is identified as most likely a form of typhus via the description of bleeding from the body's mucous membranes, once again cutting population size in half. The last of the pandemics has been identified again as typhus with losses somewhere in the region of two million at its end. These descriptions consider only the most influential epidemics on population loss, thus it should not be forgotten that in the intermittent periods decline continued on a large scale brought on by other more regional epidemics such as that of possible measles in 1531 to give an example. <fnote>McNeill, Plagues and Peoples, p.212 </fnote><fnote>Cook, Noble David, and Lovell, W. George, "Secret Judgements of God" Old World Disease in Colonial Spanish America (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1992) p.24 </fnote><fnote>Cook and Lovell, "Secret Judgements of God", pp.25 </fnote><fnote>Cook and Lovell, "Secret Judgements of God", pp.31 </fnote>As is probably clear by now from the lack of confidence with which I assert exactly what infectious disease the various epidemics constituted of and the numbers of dead, identification of demographic impact is extremely difficult. Such analysis depends on qualitative records that inherently suffer problems of unreliability due to exaggeration or misrepresentation. In terms of the description of epidemic symptoms one must remember that symptoms do not always manifest themselves in the same manner, and also that sources are often lacking in enough detail to make a completely informed decision on the exact cause. As Crosby argues, the native population were probably more likely to 'cast their eyes skyward and comment on the sinfulness that had called down such epidemics... than to describe in any detail the diseases involved." Equally one must consider that the assault of diseases that the Europeans unleashed in the Americas would not follow a simple course of causing epidemics constituting a single disease. Symptoms of other diseases are perhaps often hidden under the blanket of the identified epidemic cause, creating what Woodrow Borah calls "compound epidemics". In terms of population losses, figures quoted on the number of dead perhaps reflect more an emotional rather than a true statistical representation. However, what is clear is that the Columbian Exchange, regardless of exactly which 'exchanged' disease caused which epidemic or the exact figures for the number of deaths, resulted in a decline in numbers on a truly enormous and unimaginable scale. It seems to me therefore to be futile to attempt to attribute the huge demographic decline in the population of the Americas simply through 'the lens of the Black Legend. That view [which] attributes native loss-of-life primarily to demoniacal acts of cruelty." Such factors may well have become important in the decades following the European takeover, but initially only disease can explain such rapid and large-scale losses. <fnote>Crosby Jr., The Columbian Exchange, pp.43 </fnote><fnote>Cook and Lovell, "Secret Judgements of God", pp.47 </fnote><fnote>Lovell, W. George, '"Heavy Shadows and Black Night": Disease and Depopulation in Colonial Spanish America', Annals of the Association of American Geographers, Vol. 62 (1992), pp.427 </fnote>Considering the scale of loss as a result of the Columbian Exchange leads well on to what I stated to be the second part to be looked at in considering its effects, the cultural impact it had upon society. In terms of the damage that was done to ancient Amerindian society, the Columbian Exchange had far-reaching effects. In Aztec society initial defence of the capital against European invasion was successful but soon the city became ravaged with smallpox, weakening it to such an extent that Cortés and his followers easily completed their takeover. This example shows how infectious disease has the power to alter history, would Aztec society have survived had smallpox not struck? Both the Aztecs and Incas lost those in power as well as the heirs to the throne, something which led Incan society to self-destruct. With no legal heir left, civil war broke out in the battle for the throne 'which devastated the empire and paved the way for a quick Spanish conquest." Psychological impact was perhaps even more all encompassing with the natives losing faith in the power of their gods and their own claim to the land. Sources suggest that both the invaders and the natives began to see European invasion as justified because it appeared to be agreeable to the divine; Europeans seemed completely immune to the diseases that destroyed the native civilisations and they were seen as thus holding 'a shield of the gods themselves'. The native population must have been left in complete utter bewilderment at this total decimation of their lives. <fnote>Crosby Jr., The Columbian Exchange, pp.56 </fnote><fnote>Crosby Jr., The Columbian Exchange, pp.57 </fnote>The last important effect on the Columbian Exchange was the worldwide homogenisation of epidemic diseases. This concept is relatively self-explanatory; the exchange of Old and New World diseases meant that by the end of the seventeenth century, epidemics (or pandemics) on the scale of that seen in the Americas during the previous two centuries were no longer possible. A "common market" of microbes had been created and thus the opportunity for epidemics on "virgin soil" was now impossible; mutation was subsequently the only way to cause relatively major epidemics. <fnote>Ladurie, Emmanuel Le Roy, The Mind and the Method of the Historian (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1978), p.30 </fnote>In conclusion I would thus argue that the so-called Columbian Exchange was in fact hardly an exchange at all, more an assault by European and African microbes on the isolated American continent resulting in the creation of a worldwide market of common diseases. In terms of exactly who exchanged what we cannot at the present time be clear, due to the limitations of available sources and the possibilities of "compound epidemics". However, it seems that while the impact of those diseases believed to be obtained by the Amerindians such as typhus, measles, smallpox and influenza was on an unimaginably grand scale, the Europeans brought home with them, it seems, only syphilis of any major significance and even this did not prevent population growth. The native American population, as an effect at least in the major part of the Columbian Exchange, lost probably ninety per cent of their society and the resultant impact meant that established beliefs and ways-of-life completely crumbled, leaving the path open for the Europeans to establish their own society in their place. In terms of overall powerful effects then, the Columbian Exchange meant that pandemics of disease became almost completely unviable, and that European domination of the globe became a major step closer to being complete. 