Modern medicine is the product of ongoing change and progression. Where once medicine held a relatively narrowly delineated position, today it is a complex and highly organised socio-political institution (Lupton, 1995, p.2). Its role within our society has altered significantly, becoming increasingly encompassing in its scope. Many contemporary writers indicate the way in which medicine as an institution has taken over various functions previously overseen by religion or the law (Illich, 1995, p.1652) and it is here that its potential to exert social control must be placed. When one uses such terminology in relation to modern medicine, it is important not to consider only the direct, often violent, coercion of peoples that the term can imply. Social control is defined as the encouraging, or enforcing, of particular types of behaviour through the establishment of social norms, where that which does not meet the norms is deemed deviant. In this wider perspective, it is far easier to conceptualise the ways in which medicine might become coercive and controlling. A good place to begin when examining the social control element of modern medicine is the idea of surveillance. The notion of surveillance medicine is something closely associated with Foucault's theories on discipline, which saw power as 'a relationship which was localised, dispersed and diffused', typically operating at 'a micro, local and covert level' (Turner, 1997, p.xi). This type of disciplinary management suggests a society where formal coercion and control is replaced by informal self-regulation, achieved via the embodiment of surveillance into the everyday activities of social institutions. In translating this theory onto the framework of modern medicine then, in order to assess whether it is socially controlling, one needs to examine how its day-to-day practices can be seen to operate coercively to constrain or produce particular forms of behaviour. Castel (1991) relates this covert, less formalised coercive operation taking place within modern medicine to the development of the 'risk society'. He suggests that the swing towards preventative medicine within the modern institution, via the identification of potential risks to health, has resulted in a 'far more subtle and effective mode of population regulation', which has the ability to enable a far greater multiplicity of interventions (cited in Peterson, 1997, p.193). Medicine, he seems to infer, has become increasingly socially controlling because its prevention discourse identifies all individuals as potentially ill, or 'precariously normal' (Armstrong, 1995, p.396). Medicine that suggests that all activities and forms of behaviour must be examined in terms of their threat to the health of the individual becomes an institution that can legitimise intervention into almost all areas of policy and life. For example, with obesity identified as a health risk factor, medical discourse enters educational policy in terms of creating the need for health education and causes all of our lifestyle habits, such as diet and exercise, to become medicalised. Social control has therefore become a prime function of medicine through the way in which medicine has increasingly encroached into areas of social life not formerly associated with health services (Armstrong, 2003, p.85). As Peterson suggests, a 'multi-levelled and multi-organisational network of surveillance and regulatory practices' (1997, p.197) has been created, enabling far greater, yet less overt control over social behaviour. However, in evaluating this form of social control, one must acknowledge that some elements of social life have in fact been de-medicalised in recent years. For example, homosexuality was once believed to be a medical condition, and attempts were made to treat it as you would a mental health patient, yet now it is a relatively socially acceptable personal choice. Similarly many groups representing the interests of the disabled fight to be removed from the notion of needing treatment, with much success, for example anti-disability discrimination laws being passed. It seems then that while medicine clearly has a controlling function through its spread into unrelated areas of life, we must not take this to be an uncontested advance through the ranks of society: the medicalisation of a condition can be resisted. However, medicine is linked to social control in a further manner related to the moral discourse that it has exerted upon our behaviour. With the medicalisation of our behaviour and choices, comes an attached responsibility for each individual to monitor their own risk. A crucial part of this coercive medical morality is the idea of self-control. Drawing on Enlightenment philosophical thinking, modern medicine espouses the notion that the mind is separate from, and has transcendence over, the body, and thus infers the idea that an 'uncontrolled' body reflects a weak will (Lupton, 1995, p.8). Illich argues that this notion is crucially important even to death, with 'Agony' now the 'effort of a medical team, and death as the team's frustration' (Illich, 1995, p.1653). Acceptance of death, then, is seen to be a weakness or failure, and thus our society is never prepared for it (Smith, 2000, p.129). Like death, sickness, according to this model, is evidence of a lack of control, and this attitude can be readily exemplified in our responses to conditions like obesity ('He should just stop eating so much') and depression ('She just wallows in it'). This morality of restraint, according to Lupton, is so widely embedded in the norms of our society, that it has become self-policing, punished by feelings of guilt towards the self (1995, p.10) and highly controlling of behaviour through our attempts to avoid these feelings. Here we can see Bentham's Panoptican put into practice: the idea that society will condemn us if we do not partake in risk assessment has forced us into a mode of self-discipline and regulation. Health, while becoming individualised in responsibility, has also become increasingly social in authority. Those who do not concur to the aim of a risk-free existence and seen as failing to fulfil their social duty. As Lupton points out, ''Healthiness' has replaced 'Godliness' as a yardstick of accomplishment and proper living' (1995, p.4). Social control has become a prime function of modern medicine then not in a direct or overt manner, but through its ability to produce a self-regulating population via appealing to wide social values. However, one must stop to acknowledge that there are potential and actual sites of resistance to this morality of sickness as personal weakness. Research into terminal care, for example, shows that, in reality, many patients do not view death as a failure, and prefer to be aware of the eventuality of their condition, placing the freedom to enjoy their last days as an outpatient over the intense battle to be kept alive in hospitals (Hinton, 1979, p.32). The privatised moral dimension of contemporary medicine is, however, still hugely evident in current health policy, which focuses crucially upon health promotion and the duty of the individual to avoid a lifestyle that may pose a threat. In illustration, the '5-a-day' fruit and vegetable campaign very much emphasises that good health can be a personal choice. Foods deemed nutritious are also often advertised as 'guilt-free'. Medicine's social control function can thus be extended to become the consequence of a whole moral discourse surrounding risk and the autonomous, responsible individual, whose health status is of their own causing. It coerces because this morality encourages or condemns forms of behaviour, all in the name of health and the social good. Moving further with this idea of social condemnation, one must consider the way in which doctors might be viewed as agents of social control because of their role in helping to define individuals as deviant. As Armstrong suggests, disease labels carry with them 'social evaluations' (2003, p.142), so the doctor holds a powerful position as gatekeeper to social acceptance or discredit. To offer an example, if a person's mental health stability is questioned, their credibility is loosened. As Zola so eloquently put it, "In this role of arbiter of social values, medicine therefore acts as what has been called an institution of social control and the doctor as its agent" (cited in Armstrong, 2003, p.142). This is important in relation to what Parsons called the 'sick role' (cited in Armstrong, 2003, p.144-45). Societal acceptance of deviance as it is medically contrived means that the physician is he who can legitimise a person's claim to sickness. This legitimisation, in the form of a diagnosis, can be extremely important according to Parsons, because it allows the patient access to the benefits of the 'sick role', such as being excused from normal social responsibilities like employment (Moynihan and Smith, 2002, p.860). However, in return for this the individual must agree to cooperate with the doctor and defer to the authority of his/her expertise, two elements crucial to medicine seen as socially controlling. In this manner, medicine becomes a coercive institution because it enforces certain types of behaviour. However, it has been suggested that adopting the sick role can be used as a form of dissent, to express dissatisfaction with a social role. For example, hysteria among Victorian women might be viewed as a form of passive resistance to the constraint of their domestic social role. Nevertheless, at present, the highly individualised nature of modern medical discourse still means that this image of sickness tends to be overlooked or ignored, thus it is a relatively ineffective means of initiating change and simply reinforces medicine's coercive functions. One further element that must be considered when discussing the concept social control as a function of medicine is that of Illich's ideas on iatrogenesis, particularly its social and cultural elements. In brief, this theory suggests that modern medicine sponsors illness and destroys the individual's coping mechanisms to deal with it, both of which, in turn, create yet further reliance on the medical institution (Illich, 1976, p.268). This can be linked to the earlier discussion of the way in the medicalisation of society has resulted in a coercive system which patients must defer to medicine to gain the 'sick role' and legitimacy that comes with it. It is also relevant to examining medicalisation's vested interests, such as drug companies, who benefit from it via the perceived need to create more pills. It would seem that modern medicine brings on this iatrogenesis, in order to gain increased control over the individual and their response to disease, again emphasising the social control element of the medical profession. However, as with the response to the moral discourse that coerces action, iatrogenesis again can be resisted to some extent. In illustration, patients might be seen to be increasingly taking back control via the use of the internet to self-diagnose and thus avoid the medicalised 'sick role', or to better negotiate treatment with professionals. One should be careful, it appears, not to over emphasise the controlling nature of medicine without considering the ways in which individuals can avoid medical imperialism. Before bringing this debate to a close, one must also stop to consider that medicine can sometimes be direct and overt in its social controlling function. For example, the involvement of doctors in abuse of detainees, via the sharing of medical records, at the Guantanomo Bay detention centre (Lancet, 2004, p.637) suggests that medicine can be very directly coercive, in addition to its less overt operations through medicalisation and moral discourse. It appears readily apparent that medicine is not a neutral institution, instead one affected by social, political and economic circumstances, which can result it in becoming socially controlling. Modern medicine does have demonstrable 'strongly coercive elements', evident in the way in which it sets out 'to shape and normalise human behaviour in certain ways' (Lupton, 1995, p.10). The moral discourse surrounding health coerces the individual by offering social condemnation to those who do not follow its individualised concept, and legitimacy of certain behaviours through the active seeking of the 'sick role'. Equally, the expansion of medicine into increasingly broad areas of life has promoted the surveillance system, whereby all behaviour becomes subject to medicalisation because of its potential as 'risk'. Evidently the controlling function is important because much of its implications are evident in policy which emphasises the moral dimension of health. However, what is also clear is that we should be careful not to over-emphasise the extent to which social control is a prime function of modern medicine. While it clearly has a place within the institution, one must remember that it rarely acts directly to force people to behave in a certain way. There are many examples of dissent from the expected forms of behaviour, such as non-compliance with drug taking for or heavy drinking, which may not even be socially condemned if they occur among particular groups. Indeed perhaps even if we admit that social control is an important function of modern medicine, it does not necessarily have to be a negative one, as medicalisation can result in health improvements, such as declining maternal death during childbirth. In conclusion then, I would argue that while social control has become an important and certainly present function of modern medicine, perhaps to use the term 'prime' in relation to it is to over-emphasise the coercive nature of medicine as an institution. Seeing medicine's primary function as the control of social beings is to deny them their ability to negotiate the boundaries of medicalisation and the moral discourse surrounding health. 