The fall of the Bastille in July 1789 marked the beginning of what was to become a cataclysmic course of events in the history of France: the French Revolution. The political, social and cultural landscape of the French nation was so irrevocably transformed by the course of the Revolution that by 1795, the end of the period under scrutiny, it was barely recognisable from the absolute monarchical France of 1784. The effects of the Revolution reached out into all corners of life; culture as well as politics took on novel forms. The subject of artistic and cultural works from this period should not be treated as 'autonomous phenomenon'; they provide a unique insight into the extent of its upheaval. In undertaking an intensive analysis of the themes and principles given attention in the most influential paintings of this era, a social history of Revolutionary art can be formed. In contrast to traditional art history, such an approach can help the viewer to understand these pieces as both products and, at times, producers of the Revolutionary milieu. <fnote>Boime, Albert, Art in an Age of Revolution, 1750-1800 (Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987), p.xix </fnote>The period in question incorporates what might be seen as three broad stages of the French Revolution. The first, 1784-89, in truth preceded the commencement of the Revolution. However, the significance of these years cannot be underestimated, for it is during this time that the environment took shape into which the Revolution could explode in 1789. As such, debate rages between art historians as to whether the influential paintings of this period can be said to anticipate the principles that were to become those espoused by revolutionaries by the end of the 1780s. With hindsight perhaps leading one to believe that the artistic context might well be expected to indicate the origins of the Revolution, it is important to analyse the extent to which these paintings truly represent a rupture from the past. Republican imagery comes to the fore as the most crucial element in need of attention, arguably being used to uphold and promote the Bourbon monarchy or, by contrast, to indicate the need for an alternative form of governance. <fnote>The main figures involved in this debate have been L.D. Ettlinger, Hugh Honour, Anita Brookner, Antoine Schnapper and Robert Herbert. A full discussion can be found in Roberts, Warren, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist: Art, Politics, and the French Revolution (Chapel Hill; London: University of North Carolina Press, 1989). </fnote>The years 1789-92 represent the most optimistic of the French Revolution. The formation of a National Assembly incorporating the nobility, clergy and Third Estate, and the design of a constitution which handed sovereignty to the body of the people, inspired feelings of fraternity and patriotism amongst the nation's new political leaders. Painting similarly intercepted such ideals, reflecting the atmosphere of unity and optimism. The final stage under scrutiny here represents something of a turning point in the history of the French Revolution. Growing suspicions about the King's support for the Constitution, confirmed by the flight attempt aborted at Varennes, coupled with growing military crisis, led to the forced removal of the monarchy on 10 August. The subsequent creation of the National Convention marked the first step towards initiating the period known as the Terror, during which many thousands were executed by guillotine for crimes against the nation. Intense fears of counter-revolution meant these years became characterised by surveillance, suspicion and violence, all in the name of upholding the new French Republic. In response, painting was called upon to promote Revolutionary values with much greater intensity, its task to guarantee the maintenance of public support. By 1794, it was seen as a critical form of propaganda for the Revolutionary government. <fnote>Dowd, David L., 'Art as National Propaganda in the French Revolution', The Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 15, No. 3 (Autumn, 1951), pp.871-892. </fnote>It is clear that this period is crucial to understanding the role that paintings played in the Revolution. In revealing the potential of painting to take on a variety of roles related to the Revolutionary cause, a focus on this ten-year period enables one to appreciate the multi-layered task it fulfilled. It easily justifies in-depth study alone, without delving into the equally fascinating work carried out under the Directory and after the Restoration. This study will focus upon the most influential paintings by Jacques-Louis David, with pieces by other artists used as additional illustration. This concentration is not without due cause. Almost as soon as the Revolution began, David emerged as its 'official painter'. Huge debate exists around whether his influential Oath of the Horatii and Brutus and the Lictors represent pre-Revolutionary paintings. In addition, David's artistic, and later political, involvement with the French Revolution was significant. He drew upon his expertise to 'popularise the cause of the Revolution' and his paintings are seen to represent the most significant attempt at Revolutionary propaganda. As Tocqueville asserted, cultural leaders became 'a power in the land' during the Revolution, and as a result of his (albeit disputed) role in overcoming the restricted modes of political expression in ancien régime France, David was one of the most significant. As Honour indicates, he came to be seen as 'the perfect political artist'. <fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.391 </fnote><fnote>Dowd, David L., 'Jacques-Louis David, Artist Member of the Committee of General Security', The American Historical Review, Vol. 57, No. 4 (July, 1952), p.875 </fnote><fnote>Tocqueville, Alexis de, The Old Régime and the French Revolution, cited in Hunt, Lynn, 'Introduction: The French Revolution in Culture: New Approaches and Perspectives', Eighteenth-Century Studies, Vol. 22, No. 3, Special Issue: The French Revolution in Culture (Spring, 1989), p.295 </fnote><fnote>Honour, Hugh, Neo-Classicism (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991), p.71 </fnote>Finally, in discussing the role of French painting in this era, it is important to emphasise that only the more public forms are under scrutiny. David's school of morally thematic paintings represent only one part of the art produced during the Revolution. Other important developments, such as the growth of portraiture in response to a new market-based cultural environment, will not be covered here. The concern is specifically the role played by painting in influencing, reflecting and guiding the development of the Revolution, and as such will focus on the paintings commissioned by government, alongside the most influential and controversial of the period. <heading>1784-89 - ANTICIPATION</heading>Here we analyse the period leading up to the Revolution of 1789. It was during this time that the style of painting known as Neoclassicism came to the fore, seen in particular in the work of Jacques-Louis David. By adopting this style, many of the concepts that were to become central to the Revolution entered into David's paintings, and as such he can be said to have anticipated it. Some art historians suggest it is misleading to make this link. They point out the absence of a revolutionary ethos in France in the years before the Revolution, and suggest that associations have developed as a result of the course taken by David, and the Revolution itself, after 1789. <fnote>Kennedy, Emmet, A Cultural History of the French Revolution (New Haven; London: Yale University Press, 1989), p.xxii </fnote>However, first we look to evidence of the incorporation of those principles soon to become Revolutionary, in the most influential paintings of this period, David's Oath of the Horatii and Brutus and the Lictors. <heading>Order, balance and rationality</heading>Exponents of the Revolution saw its task as correcting the corruption and excesses of the ancien régime by instilling a democratic form of governance representing the balance of interests in society. The principles of rationality, order and proportion declared by the Enlightenment, therefore, became central to Revolutionary rhetoric. The Neoclassical style adopted by David throughout the course of the years 1784-89 does appear to have operated under the same principles of order, balance and proportion.  <fnote>Dowd, David Lloyd, Pageant-Master of the Republic: Jacques-Louis David and the French Revolution (Freeport, New York: Books for Libraries Press, 1969), pp.22-23 </fnote>This is perhaps best exemplified in the Oath of the Horatii (fig. 1), a painting described as having the effect of 'an electric shock' on the Salon public in its rupture from the rococo style popular under Louis XV. The taut, muscular frames of the three Horatii brothers, together with the sense of aggression exposed in their sharp, forceful stance (fig. 2), demonstrate a severity and firmness that 'violated the décence and douceur of old regime sensibility'. The painting is stripped of the superfluity and embellishment so characteristic of rococo paintings, and replaced with a somewhat austere sense of order and rationality. Boime goes further in calling the Horatii 'an eighteenth-century Declaration of Rights'. The way in which everything in the painting, each figure or group for example, is clear and understandable seems to make reference to both the notion of man's natural rights and also the desire of the revolutionaries to make governance transparent, in contrast to the closed-off and corrupt court of the ancien régime. <fnote>Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, p.86 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.86 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.396 </fnote><heading>The social whole and the individual</heading>The Horatii and its 1789 counterpart Brutus and the Lictors (fig. 3) both appear to be indicative of the Revolutionary ideal of raising the whole above the individual. This principle grew out of Rousseau's 'enlightened' writings on the sacrifice of man's natural freedom to a negotiated state beneficial to all, a concept known as the general will. Mirroring this principle, in David's neoclassical paintings, 'objects and persons are generalised'. This is evident in the way in which the Brutus lacks both a focal point and coherent structure. That the statue of Roma both screens out the bodies and is Brutus' source of comfort (fig. 4), adds to the sense of subordination of the individual to the state. <fnote>Ib id. , p.393 </fnote><fnote>Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, p.81 </fnote>Structure reflects theme in a similar way in the Horatii. The oath uniting the brothers in the interest of the state 'is also the controlling pictorial motif subordinating the individual figures to the compositional whole." That no single figure or group dominates the painting seems to indicate that this is a visual representation of the idea of subverting the individual to the general will. The father, who proffers the swords, operates as a symbol of the Fatherland, and thus it appears to be on behalf of the nation, not the individual that the oath is sworn. This might be interpreted as a call by David for a new form of sovereignty, one no longer vested in a single person, that is, the king. It is not surprising that the Horatii is seen to have injected 'determination for a patriotic cause' into the French people, when one considers that evidence of la patrie (devotion to the nation) within David's art has been interpreted as a call to displace the dictates of the existing monarchy.  <fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.393 </fnote><fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.17 </fnote><fnote>Crow, Thomas E., Emulation: Making Artists for Revolutionary France (New Haven; London: Yale University Press, 1995), p.36 </fnote><heading>Civic duty and personal commitments</heading>Emphasising this idea of commitment to the protection of the nation is the way in which 'David's art put the Republic above personal sentiment and family attachment." Both Brutus and Horatii share the theme of pro patria mori (to die for one's country), and this is depicted as a sacrifice of personal considerations on behalf of the state. In the story of Brutus, for example, it is his commitment to the nation that impels the sacrifice of his two sons. The central character is shadowed in darkness, perhaps emphasising the way in which his personal sacrifice is of less significance than his defence of the nation. In choosing to depict the 'moment of exultation and self-sacrifice', then, David seems to anticipate the commitment to general welfare made by those taking the famous Tennis Court Oath of 1789. <fnote>Kennedy, 1989, p.88 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.395 </fnote><fnote>Levey, Michael, Rococo to Revolution: Major Trends in Eighteenth-Century Painting (London: Thames and Hudson, 1966), p.190 </fnote>In addition, the way in which women are depicted in the Horatii seems to make them symbolic of the old order. Their languid, flowing forms create a sharp divide with the almost unnatural rigidity of the Horattis (fig. 5), creating some form of continuity between them and the rococo style. In the association of rococo with the interior, this relationship seems to emphasise that women are synonymous with 'the traits of emotion and family concerns'. In indicating their powerlessness to affect the action of the oath via the centrality of the swords, David seems to suggest that personal concerns must be overcome in the name of the nation. <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.26 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.399 </fnote>This, in turn, has been linked to the Revolution via the idea that the values represented in the feminine had to be overcome to establish a new order. In the symbolic links between the women and the ancien régime, David seems to refer to the corruption of the court as a form of government. The Revolution claimed that the focus upon personal interest displayed by the nobility, and the feebleness of the king in failing to punish this, was to blame for the economic crisis the nation faced by 1789. The lack of attention paid to the women of the Horatii, thus, provides additional evidence that perhaps David anticipated the Revolutionary argument that 'The Nation exists before all things and is the origin of all.'  <fnote>Dowd, Pageant-Master of the Republic, p.20 </fnote><fnote>Quote taken from argument against middle-class privilege put forward by Sieyes in pamphlet, What is the Third Estate? , cited in Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.420 </fnote><heading>Antiquity and the potential relationship to republicanism</heading>The principles that David seems to advocate have been seen not merely as Revolutionary, but republican, that is, anticipating the anti-monarchical turn of events later in the Revolution. This presumed relationship derives from both his treatment of the concept of general will, and also his attention to antiquity. As Kennedy indicates, 'The association of political liberty with moral and artistic greatness would become the credo of the revolutionary artists at the end of the eighteenth century." This connection might be argued to have found expression in David's focus on the Roman Republic in the Horatii and Brutus. In both paintings we see a celebration of those who place the preservation of the nation over familial concerns, and in this case it is a Republic they seek to maintain. Lajer-Burcharth develops this argument in pointing out that the treatment of antiquity was seen as a 'means of... recognition of republican cultural value.' <fnote>Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, p.82 </fnote><fnote>Lajer-Burcharth, Ewa, 'David's Sabine Women: Body, Gender and Republican Culture Under the Directory', Art History, Vol. 14, No. 3 (September, 1991), p.397 </fnote>As a result of these clear associations David's work has been 'hailed for its fierté républicaine'. Whether or not the evident visibility of patriotism and devotion to the nation can be read as some form of "revolution manifesto" for the French Republic has been fiercely debated. However, this relationship must be treated with the same caution as the one which proposes links between the writings of the Enlightenment philosophes and the Revolution. That David later engaged with Revolutionary and republican politics does not necessarily mean that at this point he brought them to his work. <fnote>Brookner, Anita, Jacques-Louis David (London: Chatto and Windus, 1980), p.68 </fnote>We must be aware of the political context into which the paintings of 1784-89 are situated, particularly with reference to the concept of republicanism. As an expression of preference for an alternative form of government, one based on the classical mode favoured by the ancients, republicanism did not exist in France at this time. The notion of France as a Republic based on the general will of 'the mass of citizens... recognised as sovereign', as Jean-Marie Goulemot has indicated, had no place in political debate in period leading up to the Revolution. Devotion to the patrie, as exemplified in both Brutus and the Horatii, instead represented devotion to the king, as the embodiment of the sovereign power of the nation. Neither the eighteenth-century philosophes, nor the revolutionaries of 1789, advocated a French republic. Philosophical interest resided in 'transforming the monarchy in the service of a modern society', evident in David's initial sketches for a commission to be named 'Louis XVI Showing the Constitution to His Son' (fig. 6), which demonstrate continued support for the king early in the Revolution. Thus, as Crow indicates, rather than speaking of republican virtue, the oath made by the Horatii is more likely related to 'a very military loyalty to a monarchy.' <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.18 </fnote><fnote>Jean-Marie Goulemot, 'Du républicanisme et de l'idée républicaine au XVIIIe siécle', cited in Baker, Keith Michael, 'Transformations of Classical Republicanism in Eighteenth-Century France', Journal of Modern History, Vol. 73 (March, 2001), p.34 </fnote><fnote>Honour, Neo-Classicism, p.72 </fnote><fnote>Baker, 'Transformations of Classical Republicanism in Eighteenth-Century France', p.35 </fnote><fnote>Crow, Thomas E., Painters and Public Life in Eighteenth-Century Paris (New Haven; London: Yale University Press, 1985), p.213 </fnote>As Honour points out, it is also important to acknowledge that it was the King who commissioned the Horatii, and he fully supported its conception. It was more likely devised as an attempt to 'project the king as a benevolent ruler committed to Enlightenment goals' than with republican commitment. The preference for history painting from within the Academy of Fine Arts, already pandered to in David's Andromache Mourning Hector (fig. 7), suggests that his work on the Horatii was perhaps more the 'emanation of the throne' than an agent of Revolutionary ethos. Morally, both the Horatii and Brutus are 'well within the confines of the eighteenth century' in their depiction of scenes from antiquity. <fnote>Honour, Neo-Classicism, p.71 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.393 </fnote><fnote>See Crow, Emulation, p.41 for a discussion of the way in which Andromache Mourning Hector was seen as 'an endorsement of prevailing taste'. </fnote><fnote>Dowd, 'Art as National Propaganda in the French Revolution', p.535 </fnote><fnote>Brookner, Jacques-Louis David, p.92 </fnote>To some historians it is the sense of fragmentation and dislocation apparent in Brutus, when compared to its 1784 predecessor, which exemplifies a progression in the association between painting and Republican values. As Levey points out, in the heightening both the hysteria and the violence, David makes the Brutus 'more disturbing, as well as more disturbed'. This might be supported by the evidence that attempts were made to ban the exhibition of the painting in the 1789 Salon on the basis of its potentially provocative influence. However, as Brookner indicates, the uneasy theme and structure of the Brutus is probably more likely to be part of David's response to the breakdown of his relationship with the Academy than a 'pictorial manifesto' forecasting the Revolution. Those reading the Brutus as 'fully republican', she suggests, have made the mistake of interpreting effect (the response of the 1789 Salon) as cause. <fnote>Levey, Rococo to Revolution, p.194 </fnote><fnote>Wrigley, Richard, The Origins of French Art Criticism: From the Ancien Régime to the Restoration (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993), p.95 </fnote><fnote>Brookner, Jacques-Louis David, p.87 </fnote>Any apparent references to the value of the Republic in David's work are, more likely, a response to its use as a form of political expression, a critique of the claims of absolute monarchy at a time when Louis XVI and his court began to come under criticism. It seems unlikely that painting could fully anticipate the principles of a French Republic at a time when, as a form of government, it 'belonged to a vanished past that lived on only in books, devoid of relevance as a political model'. David's paintings, then, are pre-Revolutionary, in their awareness of the changing political and social pressures building within France, without being 'fully republican', that is, operating as 'the manifesto' of the new order. <fnote>Baker, 'Transformations of Classical Republicanism in Eighteenth-Century France', p.34 </fnote><fnote>Dowd, Pageant-Master of the Republic, p.18 </fnote><heading>Anticipation, retrospective assumption and political consciousness</heading>It seems most sensible to concur with Roberts in arguing that David's work between 1784 and 1789 was political, without being politically subversive. One must always bear in mind that both Brutus and the Horatii were painted before the Revolution began, so comparisons drawn between them and the events of the Revolution are always retrospective. Indeed, none of the contemporary comment on either Brutus or the Horatii indicates in any overt manner that they were viewed as dangerously subversive. Even David himself described his work 'purely in terms of the passions it represented' without political implication.  <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.18 </fnote><fnote>Honour, Neo-Classicism, p.72 </fnote>It is essential that one acknowledges that David's work between 1784 and 1789 only begins to be referred to as though it were Revolutionary after the fall of the Bastille. The first such reference was made in relation to his role as the artist chosen to depict the Tennis Court Oath of 1789. Dubois-Crancé desired David as 'the painter of the Brutus and the Horatii... whose genius anticipated the Revolution." The failure to not this relationship until after the commencement of the Revolution suggests that the assumption that Revolutionary, and/or republican, ideals appear in David's work is likely to have been misshapen by the fact they were reproduced later in Revolution. David's paintings, for example, did indeed provide some of the propaganda techniques used later to destroy the monarchy and aristocratic culture. However, as Kennedy indicates, 'The shrill cry of "justice", that is, the desire to depict Roman antiquity, could be heard well before the Revolution. David's paintings only become associated with the Revolution when the ideas they depicted were transformed into 'its own'. As a result, neither Brutus nor the Horatii can really be viewed as the direct predecessors of revolutionary principles. <fnote>Dubois-Crancé, announcement to the Jacobin club, 1790, in Ib id. , p.75 </fnote><fnote>Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, p.88 </fnote>Historians have also played a sizable role in assigning political significance to public art produced during this period, particularly those Marxist historians hailing the Horatii as depicting 'a pre-Revolutionary dedication'. Neoclassicism, synonymous with David, did evolve over time 'into the official visual language of the French Revolution'. However, this relationship is more likely to be linked to the effect of the Revolution, and David's own choice of style and subject within his revolutionary work, on how his older paintings were perceived. <fnote>Brookner, Jacques-Louis David, p.70 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.391 </fnote>The ideals that David's work reflected before 1789 were those of the enlightenment, not the Revolution. The 'republican' themes that seem to appear within his paintings are likely to represent an anti-establishment reaction to his relationship with the Academy. This can also be associated with a wider language of political critique that found expression in France during this time, and picked up upon the republican tradition as a form of dissent. Although the Horatii and Brutus cannot be said to point specifically to a democratic revolution, they may have been a visual expression of the growth in public consciousness of a radical language of opposition, which perhaps was part of the 'spirit of change' that would climax with the French Revolution. However, for the time being, David's neoclassicism, remained 'the visual equivalent of the rational principles declared by the Enlightenment' before the Revolution took these up and develop them far from this original context. The temptation to extend the strong links between Neoclassicism and both the Enlightenment, and classical republicanism, to an association with the Revolution should, it seems, be avoided. <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.19 </fnote><fnote>Baker, 'Transformations of Classical Republicanism in Eighteenth-Century France', p.40 </fnote><fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.5 </fnote><fnote>Dowd, Pageant-Master of the Republic, p.23 </fnote>The most influential paintings of this period did anticipate the Revolution, but only in so far as imbuing the canvas with the philosophy of the Enlightenment. David's paintings reveal an engagement with the politicised attitudes of a revolutionary consciousness in the making. He provided the moral content, themes, and motifs, later picked up upon by the revolutionaries and turned into the French Revolution's particular rhetoric and propaganda. However, in claiming that David's work 'inflamed more souls for liberty than the best books', many historians have ignored that this anticipation, albeit visible with retrospect, was not one of political intention. It was that the themes of David's Oath of the Horatii and Brutus and the Lictors were acted out in the politics of the years following 1789 that made him appear to be a Revolutionary prophet. <fnote>Levey, Rococo to Revolution, p.186 </fnote>As Dowd indicates, the enthusiasm with which the Salon public greeted David's Brutus suggested to the revolutionaries of 1789 that 'his services would be of considerable value in manipulating public opinion during the rapidly approaching struggle for control of the State." The re-exhibition of Horatii and Brutus in the Salon of 1791 indicated that, as part of the lived experience of the early Revolution, the people had begun to read more into the themes they contained. In the Roman warriors of antiquity depicted in the Horatii, then, the peasant described by Dowd now saw reflected his own devotion to the nation. With the commencement of the Revolution, the neoclassical themes related to la patrie contained within David's paintings had taken on immediate relevance. He became recognised as the artist whose style best recognised the principles of the Revolution, and was proclaimed its leading artist. <fnote>Dowd, Pageant-Master of the Revolution, p.20 </fnote><fnote>Ib id. , p.1 </fnote><heading>1789-1792 - REFLECTION</heading>The relationship between David's most influential paintings and the Revolution thus becomes much clearer, full and less disputed during the course of this next period. As Roberts indicates, the concept of the nation was vital to the Revolution of 1789. Its reconfiguration in line with the concept of the general will meant that the people became a sovereign whole, and as a result the ideals of unity, harmony and fraternity became a foundation of Revolutionary rhetoric. These principles are reflected by the ideological shift in Neoclassical painting that takes place between 1789 and 1792. David's interest in the themes surrounding the subversion of the individual to the collective undergoes a radicalisation in the service of the Revolution, and as a result, the relationship between his work and the French Revolution is no longer problematic. <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.46 </fnote>His unfinished Tennis Court Oath (fig. 8) powerfully illustrates the growth in unity between the principles of the Revolution and David's painting. As Crow points out, its 'conception, subject, and patronage... together cross a decisive boundary that divides Revolutionary art from even the most provocative images produced under the Old Regime." Although some of the imagery of the Tennis Court Oath suggests a harking back to antique models, its sense of immediacy means that it seems to have been designed with the specific aim of reflecting the ideals of the new French nation. <fnote>Crow, Painters and Public Life in Eighteenth-Century Paris, p.256 </fnote><heading>Classical structure of figures</heading>In his initial sketches for the Tennis Court Oath (fig. 9), David reveals the classical structure of his painting. Figures were drawn in the spirit of antiquity: muscular and nude. Here we can see clear evidence of the way in which David 'harnessed neoclassical imagery in the service of the Revolution'. He seems to have seen his task as the ensuring the "eternalisation" of the oath, and therefore based the scene on a classical composition. This adds to sense of the universal reflected in the painting, the idea that this oath belonged to all, and was the fulfilment of an ancient task. When clothes were added later, it was part of David's acknowledgment that 'no history of no people offers me anything so grand, so sublime, as this oath of the Tennis Court'. The naturalism evident in his final sketch is the realisation that nothing represented a sacrifice on behalf of the nation as significantly as the actions of his real contemporaries. <fnote>Lajer-Burcharth, Ewa, Necklines: The Art of Jacques-Louis David After the Terror (New Haven; London: Yale University Press, 1999), p.2 </fnote><fnote>David, 5 February 1792, cited in Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, pp.247-250 </fnote><heading>The surrender of self to the unified nation</heading>David, like many other artists, appears to have participated in the 'patriotic élan' of the most dramatic episodes of the Revolution following 1789. In his decision to depict the moment when the people's representatives swore to die if France were not made free, David uses the Tennis Court Oath to reflect the theme of individual sacrifice on behalf of the la patrie. He can perhaps be held responsible for some of the debate surrounding the "revolutionary" content of the Horatii by choosing to demonstrate this principle via a translation of the Horatii's composition onto this new painting. With their arms raised toward the central figure of Bailly (soon to become Mayor of Paris), the delegates mirror the gesture made by the three Horatii brothers. However, as Boime indicates, the action is now 'multiplied and extended', as though David suggests that this oath, real not imagined, is all the more significant because it is taken on behalf of the French nation. The sense of harmony between the painting and reality is emphasised by the fact that these figures swear their oath against a concrete goal, not an abstract ideal. The "social contract" is truly being realised, and thus it is all the more crucial that the gesture which binds the individuals to its realisation is the over-arching motif of the painting. In reflecting the notion of sacrifice to the general will, then, David provides a way for society to picture its reinvention.  <fnote>Dowd, David L., 'The French Revolution and the Painters', French Historical Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2 (1959), p.127 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.429 </fnote><fnote>De Baecque, Antoine, 'The Allegorical Image of France, 1750-1800: A Political Crisis of Representation', Representations, No. 47, Special Issue: National Cultures before Nationalism (Summer, 1994), p.115 </fnote>The way in which almost every person within the scene raises his or her arm in commitment to the oath is a bodily reflection of the principle of unity within the Tennis Court Oath. In his depiction, David made several alterations to the reality of the scene, which serve to underline this significance of unity. In contrast to an engraving made at the time by Flouest (fig. 10), the delegates appear as one unified mass, rather than in two separate groups. In addition, David incorporates two spectator galleries, filled with joyous onlookers, into his painting. They serve to reflect the unity between the public and the legislature under the Revolution, and also to indicate that the Revolutionary government conforms to the 'ideal of transparency', designed to reflect that this unity could never be compromised, as it had been under the monarchy. <fnote>Roberts, Warren, Jacques-Louis David and Jean-Louis Prieur, Revolutionary Artists: The Public, the Populace, and Images of the French Revolution (New York: State University of New York Press, 2000), p.236 </fnote>The backdrop of the royal chapel, symbolic of monarchical power, similarly serves to indicate the unity of the crown with the process of creating a new French nation. Although the Tennis Court Oath was a response to the king's attempts to shut off Parliament house, his later agreement with the terms of the constitution meant that the monarchy continued to be a significant part of the Revolutionary France of 1789. That the king is represented only in the background of the painting does, however, serve to emphasise that the sovereign power of the monarchy has now been subverted to the 'Herculean power of the people', embodied by its representatives in the Third Estate. <fnote>De Baecque, 'The Allegorical Image of France', p.115 </fnote><heading>Fraternal reconciliation and optimism </heading>The unification of the new French nation is also emphasised by the incorporation of the principles of fraternity and reconciliation, that is, brotherhood among the nation's once divided representatives. As Popkin indicates, images reflecting the unity of the three orders were popular during this phase of the Revolution, and this is echoed in the Tennis Court Oath by the presence of clergyman and aristocratic figures alongside the Third Estate. Fraternity among the representatives is perhaps best expressed in the 'fraternal embrace' of dom Gerle, abbé Grégoire and Rabaut Saint-Etienne (fig. 11), just below the centre of the painting. In representing the different branches of religion (the secular clergy, regular clergy and Protestantism) they signify that the unnatural divisions imposed by the ancien régime have been eradicated in the oath-taking process and the subsequent creation of a new society. <fnote>Popkin, Jeremy D., 'Pictures in a Revolution: Recent Publications on Graphic Art in France, 1789-1799', Eighteenth-Century Studies, Vol. 24, No. 2, Special Issue: Northrop Frye and Eighteenth-Century Studies (Winter, 1990-1991), p.255 </fnote><fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.52 </fnote>David clearly uses the Tennis Court Oath to reflect on the optimism of this period of the Revolution. The shaft of sunlight shining down upon the delegates seems to indicate some form of heavenly blessing on the proceedings. This effect is heightened by the allegorical gust of wind that blows the curtain of the left-hand gallery into the room, likely connected to the concept of "the winds of change". The variety of jubilant gestures performed by the delegates, the clasping of hands in thanks and hats held high, capture the positive vision for the future that the Revolutionary spirit consisted of at this time. <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David and Jean-Louis Prieur, Revolutionary Artists, p.228 </fnote><heading>Abandonment and glorification</heading>Fundamentally important to understanding the Tennis Court Oath as crucially bound up with the atmosphere and principles of this period exclusively, is its abandonment in September 1792. By this time, as Roberts indicates, many of those depicted in the painting were 'no longer the heroes of the Revolution but now were its enemies." The relationship between David's work and the progression of the Revolution is thus highlighted by his inability to complete the project. The Tennis Court Oath is uniquely a reflection of the optimism of the early Revolution and its principles of unity and fraternity. <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.58 </fnote>David seems to have felt a responsibility to 'explain, glorify, and popularise revolutionary principles'. His Tennis Court Oath captures the moment when these principles were first legitimised, protected and "actioned" in its illustration of the oath made on behalf of a free French nation. In making significant alterations to the actual circumstances, David emphasises the unity and fraternity amongst the people that the Revolution hoped to achieve. The sense of sacrifice to the public will clearly illustrates that the connections between David's art and political circumstances are no longer 'a question of contested metaphor." His painting is a mirror to the atmosphere of reconciliation and optimism amongst a newly formed sovereign people and reflects the unity and transparency that the Revolution held in the public imagination at this specific moment. <fnote>Dowd, 'The French Revolution and the Painters', p.148 </fnote><fnote>Crow, Painters and Public Life in Eighteenth-Century Paris, p.256 </fnote>On completion, David's painting was to be hung in the National Assembly to remind the representatives of their commitment to public welfare, and also to be engraved and then distributed. This purpose makes it evident that members of the Revolutionary government were beginning to see the potential for painting as 'as vital means for the propagation of new political values', that is, for inculcating public sentiment with the value of Revolution. The focus of the Tennis Court Oath upon principles of unity, fraternity and self-sacrifice indicates that it was part of an 'imaginary ideal' held by the revolutionaries of the years 1789-92, in envisioning a society 'in which all was simple, uniform, coherent, equitable, and rational." As such the Tennis Court Oath can perhaps be said to anticipate the propaganda role that David's art would assume under the Convention. In creating a painting that so well reflected the principles of the 1789 Revolution, David went some way towards creating a role for himself as "author" of them. His work left such an indelible print on the public mind that the evolution of his role, from 1792-1794, into the cultural promoter of the Revolution, became a natural progression. <fnote>Popkin, 'Pictures in a Revolution', p.252 </fnote><fnote>Hunt, 'Introduction: The French Revolution in Culture', p.294 </fnote><heading>1792-1795 - PROMOTION</heading>The relationship between David's work and the course of the Revolution becomes most direct during the last three years of the period under scrutiny. Following the destruction of the monarchy on 10 August, 1792, came the installation of the National Convention, armed with the task of constructing a constitution for the new French Republic. Facing rising fears of counterrevolution from within the country, the Convention, under Robespierre's lead, initiated a period characterised by high levels of suspicion, violence and surveillance. In justifying the Terror, the Convention increasingly made propaganda and promotion a central feature of their policy. Seeing in artistic forms the potential to 'reach and influence a large number of the population', painters were enlisted to help maintain public support for the Revolution. David played a fundamental role in the progress of this period, with both his politics and art becoming increasingly tied into securing the Republic. His roles on the Committee of Public Safety and as artistic director of Revolutionary festivals meant that David became part of the apparatus of Terror, a mechanism upholding the Revolution. From being the 'official painter' of the Revolution, that is, the artist reflecting its progressive ideals, David evolved into something of an "official promoter". He not only utilised his own pieces for propaganda purposes but also mobilised other artists to similarly illustrate their devotion to the new regime. His paintings of revolutionary martyrs Lepelletier, Marat and Joseph Bara, in particular, played a critical propagandist role in illustrating the virtue found in support of the nation. <fnote>Dowd, 'Art as National Propaganda in the French Revolution', p.532 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.442 </fnote><heading>Martyrs to the nation</heading>The purpose of David's Death of Lepelletier (fig. 12), Marat Assassinated (fig. 13) and Death of Joseph Bara (fig. 14) is clearly the admittance of their namesakes to heroic Revolutionary martyrdom. With violence a distinguishing feature of this period, its most influential pieces utilised the theme of death to promote the virtue found in dying in defence of the nation, thus encouraging Revolutionary good-feeling. Maleuvre emphasises the implicit indication of martyrdom in the Marat, in his discussion of the inscription on Marat's wooden 'tombstone'. In making out his painting 'À Marat', that is, 'for' or 'toward' him, David seems to sacrifice the painting itself in order to allow the subject to take precedence. It gives Marat the gift of being seen rather than looked upon, and thus assigns to him a secular form of immortalisation. <fnote>Maleuvre, Didier, 'David Painting Death', Diacritics, Vol. 30, No. 3, Post-Mortem: The State of Death as a Modern Construct (Autumn, 2000), p.13 </fnote>This desire to promote Revolutionary virtue is emphasised by the serenity and grace found in David's depictions of Lepelletier and Marat, both physically ugly in real life. In describing his painting of Lepelletier, David specifically indicated to the Convention the peaceful quality of the victim's face, and that this was intended to promote the idea that 'when you die for your country, you die with a clear conscience." The contrast between these paintings and David's sketch of Marie Antoinette on the way to the guillotine (fig. 15) is a clear indication that he wished to elevate the Revolutionary purpose. She is 'delineated without mercy', disfigured without the appendages of Bourbon monarchy, thus indicating that virtue and grace is to be found only in those who uphold liberty. <fnote>David, speech to the Convention, March 29, 1793, cited in Roberts, Jacques-Louis David and Jean-Louis Prieur, Revolutionary Artists, p.285 </fnote><fnote>Brookner, Jacques-Louis David, p.109 </fnote>As Levey indicates, the "people's friend" Marat is painted as a servant of the Revolution, even at his last breath. David, it would appear, initially intended to paint Marat in an upright position, 'as if still toiling for the welfare of "the people"', reiterating the significance found in depicting this as a death on behalf of the nation. The extent of Marat's Revolutionary service can perhaps be read in a comparison of his depiction with David's Andromache Mourning Hector. As Boime suggests, Marat's quill is tilted at a similar angle to Hector's sword, and thus David seems to infer that Marat's words were equally as powerful, helping to uphold a France free of unnatural privilege. The significance of the written word in connection with Marat is reiterated by the presence of two hand-written notes in the painting (fig. 16). The letter used by Charlotte Corday (Marat's assassin) to gain entry to his home is transformed within the painting. From the revelation of Girondin suspects, it becomes a note appealing to Marat's humanity. The paper resting on the wooden box compounds the symbolic illustration of Marat's adoration of the people, in granting assignat to Corday. In this incorporation of the written word, then, David gives Marat's assassin symbolic meaning. He promotes the notion of Marat as "friend of the people", adding to the worthiness of his veneration, and therefore to the principle that death in the service of the Revolution demands both pity and respect. Viewing the Marat as a piece of Revolutionary propaganda, this quality was fundamental to the promotion of the Republic because pity was seen as 'the key that would open the door of loyalty to the Revolution.'  <fnote>Levey, Rococo to Revolution, p.194 </fnote><fnote>Crow, Emulation, p.162 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.463 </fnote><fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.83 </fnote><fnote>Ib id. , p.84 </fnote>Elements of both the Lepelletier and Marat are idealised. However, the starkness of bloodshed emphasises that violence is at the spiritual centre of both paintings. The victim's wounds are visible, and the lower half of the Marat is somewhat dominated by the redness of blood. David seems to indicate that 'The blood of friends cannot be romanticised', and instead should be illustrated with a realism that signifies to the people the sacrifices made to uphold their freedom. Both the Death of Lepelletier and Death of Joseph Bara contain comparable imagery illustrating their sacrifice to a free people. Lepelletier is found beneath a suspended sword, the weapon used to attack him, which pierces a ballot paper, servicing to explain the motive: Lepelletier's vote for the king's death. It is in contributing towards the removal of the evil tyrant who had suppressed the freedom of the French people, David seems to suggest, that Lepelletier has been murdered, and thus he makes the ultimate sacrifice to uphold the Revolution. Bara, meanwhile, dies clutching the tricolour cockade to his breast, rapturous in his loyalty to the Republic, in death as well as life.  <fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.464 </fnote><fnote>Ib id. , p.466 </fnote><heading>Secular religiosity? </heading>While David's work during the early years of the Revolution is strictly classical in form and structure, his paintings under the Convention increasingly absorb 'the pacifying consolations of religion'. This is likely to be linked to the formation of a secular religion of Virtue at this time, something which the festivals organised by David formed a part of. Reflecting this in his craft, David incorporates an abundance of religious imagery into the Lepelletier and Marat, adding to the sense of idealisation. As Crow indicates, 'Marat's pose... the plain wood of the upright box, the insistently perpendicular compositional order, all evoke Christ's sacrifice'. Comparisons can be drawn between the slumped repose of both Lepelletier, and Marat, with that of Christ in Michelangelo's Piet à(fig. 17). Such a resemblance was devised presumably to emphasise the virtue and self-sacrifice associated with Marat's death. As Kennedy points out, Marat's passion for violence (he once called for thousands of heads to roll in the name of the Revolution) is suppressed, in order that the 'transfer of sacrality' between Christ, the saviour of mankind, and Marat, the saviour of the menu-peuple, can take place. <fnote>Crow, Emulation, p.166 </fnote><fnote>Ib id. , p.165 </fnote><fnote>In 1790, Marat argued that 'Six months ago, five or six hundred heads would have been enough to rescue us from the abyss, Today... perhaps it will be necessary to lop off five thousand. But if it requires twenty thousand, we shouldn't hestitate for a moment.', L'ami du peuple, cited in Baker, 'Transformations of Classical Republicanism in Eighteenth-Century France', p.47 </fnote><fnote>Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, p.286 </fnote>The use of religious symbology seems likely to form part of the growing trend found in David's work during this phase to actively promote the maintenance of the Republic. Although one might view references to Christianity as a subversion of the Revolution, in using them to depict influential figures, like Marat, as martyrs to the cause, David in fact offers an endorsement of the necessity of the Republic. That David did not intend to compromise the Revolution's rejection of the Church is clear from the way in which, as seen in Girodet's Pieta (fig. 18), it is with the unadulterated eloquence of the body that Marat's sacrifice for the people is expressed. In its simplistic composition, emphasised in particular by the use of an upturned box in place of a desk, the Marat, like the other martyr paintings, is free of the decorative appendages associated with Christian religious art. It thus evokes an idealised, supernatural subject 'without leaving the factual realm of secular history', a combination that secures the image of Marat as a saviour of humanity. <fnote>Crow, Emulation, p.166 </fnote><fnote>Ib id. , p.165 </fnote>Critical in its relationship to the religious symbolism clearly dominating David's depiction of Marat, is his designation of the captured moment as being "Marat at his last breath". The potential growth of a religious cult surrounding Marat's assassination meant that David's painting played a critical role in balancing the admittance of Marat to secular martyrdom without encouraging cult fanaticism. The appearance of Marat on the canvas at the uncertain moment in between the ownership of life, and the abandonment found in death, allowed the employment of Christian symbology. It deflected the potential loss of Marat's body to the contemporary relevance of a secular Revolution increasingly characterised by "dechristianisation".  <fnote>Maleuvre, 'David Painting Death', p.15 </fnote><fnote>Ib id. , p.25 </fnote><fnote>Idzerda, Stanley J., 'Iconoclasm during the French Revolution', The American Historical Review, Vol. 60, No. 1 (October, 1954), p.17. This article discusses the removal of symbols left over from the ancien régime associated with Christian traditional religion, and how its intensification coincided with Marat's death and increasing hold of a form of secular spiritualism. </fnote>Here, then, lies the critical balance of Marat Assassinated. In incorporating a serene, otherworldly quality into the depiction of a highly politicised, contemporary moment, David manifests his politics within his art, to the highest degree. The balance of religious imagery with the proliferation of symbols that denote the relationship of the death to the Revolution means that this painting is highly promotional. It clearly proffers the notion that to live, work and die for the French Republic is ennobling and virtuous, and thus elevates the Revolution. In doing so it thus 'legitimated the authority to judge' the literal exclusion of the so-called "enemies" of the Republic from the Revolutionary body, something achieved by their execution.  <fnote>De Baecque, 'The Allegorical Image of France', p.117 </fnote><heading>The Death of Joseph Bara and its relationship to 9 Thermidor</heading>David's portrayal of the death of Bara, the child-martyr, provides an interesting contrast to this aspect of the Marat. The political references clear in both the Marat and Lepelletier appear to be missing from this painting. The fleeting appearance of a flag at the far left corner of the painting, and the tricolour held by Bara, are the only indication of the Revolutionary action for which Bara died. Instead the focus is upon 'the sinuous form of the androgynous youth... distant from the world of contemporary politics and violence." The body bears no mark of violence and is more feminine than masculine in its beauty, making it by far the most idealised of David's martyrs. Bara is elevated from the violent circumstances of his death and transformed into the representative of an ideal far more universal, timeless and spiritual than either Marat or Lepelletier.  <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.87 </fnote><fnote>Honour, Neo-Classicism, p.80 </fnote>The contrast between the reality of Bara's death and its portrayal is perhaps a reflection of the increasing discrepancy within Revolutionary discourse. Like the painting, the Revolution appealed to the ideals of virtue and salvation, but in order to achieve this it had to justify an escalating mixture of extreme violence and surveillance. The Bara then, seems to be symbolic of the growing rift between the politics and the idealised goals of the Revolution, a gap which propaganda would be utilised to fill. In its depiction of an idealised youth, this painting attempted to fulfil its promotional purpose by avoiding the escalating grimness of Revolutionary reality. It is synonymous with Robespierre's developing symbolism of virtue, and is crucial in revealing the extent to which promotional art was forced to become more 'abstractly beatific' as the political moment became more violent and coercive.  <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David Revolutionary Artist, p.90 </fnote><fnote>Crow, Emulation, p.177 </fnote>The course charted by the realism of the Tennis Court Oath of the early Revolution, to the violent dramatisation of the deaths of Marat and Lepelletier, and finally to the Bara's sublimity, might be said to record the progress of the Revolution, from 'zeal and idealism to violence and disillusion." As a result, the Bara, David's last painting before the fall of Robespierre on 9 Thermidor, can be seen as something of a reflection on the onset of the political collapse of the politics of Terror. David's inability to combine the political and the ideological elements of the Revolution into this painting seem to indicate that they will soon become uncoupled in the public mind. While it is, without doubt, still an attempt at the Revolutionary propaganda that David vehemently believed in, the Bara perhaps fails. It seems too close to a prediction of the reality of the political moment, something it achieves through its very avoidance of the political fervour still apparent in the Marat. <fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.464 </fnote><heading>Promotion and idealisation</heading>In painting those who were seen as having sacrificed their lives to uphold the Republic, David's work throughout the years 1782-84 operated as promotional propaganda on behalf of the Revolution. The Lepelletier, Marat and Bara are the embodiment of a belief David shared with the Convention that 'the traits of heroism and civic virtue presented to the regard of the people... will cause to germinate in it all the passions of glory and devotion to the welfare of the fatherland." They actively promoted the maintenance of the Republic by placing emphasis upon the honour, virtue and serenity found in the sacrifice of the self to the nation. Incorporating a hybrid of secular and religious imagery, they represent idealisations of the Revolution, in the hope that this would aid the continued justification of the intensifying politics of Terror in the public mind. <fnote>David, in speech to the National Convention, 15 November, 1793, cited in Dowd, 'Art as National Propaganda in the French Revolution', p.537 </fnote>By portraying those who died on behalf of the people, the martyr paintings elevate the principle of sacrifice to the general will to its violent realisation. The optimism reflected by the Tennis Court Oath is replaced by an attempt, both in art and politics, to equate Revolutionary ideals with the violence of their fulfilment. The increasingly serene quality of David's art thus reflects the need for public assurance, acting as an 'allegorical mirror' to the growing suspicion and violence of the period. The Bara is the climatic piece in this trend, its almost total separation from the political indicating that the reality of the Revolution had become so divided from its moral ideal, that any form of realism could no longer successfully promote the value of the Republic. <fnote>De Baecque, 'The Allegorical Image of France', p.127 </fnote><heading>CONCLUSIONS</heading>The French Revolution represented more than just a political upheaval. It was a fundamental rupture from the past, which uprooted the social and cultural landscape of the ancien régime, and replaced it with an environment shaped by the Revolution's own principles of freedom, virtue and the nation. Artistic forms did not operate autonomously from the changing consciousness of the French nation, instead becoming a fundamental force within the Revolutionary milieu. Painting, and in particular the public form favoured by Jacques-Louis David, played a critical role in producing and propagating a cultural context unique to the age of Revolution. As Roberts indicates, from 1784 onwards, David's paintings seem to have captured the progress of the Revolution. They chart its inception as the realisation of the "enlightened" principles espoused by the eighteenth-century philosophes, all the way through (and beyond the period under scrutiny) to the 'bitter sequel' represented by the Bourbon Restoration. Within these paintings, then, one can read 'the transfer of political power, the passage from monarchy to republic'. However, the role carried out by David's work encompassed more than a static reflection of the events associated with the Revolution. By understanding his pieces as the visual representation of three distinct stages within the Revolutionary age, it is revealed that both the purpose, and the moral role, of painting was transformed during the course of the Revolution. It is this artistic evolution that David's work captures with unique brilliance. <fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.7 </fnote><fnote>De Baecque, ''The Allegorical Image of France', p.115 </fnote>The years 1784-89 represent the foundations of the Revolution. It was within this period that the consciousness of the French people, drawing from the political philosophy of the European enlightenment, developed to incorporate the crucial Revolutionary concept of the nation. David's Oath of the Horatii and Brutus are indicative of the ambiguity and uncertainty that characterised this political moment. They significantly portray many of the principles that became central to the Revolutionary ethos, in particular focusing on the subversion of the personal to civic duty. In doing so, these paintings have been hailed as having anticipated the onset of a revolution that would uproot monarchical sovereignty. However, in debating the "Republican" nature of David's work during this period, historians have revealed the role played by historic retrospect in this pronouncement. Rather than directly indicating the principles of the Revolution, David's Horatii and Brutus are a representation of the atmosphere of late eighteenth-century France. They depict concepts associated with the Enlightenment, those present within public perception, which became synonymous with the Revolution only after its onset in 1789. The relationship between painting in the years 1784-89 and the Revolution is, therefore, one of indirect anticipation. As Honour points out, 'The French Revolution was a complex series of events, in fact a succession of overlapping revolutions with different origins and aims." The role played by David's most influential paintings, in the years 1789-94, denote this complexity. The relevance of the Horatii and Brutus to contemporary events played a significant role in the recognition of David as the 'official artist' of the Revolution. From this point, as Roberts indicates, he 'put his brush in service of the new regime." His Tennis Court Oath, with its emphasis upon the themes of fraternity and self-sacrifice, is a relatively straightforward reflection of the atmosphere of the early Revolution. With the king's support for a constitution secured, the revolutionaries of 1789 were optimistic about its success in uniting the French nation as a sovereign people. Artistic forms were thus called upon to perform little other than a reproduction of the moment. <fnote>Honour, Neo-Classicism, p.70 </fnote><fnote>Boime, Art in an Age of Revolution, p.391 </fnote><fnote>Roberts, Jacques-Louis David, Revolutionary Artist, p.5 </fnote>When one compares the Tennis Court Oath with David's martyr paintings of the years 1782-84, it becomes clear that painting had no explicit role in upholding the early Revolution. The onset of the Terror meant that the idealised goals represented in the paintings of 1789-92 became increasingly divergent from Revolutionary reality. In a period characterised by surveillance, control and violent retribution, art became a crucial means of propaganda. David's role evolved to become the producer of images used to promote the Revolution, and thus to help uphold the Republic. In consequence, David's paintings increasingly focused upon Revolutionary virtue. The serene quality found within the Lepelletier, Marat and Bara, played a fundamental role in emphasising the idea that virtue was found only in the sacrifice of the individual on behalf of the nation. By promoting Revolutionary morality as something of a supernatural state, these paintings served as promotional propaganda. David helped to justify the growing coerciveness of the political moment, by means of an increasing avoidance of its realistic portrayal within his paintings, a technique that reached its peak in the Bara of 1794. David, it would appear, was able 'to produce a style to meet the needs of the historical moment'. His most influential paintings not only form a timeline charting the progress of the French Revolution, but more than this, they have an active, evolving and dependent relationship with it. The events of 1789-92 brought meaning to his Horatii and Brutus, which has since sparked ferocious debate over their "republican" nature. The progression, from political optimism to political divorcement, found within the Tennis Court Oath, throughout the course of David's martyr paintings, and ending with the Death of Joseph Bara, symbolises the 'springtime and sanguinary crisis of the Revolution'. These pieces indicate the evolution of David's relationship to the Revolution: from being its official painter he became a mediator of propaganda upholding the Republic. <fnote>Brookner, Jacques-Louis David, p.68 </fnote><fnote>Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, p.xxi </fnote>In conclusion, David's paintings represent the dominant examples of public art found within French painting between 1784 and 1794. They symbolise the power of an artistic form to influence, replicate and guide a political moment. Within the Horatii and Brutus, David was able to anticipate the vital Revolutionary concept of the sovereign nation, by synthesising the political consciousness of the pre-1789 era. In the Tennis Court Oath, he created a reflection of the centrality of fraternity and self-sacrifice, depicting the optimism that characterised the Revolution in the years 1789-92. Finally, his martyr paintings, the Lepelletier, Marat and Bara, helped uphold the French Republic of 1792-94, by promoting the transcendence found in Revolutionary virtue. The paintings of Jacques-Louis David represent the best example of an artistic record that charts the changing nature of political consciousness within the French Revolution. 