The shelves of today's supermarkets are characterised by diversity and plentiful supply. The modern globalisation of the food industry means that goods and products from all over the world are capable of appearing together in our stores, without regard for seasonal variation or local climate and geographical conditions. This food system is just one aspect of the process of globalisation, which many believe to be key to the development of our contemporary world. Globalisation refers to the 'world-wide integration of economic processes and of space' (McMichael, 1994, cited in Atkins and Bowler, 2001, p.37) in that, for example, the effect of economic change in one country might now be felt in others on the opposite side of the globe because of shared trading networks. The ownership by TNCs (Trans-National Corporations) of land and employees across many countries means that economies can no longer be split along national boundaries. This is said to have created, to some extent at least, a sort of global homogeneity of market culture. It is the consequences of this globalisation process in terms of food that we need to understand in order to consider who has gained and who has suffered in the modern, global food system. In short, the basic premise of a worldwide food network is that countries should be able to specialise in growing and producing whatever they have the most optimal conditions for, while importing goods they are less proficient in from outside (Hines, 2000, p.6). However to put into effect such a system there needs to be an increase in the international trade of food, something which entails the removal of barriers like import and export taxation, tariffs and subsidies, and also the establishment of new international regulatory agencies. In theory such 'trade liberalisation' should help 'improve the efficiency with which the world's resources are used', as is the official line (Brian Wilson MP, former Minister for Trade in the U.K, cited in Hines, 2000, p.3). However in practice, as we shall see, not everybody benefits equally from the modern, global food system currently in existence, largely because of political domination by the developed world. One fact that must be made clear before embarking on any discussion of world hunger is that there is no global food shortage. Across the planet there is enough grain alone to give each person 3,500 calories daily, without including the addition of any fruit or vegetables. This level of food intake is actually enough to make most people overweight, so why is it that hunger, malnutrition and famine are still at large? The answer does not lie, as many believe, with the rapid population growth of developing nations. Increases in food production over the last thirty five years have been greater than growth levels by as much as 16 per cent (Moore, Collins and Rosset, 1998, p.8). However the fact remains that the twentieth century saw the greatest ever rise in food supply while simultaneously experiencing the largest ever number of famine-related deaths (Watts, cited in McIntosh, 1995, p.51). This occurrence has become known as the 'paradox of plenty' and is explainable only when we consider the distribution of food globally, and how this relates to profit. In today's global food system, access to a decent food supply revolves around an individual's ability to come up with money to pay for it. Very little is bought through a process of exchange anymore, and thus the 'losers' in terms of hunger are always those who simply cannot afford an adequate diet. The immediate assumption then is that the richer developed world, or northern hemisphere, has food surpluses while the developing southern hemisphere goes hungry. The picture taken globally does indeed reflect this idea: countries like Ethiopia have suffered severe famine in recent years while the U.S. food supply could feed the whole population almost twice according to nutritional guidelines (Nestle, 2002, p.1). However food remains outside the grasp of the poor even in well-off nations such as the U.K. and U.S. Supermarket competition has led to the removal of more costly elements such as stores in the inner-city areas that house the majority of the poor. Small local stores have little fresh produce and also sell goods up to 49 per cent higher in price (Atkins and Bowler, 2001, p.103) but to reach out-of-town supermarkets those with lower incomes are often required to use expensive public transport. It seems then that the modern food market does not reach those marginalised in society and they become its 'losers' via their inability to pay for an adequate diet. Sen (1981) would deem this to be a lack of 'entitlement' and is a classic case of her explanation that hunger is caused by not having enough to eat rather than there not being enough. In terms of southern hemisphere dietary 'losers' the answer appears obvious: use the food surpluses of the developed world as food aid for those with food-deficits thus equalling out access at least on a global level. However the giving of food aid is less simple than this sort of idealism, and is more often than not intimately tied up with political aims. This can be seen from the fact that in recent years food aid went to countries like Korea and Tunisia alongside those one would be more likely to expect. Food aid also creates a reliance on the outside world and thus helps to reduce national self-sufficiency, exacerbating existing problems. In Bangladesh, for example, food aid has helped to avoid widespread famine death while at the same time undermining self-sufficiency through enabling continued population growth (Payne, 1993, p.40). To be somewhat callous, food aid removes those "natural checks" on population that Malthus talked of, thus creating pressure on the resources of these food deficit nations. In terms of worldwide hunger then it seems that those who lack access to food, the 'losers' of the global food system so to speak, are the poor, who lack the money that is the key to trade, or those who suffer the effects of food's uneven distribution globally. The concept of food distribution is, however, complicated by the import/export dealings that characterise the modern system. 78 per cent of malnourished children worldwide live in countries that have food surpluses (Moore, Collins and Rosset, 1998, p.8), showing that being a 'loser' of this system is about more than there simply being enough food grown in your country to feed you. The problem arises because our current global food market forces underdeveloped countries to export food, even when a large percentage of their populations are undernourished. This leads me onto what I feel to be the second, linked aspect of the 'winners' and 'losers' debate, that revolving around the economic and political nature of the food system. The first principle that must be understood is that of free trade as it forms the basis of our modern food system. The general concept is that if all protectionist barriers are removed, world trade mirrors the 'comparative advantage' of nations via specialisation and exportation plus importation to ease hunger using the foreign exchange earnings gained (Moore, Collins and Rosset, 1998, p.109). This theory does not, as we have already seen, operate effectively when put into practice, in fact it is probably the biggest influence expanding the gap between the 'winners' and 'losers' of the system. The free market has spelled disaster for small businesses worldwide and, as ever, particularly those in poorer countries. Part of the problem stems from the promotion of 'modern' systems of production in countries where they are often inappropriate for the type of land and climatic conditions. Such modern systems are also generally less labour intensive and thus their imposition tends to increase local unemployment in rural areas. In turn this encourages migration of the poor to urban slums where overcrowding and disease are often rife. Once again the poor are those who lose out through the disturbance of their established farming communities. Small-scale farmers also fail to benefit because the large corporations who tend to control food industries usually favour production contracts with a few large farms to grow their produce. Even these often suffer in developing countries however due to the unequal power balance of the contract. As Atkins and Bowler point out, contracts can be terminated at any time and working practices are often dictated (2001, p.44). Smaller farmers are unable to compete in a global space, a fact that has created a third world where 20 per cent of farms are responsible for 80 per cent of production (ib id, p.102). The biggest economic problems stemming from the free market global food system are those of 'delocalisation', a concept devised by Pelto and Pelto (1985, cited in Beardsworth and Keil, 1997, p.40) and export/import dependency. The necessity of many countries to enter the global market, through exportation, to survive has forced regional specialisation, and thus many areas are not longer locally self-sufficient. This is sometimes true even of entire countries, for example the 'banana republics' of Central America and the Caribbean. Such specialist economies often discover that the large corporations dominating their produce have the power to induce political and social change if it does not suit their purpose, for example the building of otherwise unnecessary railways direct to airports for the use of exportable produce. Those who benefit from exportation are not the majority as is claimed however, but instead only the largest producers and processers, with only a tiny percentage of retail price going to the original farmer. Large corporations look to use only the cheapest labour and thus are able to dictate where certain foodstuffs are grown, for example Del Monte pulled pineapple growing from Hawaii when liveable wages was secured there (Atkins and Bowler, 2001). Local food production is also depressed further by the 'dumping' of the food surpluses of developed nations into southern hemisphere economies at cut price, undercutting local producers, and thus undermining any attempt to grow locally for local consumption. In turn importation of processed goods creates a taste for non-native foodstuffs such as wheat in Africa, hence the cycle of importation is continued to the benefit of nobody other than developed country corporations who reinforce their politically dominant position. The third world is unlikely to escape the exportation/importation cycle that keeps it suppressed unless the current food system alters dramatically. This is emphasised by the fact that while international agencies like the World Trade Organisation have forced such nations to remove things like trade restrictions and tariffs, under the notion of not restricting free trade, they have allowed the continuance of the E.U. Common Agricultural Policy. This allows the subsidy of larger farmers in the EU thus enabling them to offer good much more cheaply than third world nations or small-scale producers would be able to. It seems clear then that the 'winners' in both the developed north and developing south are those large corporations who control the export/import industry, although the developed world taken as a whole has certainly benefitted at least to some extent through diversity and increased choice of foodstuffs. As Hines points out, 'Most obviously the poor are not the winners' (Hines, 2000, p.212) and this again is true in both hemispheres. The poor in countries like the U.K. and U.S. have their access to cheap food largely barred, although social security offers access to at least the most basic of diets. The biggest losers it seems are the poor third world food growers and producers. The global free market has resulted in a loss of local interdependency and self-sustainability through delocalisation and export/import dependency, loss of local diversity through the need to specialise and a drawing into inappropriate practices and methods. The use of food aid to alleviate hunger problems caused by forced exportation simply strengthens developed-world political dominance. Once again the developed world 'wins' at the expense of the third world, or as Moore, Collins and Rosset suggest, 'Left to its own devices, the market simply mirrors inequalities.' According to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) it is 'the right of everyone to have access to safe and nutritious food' (cited in Atkins and Bowler, 2001, p.165) yet our current food system is strengthening the differing access between rich and poor, small and large farmers and producers and the northern developed and southern under-developed worlds in their entirety, rather than increasing equality. The political dominance of the north means that tariffs and subsidies fall to our benefit and undercut local third world markets to increase import dependency. Until such processes are reversed the modern, global food system will continue to create massive 'winners' in the form of global corporations at the expense of maintaining a huge number of 'losers' in the politically subservient, poorly paid and hungry poor. 