Eugenics was described by Charles B. Davenport, a leading member of the American field, as being "the science of the improvement of the human race by better breeding." In short, eugenics theoretically aims at the improvement the characteristics of man via the study of heredity and the subsequent application of this knowledge to human reproduction. Thus in practice this entails curbing reproduction between those with "inferior" characteristics (negative eugenics) and encouraging it among those possessing valuable qualities (positive eugenics). Such eugenic science was practically legislated for in many states of the U.S.A. and in Germany. Many U.S. states had laws for the sterilisation of the "feebleminded", for example, including epileptics, manic-depressives, prostitutes, alcoholics, the homeless and criminals, and the 1924 Immigration Restriction Act prevented people of certain ethnic backgrounds entering the country. Nazi Germany followed suit during the 1930s where the Law on Preventing Hereditarily Ill Progeny called for the "hereditarily sick" to be sterilised and later, bringing ethnicity into eugenics, the Nuremburg Laws prevented inter-marriage or sexual relations between Jews and non-Jews. <fnote>Davenport, quoted in Haller, Mark H., Eugenics: Hereditarian Attitudes in American Thought (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1963), p.3 </fnote>The memory of what happened as a result of the German National Socialist eugenic policies has perhaps tended to obscure the history of the eugenics movement as a whole. Historians have tended to look upon eugenics movements as national phenomena, ignoring the mass of evidence suggesting international collaboration on both academic and practical enforcement issues. The Final Solution devised in Germany was the most overt and horrific enforcement of negative eugenics in killing thousands of Jews with allegedly "inferior" racial characteristics, but it is not the only example of the practical application of eugenics. One must remember that the eugenics movement began not in Germany but in Great Britain and the U.S.A., and the latter was the first country of the world to possess laws imposing the application of eugenic policy. Thus in studying how it was possible for Germany to reach the point at which their program of systematic killing could be designed, I feel it is important for the historian to consider what outside influence the country came under. As Great Britain rapidly distanced herself from the German racial hygienists after Hitler's takeover, it is the U.S. whose influence is of most relevance and interest. <fnote>Kühl, Stefan, The Nazi Connection: Eugenics, American Racism, and German National Socialism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994), p.xvi </fnote>It is claimed that the origin of eugenics can be traced back to ancient Greece but its modern form draws mainly from Darwinian theory. The idea of evolution being a process of natural selection, where only the strongest survive, is essential to the basis of this science. Evolutionary theory shows how the weaker elements of any species are eliminated via the course of heredity in that more of those with "superior" characteristics will survive to pass these on. It is this natural elimination, however, that the human species has been able to overcome as a result of medicine, charity and technology. Early eugenicists thus believed that human progress was being hindered by the need for the strong to take care of those "inferior" elements that existed as remnants of modern society. As their understanding was that humans gained almost all of their characteristics through the process of heredity, regardless of environmental factors, a simple solution to this problem existed. By curbing the reproduction of those possessing qualities of weakness and encouraging it among the more superior, continued progress could be assured. In practice this meant the use of such things as marriage restriction, sterilisation, permanent imprisonment of defective individuals, or in the German case, euthanasia. <fnote>Haller, Eugenics, p.3 </fnote>As with almost all processes, the eugenics movement was affected by race, class and other forms of prejudice existing in society. Thus it was not only the medically defective, those with hereditary illness for example, that became part of the scope of eugenic aims, but also those sharing "inferior" qualities of race and class, and the asocial. The extent to which such prejudices affected the progress of eugenics differed in each respective country as a result of the specific social, cultural and economic conditions in existence, as Daniel Kevles has pointed out. Thus in Great Britain the main concern was the rapid growth of the working classes, whereas in Germany and America in particular it was racial hatred that governed eugenic progress. Perhaps it is for this reason why it came to be the U.S. that presented the greatest influence on German policies of racial hygiene. <fnote>Soloway, Richard A., Demography and Degeneration: Eugenics and the Declining Birthrate in Twentieth-Century Britain (Chapel Hill; London: The University of North Carolina Press, 1995), p.60 </fnote>Although the American movement first began to take shape around the 1870s, it became most influential from the turn of the century up until the 1930s, when Nazi cruelties began to overshadow and denigrate the movement as a whole. Official approval for the sterilisation of "feebleminded" individuals was given in many states throughout this period, and it was also at this time that racist undertones began to move toward the forefront in U.S. immigration restrictions. However links between the eugenics movement in the U.S. and Nazi Germany have been suggested right into World War II, hence the decision to study this connection through until 1945. My aim is to examine the extent to which it can be claimed that developments in the American eugenics movement influenced the shape of German and later Nazi racial hygiene. There are many ways in which this influence might be demonstrated, including evidence of the use of the U.S. as a model in Germany, contact between influential individuals in the movement and the discussion of claims from both sides of the importance of the U.S. <fnote>Pernick, Martin S., The Black Stork: Eugenics and the Death of "Defective" Babies in American Medicine and Motion Pictures Since 1915 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), p.160 </fnote>The traditional view of the historical relationship between the German and American eugenics movements is one of increasing distance. Historians tended, at least until the 1980s, to suggest that only a small proportion of U.S. eugenicists continued to support racial hygiene in Germany after the Nazi takeover. They argue instead that during the 1930s the two countries followed entirely different pathways, one obscuring the scientific basis of eugenics while the other became increasingly focused upon this aspect. The suggestion here is one entirely linked to the use of eugenics in terms of race: that during this period the scientific basis believed to uphold racism became unpinned so that it no longer had "scientific respectability". Thus only Nazi Germany, a country devoted to racism over and above that of scientific eugenics itself, could maintain such a program of beliefs. Those historians who admitted to continued U.S. support for German policy generally only did so on the basis of this being a minority position among American eugenicists as an entire group. Kevles, for example, identified just two American eugenicist supporters of Nazi Germany. <fnote>Kühl, The Nazi Connection, p.xiv </fnote><fnote>Mark Haller, quoted in ib id., p.xiv </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.xv </fnote>However, more recently historians have begun in attempts to illustrate the definite involvement of U.S. eugenicists in Nazi policies. The extent to which it is seen that America influenced German racial hygiene has significantly risen and thus one is now capable of making a more balanced judgement on this issue. Kühl suggests that part of the reason why historians in the past failed to see the significance of U.S. involvement was because they tended to focus on sources provided by the American Eugenics Society. Given the eventual outcome of German racial hygiene it is hardly surprising that the Americans might attempt to downplay the extent of their involvement. By also studying German sources and their claims to have been influenced by the American model, the interaction between these two countries is more clearly revealed. <fnote>Ib id., p.xvi </fnote>Such claims then make up an important part of the evidence for the case that the U.S. did have a significant influence on German racial hygiene, and they are abundant in existence. Before the implementation of the Law on Preventing Hereditarily Ill Progeny was passed in 1933, Bonhoeffer, the Berlin professor of psychiatry for the Prussian Racial Hygiene Committee, recommended thorough investigation into those already in existence in many U.S. states. German eugenicists reportedly stated that they were indebted to the Americans, particularly with reference to the report written by Gosney and Popenoe on the Californian program. The idea seems to have been widespread that the American example was precisely what Germany ought to emulate, and its reception and conditions were important in shaping Germany's own laws. In illustration, the pointing out of heavy opposition faced in the U.S. was critical in delaying the implementation of such laws in Germany and examples of cruelty meant that the Reich Health Office initially advised against compulsion in enforcement. <fnote>Kevles, Daniel J., In The Name of Eugenics: Genetics and the Uses of Human Heredity (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985), p.118 </fnote><fnote>Weindling, Paul, Health, Race and German Politics Between National Unification and Nazism, 1870-1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), p.391 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.451 </fnote>The favoured method of sterilisation as the means to practically apply eugenic science also reflects an American trend. Back in 1914 the American Henry H. Goddard, the man who coined the term "moron" to describe those with mental deficiencies, stated that "If both parents are feeble-minded all the children will be feeble-minded. It is obvious that such matings should not be allowed." Like Davenport he believed that the "feeble-minded" should be prevented from having children via laws enforcing their sterilisation and preventing marriage. It is from such examples that the Nazis drew in their own sterilisation legislation, and the Nuremburg law preventing marriage between Aryans and non-Aryans show distinct similarities to those in many U.S. states. German academic journals in fact tended to argue that laws in America preventing miscegenation between blacks and whites were in fact far stricter that those in their own country. Barry Mehler has been the most vocal historian with respect to such similarities and insists that the Nazi program of the 1930s was directly modelled on the U.S. example. In Eliminating the Inferior he goes on to explicitly link the early history of the U.S. eugenics movement to plans set out by Frick, the German Minister of the Interior under Nazi control. However one must bear in mind that the German Eugenic Sterilisation Law did go much further than anything attempted in the U.S. It recommended compulsory sterilisation whether the individual in question was institutionalised or otherwise and resulted in sterilisations ten times the number ever carried out in the U.S. within three years. Thus while the Americans may have influenced the basic structure of German legislation and procedure, we cannot heap responsibility onto the U.S. movement for the severity or the vast-scale undertaken by the German laws. <fnote>Friedlander, Henry, The Origins of Nazi Genocide: From Euthanasia to the Final Solution (Chapel Hill; London: The University of North Carolina Press, 1995), pp.7-8 </fnote><fnote>Proctor, Robert N., Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis (Cambridge, Massachusetts; London: Harvard University Press, 1988), p.174 </fnote><fnote>Pearson, Roger, Race, Intelligence and Bias in Academe (Washington D.C.: Scott-Townsend Publishers, 1997), pp.265-6 </fnote><fnote>Kevles, In the Name of Eugenics, pp.116-7 </fnote>Following World War I, the Germans increasingly used the example of America to defend their own potential program of sterilisation. Gustav Boeters used such an argument in 1924 in continuing his ongoing advocacy of the sterilisation of "defectives". He claimed that: "In a cultured nation of the first order - the United States of America - that which we strive toward [that is, sterilisation legislation] was introduced and tested long ago." While both the American and British models were held up as examples, the Germans appear to have looked upon the U.S. as leaders in the practical application of eugenic theory and desired to copy their immigration and sterilisation laws. Even Hitler himself openly praised the American Immigration Restriction Act in Mein Kampf, revealing the importance of the U.S. example even on those at the very head of the Nazi state. The American influence as a country where eugenic-based laws had been at least partly successfully cannot be underestimated. As Proctor points out, there are numerous examples of where the German racial hygienists looked towards the U.S. for stimulation and thus in this manner at least we must realise that the German movement followed a U.S. lead. <fnote>Boeters, quoted in Proctor, Racial Hygiene, p.98 </fnote><fnote>Kühl, The Nazi Connection, p.26 </fnote><fnote>Proctor, Racial Hygiene, p.100 </fnote>The tendency to look towards the U.S. for guidance was not anything new to German eugenic science. Ever since the late nineteenth century, distinct interest had been shown in movement and developments within U.S. eugenics. At the turn of the century, for example, legislation passed in North Dakota was studied concerning the disallowance of marriage for alcoholics, the insane and sufferers of tuberculosis. Such information became important in providing guidance for Germany's initial attempts at putting eugenic science into practice in terms of legislation against those labelled as "asocial". This interest continued well into the 1930s including throughout the Weimar period when many books on eugenics written by members of the American movement where translated into German. Such works taught that time and again environmental factors had proven to be of little significance in shaping the individual in comparison to the effect of hereditary characteristics. H.H. Goddard's story of the Kallikaks was perhaps the most widely cited example, a study of a man who married a woman of "inferior racial stock" resulting in 480 offspring, of which only 46 were "normals". Having studied closely the American movement from so early in its development and continued to do so over an extended period it seems likely that its concepts had a profound influence upon German scientists. The fact that works like Goddard's were translated into German suggests there was a demand for knowledge beyond simply that involving sterilisation laws in U.S. states. It seems then that the American movement provided not only a model for the practical application of eugenic science to the Germans, but also many of the basic concepts of "scientific" eugenics upon which they based their racial hygiene. <fnote>Ib id., pp.98-99 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., pp.99-100 </fnote>The Germans not only used the U.S. example as a model and justification for their own program, but also as a means of propaganda in exposing the alleged benefits of the proposed program of sterilisation. During WWI, the Society for Racial Hygiene made a mass distribution of leaflets praising laws in twelve U.S. states that prevented the reproduction of "inferior families". Similar praise was heaped upon the U.S. model in more private discussions amongst the German medical elite. Benno Chajes, for example, drew on U.S. legislation in discussing the benefits of sterilisation with the Prussian Health Council. Kühl suggests that no other country within the international eugenics scene played such a visible role in Nazi propaganda. It seems implausible also given the number of scientists who visited Germany during this period, Laughlin being a prime example, that the Americans did not realise the extent to which the Germans used their example to promote their own brand of eugenic science. Thus I would argue that they must take at least partial responsibility for allowing the Germans to preach the benefits of such discriminatory policy using them as an example, as well as having influenced the very design of the German program itself. It seems that by showing how legislation based upon eugenic science could be implemented, the U.S. example was crafted to convince both the German public and those in power that it was possible to curb the growth of a "defective" population. <fnote>Kühl, The Nazi Connection, p.15 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.23 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.37 </fnote>Newspapers and magazines in both countries extensively covered one another's respective eugenics programs, increasing the element of competition that was another important factor in America's influence on Germany. The rapidity of advances made in the U.S. seems to have ushered the German desire to work with eugenics. Racial hygienists such as Professor Otto Reche expressed concern that the U.S. nation would soon rise above Germany in terms of racial and social health and become world leaders in this field, and thus German efforts were spurred on by this fear. Likewise Baur, an influential figure having written an almost textbook work on hereditary and eugenics, became convinced that the Germans needed a national eugenics movement if any attempt to rival the amount being spent on research at Cold Spring Harbor in the U.S was to be made. In this sense then it is clear that the Germans, at least, felt that the American movement was an important influence on their own program of eugenic racial hygiene. <fnote>Proctor, Racial Hygiene, pp.97-98 </fnote><fnote>Weindling, Health, Race and German Politics, p.301 </fnote>While some might claim that this is part of an attempt to remove blame for the horrific project undertaken during WWII, it is backed up at least in part by the fact that several leading American eugenicists welcomed and even gloated about the praise they received. Charles Davenport, for example, praised the Nazi program for its similarity to the U.S.: "To one versed in the history of eugenical sterilisation in America, the text of the German statute reads almost like the 'American model sterilisation law'". Similarly Harry H. Laughlin, an important figure in the American Genetic Association, accepted an honourary doctorate given to him by Heidelberg University as "evidence of a common understanding of German and American scientists of the nature of eugenics." It seems then that the Americans were well aware of the influence they exerted and connection they shared with German eugenics and were positively proud that another nation wished to follow their example. Thus it appears that one cannot claim that the influence of U.S. eugenics upon German racial hygiene was either not present, purely accidental, or denied by either side until after WWII. <fnote>Davenport, quoted in Larson, Edward J., Sex, Race, and Science: Eugenics in the Deep South (Baltimore; London: The John Hopkins University Press, 1995), p.147 </fnote><fnote>Laughlin, quoted in Ib id., p.147 </fnote>In discussing Laughlin's degree acceptance another important area in this examination is uncovered: the influence of key individuals in the American eugenics movement upon the German scene. Historians have suggested that while it may be true that many members of the American movement distanced themselves from German racial hygiene during the 1930s, some key figures remained resolutely supportive. Charles Davenport and Henry H. Laughlin, as we have seen, continued to be in favour of the Nazi program, going so far as to endorse the policy of euthanasia of the "unfit". Another prominent individual was Dr. Foster Kennedy. As one of the founders of the Euthanasia Society of America he believed that killing on eugenic grounds was as justified as for the terminally ill. Right up until 1942 after the U.S. had entered WWII, Kennedy found little wrong with the Nazi program. His only qualm appears to have been that perhaps the Germans went a little too far in attempting to sterilise all those seen as "feebleminded". With his obvious support for euthanasia one wonders whether his enthusiasm would have been any less with relation to the Final Solution. One must remember, however, that these figures are generally associated more with the American movement in its early stages during the 1920s. As a result their importance as advocates of contemporary eugenic science was significantly less during the period when Nazi racial hygiene came to its strongest point. Considerably less evidence exists of any support from those who headed the American movement by this point in time. <fnote>Pernick, The Black Stork, p.164 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.165 </fnote>However, early American support for eugenic projects in Germany stretched beyond that of particular individuals. Financial support was given by American foundations interested in eugenic science towards the founding of such research institutes in Germany. The New York Rockefeller Foundation, for example, funded the research of Agnes Bluhm, an early German racial hygienist looking into the link between alcoholism and heredity. It was also important in helping to establish the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Anthropology, Eugenics and Human Heredity in Berlin into the international scene and even continued to offer support after the National Socialists gained control. In addition American eugenics supporters offered praise for German film propaganda promoting racial hygiene. Henry H. Laughlin, for instance urged the importance of German works like Erbkrank and aided the distribution of others like it.  <fnote>Kühl, The Nazi Connection, pp.20-21 </fnote><fnote>Pernick, The Black Stork, p.165 </fnote>Although such support does not necessarily equate to the idea that the American movement was an influence, it surely must have suggested that they were in favour of what the German movement was undertaking. Receiving such support from a country evidently so esteemed by the German movement, I would argue, would probably have influenced them to continue and elaborate on their basic premises and thus does suggest an influence of sorts. As Kühl points out, eugenicists in the U.S. were the strongest of all international supporters, particularly with reference to German race policies. Had the Americans, like the British for example, been more cautious in their appraisal of the racial hygiene, the Germans may have felt or even actually been less secure in their position within the movement internationally. In this case it is possible that the ease with which they managed to gain acceptance for their own far more severe program would have been lessened. Or similarly without American support maybe a lack of confidence on the part of the Germans could have softened their approach. This is of course all mere speculation, but one does wonder at the extent to which aid and appraisal from the Americans influenced the German movement in their decision making processes. <fnote>Kühl, The Nazi Connection, p.37 </fnote>The American Deep South was important in terms of eugenics and programs of sterilisation as an area made up of a population high in so-called "defectives". Interest in the Nazi program was perhaps highest here because of the converging interest in race. In the southern states race relations were at least as tenuous as in Germany, if not more so among the ordinary population. It is not surprising then that the Alabama state health officer J.N. Baker seemed to be in awe of the German program when in 1935 he claimed that "With baited breath, the entire civilised world is watching the bold experiment in mass sterilisation recently launched in Germany". His comment suggests the closeness with which American supporters of the eugenics movement watched developments in Germany well into the 1930s, even after the overtly racist Nuremburg Laws had been passed. The lack of criticism from such key figures in the American movement must surely have influenced those involved in Nazi racial hygiene, perhaps emboldening their efforts in future. <fnote>Baker, quoted in Larson, Sex, Race, and Science, p.146 </fnote>The issue of race is of course crucial in any discussion of the eugenics movement and it seems fitting to discuss it here with reference to the American South. Thus far I have not separated out the issue of eugenic policy towards the "feebleminded" from the "racially degenerate" but it is ultimately this issue that determines the extent of American influence on the German movement. Race is extremely complicated in terms of American eugenics because its relevance differed over time and also between different factions of the movement. During the early twentieth century mainline eugenicists, a group who believed in white superiority, dominated the American movement. As a result they generally agreed with Hitler's policies, supporting his combination of ethnic racism and eugenic strategy. However, by the period that Hitler's racist aims were being revealed in 1930s Germany, mainline eugenicists in America had lost favour among many as a result of their support for Hitler. Racism and the Nazi regime had become an unsavoury matter among much of the U.S. public and as a result those known as the "reform" eugenicists began to dominate the movement. They advocated eugenics on a more individual basis as opposed to the automatic assumption that all of those of one race were superior or inferior to those in another. These members of the American movement did go on to criticise Hitler's policies but generally only on the basis of discrimination against the Jews. This could explain why the U.S. eugenics movement as a whole never officially denounced German racial hygiene: because it was only its racial basis that those who dominated at this time opposed. As Kühl points out, they were able to support the Germans' "excellent eugenic program" while at the same time denouncing Nazi anti-Semitism. This was because the reform eugenicists refused to accept that the inherent racism of eugenic science, that some human characteristics are superior to others, was inseparably connect to Hitler's ethnic racism of Nordic superiority. This contradictory position is reflected clearly in the Genetico Manifesto, which shows that opposition to Nazi race policy was not a result of its eugenic basis.  <fnote>Barkan, Elazar, The Retreat of Scientific Racism: Changing Concepts of Race in Britain and the United States Between the World Wars (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), p.275 </fnote><fnote>Kühl, The Nazi Connection, p.75 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.79 </fnote>What all of this reflects is the complexity of the relationship between the American eugenics movement and German racial hygiene. During the period that the racial hygiene movement began to take shape in Germany it was those who believed in white superiority that dominated the American movement. As a result the evidence I have presented showing the importance of the U.S. movement as a model and of the influence of particular American individuals to the German movement is hardly surprising. It appears that those in charge at this time, shared the same racial ideals and thus, as a movement predating that in Germany, that the U.S. movement would have influenced that in Germany is hardly deniable. However by the time at which the intensity of racial hygiene in Germany reached its peak, the U.S. movement had moved on to a more individualist eugenic stance. Although they never entirely renounced the notion of differing superiority of races, and continued to praise the developments made in Germany, that they continued to exert an influence seems improbable because of the now clear difference in position. In this case then it seems one can deny that the U.S. movement contemporary to the Nazi period was an influence on German racial hygiene, whilst at the same time agreeing that its earlier mode and ideas were of massive influence as a model and justification. That many prominent U.S. individuals like Laughlin and Kennedy continued to support the Nazi program does not mean that the American movement as a whole, now dominated by new and more advanced ideas, continued to exert an influence in Germany. Instead these figures simply functioned to the benefit of those in charge of the Nazi program in that they could claim continued support from the U.S. movement in order to justify their actions. In concluding then, an examination of the term extent appears to be necessary with relation to the influence American eugenics can be said to have had on the German movement. The evidence I have gathered seems to suggest that the U.S. movement was influential in Germany in terms of both eugenic concepts and their practical application. They shared the same vocabulary of the dangers of heredity to continued human progress and of the moral duty society had to prevent the passing on of "defective" or "inferior" characteristics. As the first country to convert eugenic science into real legislation against particular "defective" individuals, the U.S. provided a model from which the Germans drew on in creating their own laws concerning sterilisation and the prevention of inter-racial marriage. As Müller pointed out, "Racial hygiene in Germany remained until 1926 a purely academic and scientific movement. It was the Americans who busied themselves earnestly about the subject." The fact that the practical application of eugenic science had already been undertaken elsewhere was critical for the Nazi government in justifying their actions. That it was in the U.S.A., supposedly the country of freedom and equality for all, provided the ultimate evidence that such policies were not unfair or immoral and thus allowed for their implementation. In addition members of the American movement allowed themselves to be used as a form of propaganda and in fact actively encouraged the idea that it was specifically their model that the Germans had chosen to emulate. It seems therefore undeniable that the American eugenics movement and its associated ideas and legislation was indeed a profound influence in the formation and justification of German racial hygiene. However what I would contest is that this influence was considerable enough in extent to account for the ultimate outcome of the German movement. As we have seen, while the racial element had admittedly been important in the early American movement by the 1930s its scientific basis was widely denounced. As equally as the evidence showing contact between the two countries suggests collaboration, it suggests shared knowledge and thus the Germans would have had ample access to such information. It seems then that the Germans chose to ignore the fact the American movement had by now progressed, instead using the fact that they had initially shared the same outlook to justify their continued policy of extreme racism. That the American movement had offered financial support as well as appraisal by key figures could be used for propaganda purposes well beyond the period when they agreed with everything that the Germans were undertaking. In closing then I would argue that the American movement cannot be argued to be anything other than a massive influence on German racial hygiene, but that the extent of this cannot be stretched to suggest that they ought to take responsibility for the way in which it was applied in Nazi Germany. The rapidity and volume by which sterilisations took place in Germany after legislation implementing eugenic science passed, far surpassed the occasional and mainly social use it had had in U.S. states. Likewise although euthanasia was discussed in America and several key individuals did approve of its use in Germany I do not believe they sanctioned for the extremes to which the Nazis would take it during WWII. Ultimately then to me the influence of the American movement is largely peripheral because, unlike Barry Mehler, I do not agree that "ideas can be agents as surely as guns and bombs" in the sense that they result in shared responsibility and blame. The Americans may have planted the ideas behind eugenic science and supported their growth into practical policy in Germany but it was the Germans themselves who chose to take from this the notion that any form of application was justified, and who continued to use old American eugenics concepts long after the American movement itself had discarded them. <fnote>Mehler, quoted in Pearson, Race, Intelligence and Bias in Academe, p.265 </fnote>