Jean-Antoinette Poisson was born in the heart of Paris on 29 December 1721, the daughter of a bourgeois financial steward to the influential Pâris brothers and a mother whose moral virtuousness was questionable. These lowly origins fail to infer the dizzy heights of court life into which this bourgeois woman was to enter some twenty years later. Re-christened the Marquise de Pompadour, she became the official royal mistress to Louis XV in 1745, and remained in this role until her death. During her time as 'the favourite', Pompadour became probably the most powerful woman in France, exercising great influence over the king and his government. This is what has marked her out in history: while it was not unusual to find a royal mistress, Madame de Pompadour was an exception in the power she was able to exert, particularly as a figure with her origins in the lower social orders. <fnote>Mitford, Nancy, Madame de Pompadour (London: Penguin, 1995), p.19 </fnote><fnote>Lever, Evelyne, Madame de Pompadour: A Life (New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 2002), p.111 </fnote><fnote>Jones, Colin, The Great Nation: France from Louis XV to Napoleon (London: Penguin, 2002b), p.129 </fnote>The aim of this essay is to examine the evidence concerning the popularity of this extraordinary woman, both among the aristocratic courtiers that constituted life at Versailles and the Parisian populace, from which Pompadour had emerged. One might readily expect a situation to emerge where the Marquise became 'popular in Versailles, unpopular in Paris', as a favourite of the sovereign, resented by those she had left behind in Paris. It is the task here, then, to discuss the extent to which this order of events truly did unfold during her reign as royal mistress, or whether other factors contributed to Pompadour's popularity emerging in a different pattern. In order to prove this statement, one first needs to find evidence supporting the idea that Madame de Pompadour was popular at Versailles, thus among the courtiers, ministers and royalty that resided there. The most obvious example of the Marquise's favour here is to be found in the adoration offered by Louis XV. In singling out a woman of bourgeois origin to be his companion, Louis had broken with convention. His reasons for doing so appear to have been genuine love and affection for Pompadour, which continued to grow throughout her period as his official mistress. The king spent large amounts of his time with Pompadour, going to her rooms soon after dressing each morning and remaining in her company unless his royal duties dictated otherwise. She took it upon herself to ensure that the Louis XV's insatiable appetite for life's pleasures was always met, entertaining him with theatre, readings, singing and conversation. In return, the king openly adored his mistress, granting her both enormous privileges and assets. The favour in which she was held is exemplified in Louis' reaction to any criticism of his 'favourite', for example the dismissal of Maurepas, who was openly hostile. As Lever indicates, Louis 'could not do without this mistress, whom he liked better than any other woman'. <fnote>Mitford, Madame de Pompadour, p.67 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.79 </fnote><fnote>Lever, Madame de Pompadour, p.114 </fnote>However, despite Pompadour's obvious popularity with Louis, who had chosen her for his own, even he commented negatively on her bourgeois origins, suggesting he would have to 'educate' her, referring, as Crosland points out, to her 'social behaviour'. This should not detract from the affection already exemplified between these two individuals: Louis adored and indeed loved his mistress, ignoring the consistent criticism that was bandied around court. <fnote>Crosland, Margaret, Madame de Pompadour: Sex, Culture and Power (Stroud: Sutton, 2002), p.55 </fnote>In order to affirm Madame de Pompadour's popularity at Versailles, one needs more evidence of affection than merely that shown by the king; after all she was his chosen companion. The obvious place to look next is to the royal family, and whether she was accepted or popular among them, a more contested issue. While some sources suggest that the king's daughters tolerated the Marquise, there is much reference to the dauphin's resentment. The queen, meanwhile, seems to have shown a preference for Pompadour over previous mistresses. It has been noted that Pompadour 'put herself out to any extent to please the queen' and her influence seems to have encouraged Louis XV to pay more attention to his wife and family. However, while Pompadour was indeed held in gratitude for proving less a disruption than the king's former 'favourites', to say that she was popular with the queen would be something of an exaggeration. In particular, the queen disagreed with the way in which Pompadour's influence had moved government policy more in line with financial interest than the principles of pious Catholicism that she supported. In the mid-1740s this even led to the creation of a devout group, which included both the queen and dauphin, who together thoroughly 'rejected the values represented by the advent of Pompadour'. It would seem therefore that, if Madame de Pompadour was truly popular at Versailles, this did not derive from favour among the royal family, aside from her lover. <fnote>Mitford, Madame de Pompadour, p.67 </fnote><fnote>Ib id. </fnote><fnote>Jones, Colin, Madame de Pompadour: Images of a Mistress (London: National Gallery, 2002a), p.50 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.47 </fnote>Moving on to those who made up court life at Versailles, Madame de Pompadour's popularity here seems even less apparent. While some courtiers treated her courteously, they largely did so only because they recognised her potential to influence the king's favour. The most honest, openly positive comments about the Marquise seem to reflect on her good manners and looks, for example during presentation to queen it is admitted that her 'behaviour was perfect'. However, such praise was rare; instead most of Madame de Pompadour's life as official mistress was spent dealing with the constant criticism dealt out to her by the court. <fnote>Mitford, Madame de Pompadour, p.67 </fnote>Most of the resentment faced by the Marquise was related to her low social standing. Few courtiers seem to have expected her relationship with the king to be long term, on account of her bourgeois origins, and many instantly despised her entry into an arena traditionally exclusively aristocratic. Crosland sums up this attitude in her statement that 'there were many men... all willing to despise her, not because she was the king's mistress... but because she was a bourgeoisie'. The duc de Choiseul even refers to her presence as 'monstrous', somehow suggesting a subversion of natural laws. It seems abundantly clear that the Marquise's place at Versailles was detested by a majority of the court, and the resentment felt towards this bourgeoisie was exacerbated by her growing influence on the king and, in turn, court life. <fnote>Crosland, Madame de Pompadour, p.56 </fnote><fnote>Duc de Choiseul, cited in Jones, Madame de Pompadour, p.39 </fnote>Part of Pompadour's increasing power was related to her attempts to instil members of her family in important court and ministerial positions, dismantling the system established by Fleury as she did so. This was a source of particular unpopularity among those who, not without due cause, felt their established security threatened by this newcomer of such low social origin. As Crosland argues, 'Favourites... would always ask for favours to be granted to those close to them', and it was largely for this reason that Pompadour's bourgeois background was so alarming. Tournehem, a close friend of Pompadour's mother, was made directeur des Bâtiments and her brother giving rights to the role should Tournehem stand down. The royal mistress had thus secured direct access to the king not just for herself but her extended family, affirming her place in court life, much to the disgust of her enemies there. <fnote>Ib id., p.130 </fnote><fnote>Crosland, Madame de Pompadour, p.60 </fnote><fnote>Jones, Madame de Pompadour, p.40 </fnote>An extension of this, and probably more important in terms of widening her unpopularity among courtiers at Versailles, was Pompadour's restructuring of government on a more bourgeois basis. Her assent to power was accompanied by an 'influx into court life of professional financiers', a change which heralded a break down of the system of 'Sword and Robe' in place since the days of the kings predecessor. The resentment felt towards her in this respect is perhaps notable for being symbolic of wider fears concerning the growth of power among the bourgeoisie, and the potential threat this offered to established aristocratic hierarchies. In helping to gain access to posts in the court ceremonial hierarchy for those lacking a noble background, Pompadour set in place the potential for future political instability, while simultaneously sealing her unpopularity among the established ministerial world at Versailles. <fnote>Ib id., p.42 </fnote>The evidence presented thus far seems to make fairly clear that while Madame de Pompadour became increasingly popular with Louis XV, in terms of Versailles as a whole she was not favoured, and in fact openly despised, both for her lowly origins and her influence on the king and court structure. These criticisms extended out to the wider population of Paris, where Pompadour had always been unpopular for having abandoned her people for the 'other side': the tax collectors. It would be beneficial to highlight here the 'Poissonades' episode, which perhaps best illustrates the parallel court and city resentment towards Pompadour. The peace reached at Aix-la-Chapelle ending the War of Austrian Succession was seen as unsatisfactory by a large proportion of the French people, who had had to suffer great privations in order to finance the fighting. Not wanting to blame their monarch entirely, Madame de Pompadour provided a perfect scapegoat for the situation, and satirical verses scorning her low social origins and financial wastefulness, among other factors, began to circulate. This is important to the debate in place here because an insider at Versailles, eventually proven to be Maurepas, was almost certainly informing the satirists, their content being too personal for common knowledge. The 'Poissonades', then, symbolise the unpopularity of the Marquise both within court life and in Paris more widely. <fnote>Lever, Madame de Pompadour, p.118 </fnote>Other events that had roused detestation in court also carried knock-on effects upon Pompadour's popularity in Paris. The 'bourgeoisisation' of court that she had brought about was later held up as a major reason for France's lack of military success in the Seven Years War. Pompadour had put forward for promotion the Prince de Soubise, who led the battle at Rossbach, where the French army suffered what was probably its worst military defeat. To the Parisians this was yet another example of the way in which Pompadour had corrupted court life, resulting in failure. It is true that, as Crosland indicates, 'whenever something went wrong in France... it was the fault of the mistress'. The Marquise, it appears, was a useful scapegoat for a king whose military mistakes were felt by a Parisian population on the brink of poverty as a result of massively inflated taxation. <fnote>Crosland, Madame de Pompadour, p.131 </fnote>This issue of taxation is crucial to an understanding of the Parisian hatred towards Madame de Pompadour. A major cause of resentment was the belief that Pompadour 'cost the country a fortune', that is, that she was an unnecessary extravagance in a country with such high levels of taxation. As Mitford points out, 'Each taxpayer felt that her houses, furniture and works of art were paid for out of his own pocket', and thus she became increasingly unpopular as the king lavished greater privileges upon her. Important also was the royal mistress' role as a patron of the arts, an activity that, with its increasing focus upon the Rococo style, led to further criticism. In her desire to propagate an image desirable to the king, Pompadour frequently used artists like Boucher to capture her portrait. Presenting herself and sponsoring those involved in this intimate and allegedly immoral style meant that Pompadour came to be viewed as symbolic of the government decay. <fnote>Ib id., p.95 </fnote><fnote>Mitford, Madame de Pompadour, p.118 </fnote>The emphasis on intimacy and private life symbolised by Pompadour's presence also made her unpopular among the Parisian populace in the sense that it meant the king was distracted from his royal duties. This withdrawal took several forms, an important one being Louis XV's refusal to carry out the 'Royal Touch'. The presence of a mistress meant that the king, not wanting to be hypocritical, could not take Communion and thus lost the alleged healing power to cure scrofula. <fnote>Bloch, Marc, The Royal Touch: Sacred Monarchy and Scrofula in England and France (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973), p.224 </fnote>Kaiser suggests that this breaking of public ritual is part of a wider violation of the French model of monarchy made by the king. He argues that, starting with his turnaround after the renouncement at Metz, Louis XV consistently violated the 'love contract' between the king and his people by placing his desire for personal pleasures over the needs of his populace. The importance of a lack of distinction between private and public in France is clear from the way in which all of Versailles, including the state rooms, was open to the public. The king lived, as Mitford puts it, 'like a man in a glass house, visible to, and within reach of, his subjects'. As royal mistress, then, Madame de Pompadour was the ultimate symbol of Louis' neglect of public duty. She was perceived to have made worse his natural propensity towards the pursuit of frivolous pleasures and, in doing so, thus subverted the will of the people to her own. <fnote>Kaiser, Thomas E., 'Louis le Bien-Aimé and the Rhetoric of the Royal Body', in Sara E. Melzer and Kathryn Norberg (Eds.), From the Royal to the Republican Body: Incorporating the Political in Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century France (California, L.A.; London: University of California Press, 1998), p.132 </fnote><fnote>Mitford, Madame de Pompadour, p.5 </fnote>As with the court resentment towards her bourgeois origins, the hostility aimed at Pompadour in her role as the symbolic intimate was probably part of a wider reaction to the 'feminisation' of public life. In drawing Louis XV further into his own oversexuality, Pompadour was blamed for having emasculated the king, thus making him an ineffective and inadequate leader. This gendered fear thus exacerbated the notion that she was responsible for 'all the woes of France', thus making her an increasingly unpopular figure among the Parisians from whom she had derived. <fnote>Kaiser, 'Louis le Bien-Aimé', pp.151-52 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.160 </fnote>The evidence seems to speak for itself in the debate surrounding whether Madame de Pompadour was unpopular in Paris. She was regarded with both hostility and disrespect, blamed for having made the king and court ineffective at leading the nation, and being nothing more than an 'expensive distraction for the king' from the duties he should have been performing. <fnote>Jones, Madame de Pompadour, p.98 </fnote>In drawing this debate to a close, then, can it be argued that Madame de Pompadour was 'popular in Versailles, unpopular in Paris'? The latter part of this statement is certainly supported by the image of the Marquise that has been uncovered. However, I would argue that we cannot view Pompadour as having been 'popular in Versailles'. While the king's growing affection for his mistress is abundantly in evidence, both the remaining royal family and the court seem to have held Pompadour in a distinct disregard. The court resented her encroachment into a world reserved for the nobility, and this seed grew with her attempts to instil her relatives and friends into important ministerial positions. In addition, the 'Poissonades' are an excellent example of the way in which much of Pompadour's Parisian unpopularity actually often originated from her presence in the courtly world of Versailles. As both a bourgeoisie and a woman, it would seem that Madame de Pompadour could never be popular. Her actions, in making the court more bourgeois, and her symbolic presence, as a representation of the private and intimate, subverted established principles, traditions and rituals and drew the king away from what were seen to be his royal duties. This idea suggests an interesting point of development for this essay: most of reaction to Pompadour seems to have part of wider social fears, firstly, of suspicion towards women and their dangerous political influence and secondly, of a bourgeois takeover of public life. Madame de Pompadour was fated, it seems, to suffer an unpopularity based on fears of gender and class, made real in the way in which she threatened established hierarchies and the traditional model of French monarchy. In conclusion then, to say that Madame de Pompadour was 'popular at Versailles, unpopular in Paris' is to underestimate the extent to which the hostility that surrounded her was present in, and often originated from, court life and her actions within it. 