The definition of what a "socialist" state or empire must contain in order to be defined as such is by no means straightforward. The existence of many different forms of movement and ideology, all claiming to be socialist in nature, has created debate over the features of socialism. Some claim that a socialist state is driven by its economic system, and others by its ideological base. In addition our knowledge of the exact workings of an economy and society so ancient as the Inca is perhaps lacking in some of the information one might prefer to have in order to make this judgement as to its socialist nature. However one may uncover whether Inca society shared any of the features we have now come to see as characteristic of most socialist states. To be socialist is often to be linked to the idea of banning private ownership and putting the means of production into the hands of either collective or cooperative ownership. It would appear that in the pre-Incaic era there was indeed no form of privatised land ownership, which we would recognise as such today, within Andean civilisation. Instead, communities built around kinship ties (named ayllu) collectively owned land and the responsibility for its upkeep. It is the manner in which this system altered under the Incas that creates uncertainty as to the socialist nature of the empire. Land in any territory became split up into three factions: one assigned to the Sun (that is, to religion), another to the Inca Emperor, and a third part to the commoners. It is not clear how equal in size these parts were, although most historians suggest that commoners were always given enough land that their ayllus were sustainable at a decent level. <fnote>Means, Philip Ainsworth, Ancient Civilizations of the Andes (New York; London: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1931), p.288 </fnote><fnote>D'Altroy, Terence N., The Incas (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2002), p.263 </fnote>The theory behind such a system encouraged deference to the supreme Inca in repayment for his acute generosity. As Means suggests, the Incas built the idea that 'all land in the country belonged by right... to the Inca who graciously distributed the usufruct of parts of it to the Sun and to the ayllus." This quotation is revealing of the essence of the Inca land ownership system: although ayllus were still assigned a proportion of the empire's land to work and live from, they no longer owned this land in name. In addition commoners were expected to cultivate the non-communal land belonging to the Sun and the Inca, in exchange for the promise of security that being part of the empire brought. In theory everybody in the empire, including the supreme Inca, played a role in working these lands, but in practice work carried out by such elites soon tailed off. In short, land had become state property under the Incas although it continued to be worked in the same community-sufficient manner as in pre-Incaic days. In one sense then under the Incas land ownership became more socialist in nature, as many view state ownership of apparatus as a defining feature. However if this was a socialistic empire, it was not the democratic form of socialism that is aspired to by Marx. The ordinary man had no say in the running of the Inca economy, rule was despotic and it was consistently reinforced that it was the Inca and not the nation as a whole who owned land by right. <fnote>Means, Ancient Civilizations of the Andes, p.289 </fnote>In addition, evidence has surfaced that there was actually some degree of private property ownership in Inca civilisation. As well as the Inca himself, local lords (usually former nation leaders before Inca takeover) and the Inca elites (kin of the emperor) were assigned lands again worked on their behalf by ayllu populations. D'Altroy points out, for example, that the most famous of Incaic archaeological sites including Machu Pechu, were actually estates owned by Inca elites. Baudin suggests that even within the ayllu communities some private ownership existed in the form of small domestic animals, weaponry and household utensils. Many might view such instances as negating the basic principle of socialism being shared property, and thus the idea that this was a socialistic state. <fnote>D'Altroy, The Incas, p. 277 </fnote><fnote>Baudin cited in Means, Ancient Civilizations of the Andes, p.302 </fnote>Linked to the idea of communal ownership under the Incas is the notion of economic cooperation as opposed to competition, another feature encouraging the socialistic definition of the Inca state. Reciprocity in the form of mutual obligations was a key feature in society, both among those of the same kinship networks and between those of massively different statuses. In the ayllu setting, economic cooperation focused upon a communal spirit of mutual aid. If a member was called away to carry out work on behalf of the government, his share of land was cultivated by others in his absence. Such work under the system of mutual obligation was rewarded with a debt that meant the same duty would be carried out in return at any given time. Thus, in theory at least, no person or family sharing the same status had an advantage over another, although those who claim that a large family was an innate advantage in terms of time taken to carry out work dispute this notion. Such cooperation between producers suggests that the Inca was indeed a socialistic empire, as it is the competition between workers in the market system that most socialists deplore in other social and economic forms. <fnote>Mason, J. Alden, The Ancient Civilizations of Peru (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd, 1969), p.182 </fnote>Mutual obligation extended outside the ayllu to incorporate the work carried out by commoners on land designated to the Sun and the Inca. It would appear that such work was carried out equally on the basis of reciprocity. The theory it seems was that by cultivating state and religious lands, the common peasant insured not only the stability of their empire through feeding its elite, but also of their own community through the giving of tribute. For example, the ayllu carried out work on land belonging to the Inca in exchange for the giving of the right to use their own communal land unhindered. Such a system certainly appears to carry socialist features in terms of its suggestion that all members of the empire were important to its maintenance. <fnote>Wachtel, Nathan, The Vision of the Vanquished: The Spanish Conquest of Peru through Indian Eyes 1530-1570 (Hassocks: The Harvester Press Ltd, 1977), p.72 </fnote>This links into the idea of both the economy and society being run 'for the common good', that is, the benefit of the majority. It is with this aspect that many historians have taken up issue in relation to the idea of the Inca state being a socialist one. A second key feature of the Inca economy is important here, that of redistribution. Crops cultivated on these portions of the land were sent to storehouses from which they fed the Inca state and religious elites. However, part of the mutual obligation in repayment for the work done on state and religious land was, it has been suggested, that ayllus had access to these stores at times of want. As Baudin suggests, "The granaries represented, in a socialistic state, the capital which individuals build up by their thrift". Garcilaso and Valera have both contributed to the impression that the main use of state stores was to alleviate hunger during periods of frost or famine. This has produced in historical study the notion that the Inca economy operated as something of a socialistic welfare state, ensuring that nobody went hungry by redistributing the food grown on behalf of the Inca to those who had produced it. <fnote>Means, Ancient Civilizations of the Andes, p.301 </fnote><fnote>Baudin, Louis, Daily Life in Peru: Under the Last Incas (London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd, 1961), p.108 </fnote><fnote>Murra, John Victor, The Economic Organization of the Inka State (Greenwich, Connecticut: Jai Press Inc., 1980), p.130 </fnote>It is this redistribution idea that some historians have disputed on two levels: firstly, whether in reality storehouses were used for welfare purposes, and secondly the degree to which such a system was of a centralised, state-controlled nature. For the Inca system to be considered socialist, many would argue, it must contain both of these elements of being run for the good of all, in a manner undertaking economic planning of a centralised nature. Murra has been the key voice in disputing the welfare purpose of Inca storehouses claiming that historians would have been unable to speak of the "socialist Inca empire" without the creation of this idea. Instead he suggests that the hundreds of references to the use of stores for primarily military and governmental purposes, to feed and clothe warriors and those running the Inca state (with religious stores being used for ceremonial purposes) negate the few, late ones that exist putting forward the welfare idea. <fnote>Ib id., p.130 </fnote><fnote>Ib id., p.128 </fnote>To move onto the second part of the redistribution debate, were storehouses part of a system of centralised economic planning? Most recent historians seem to suggest they were not, for example Morris suggests that the notion of Inca state-controlled welfare 'dislocates welfare provision from its real role in local communities." He argues that most redistribution was carried out at a level well below that of the Inca state, the most important being locally between different ecozones. This is because, referring back to Murra, state stores were generally used for other purposes. The apparent lack of a centralised economic plan for the use of storehouses as welfare might then render the idea of a socialist Inca empire inaccurate, but it does make sense in the context of traditional ayllu self-sufficiency. The one area where one might perhaps argue centralised planning did exist was in the programme of mass movement of communities around the empire, known as mitimaes. This was undertaken for various reasons including the spread of Inca culture to a wide degree and the prevention of insurrection. Such a programme does carry with it a suggestion of social engineering at a state level and thus perhaps provides some weight for the idea of the Inca "socialist" empire. <fnote>Morris, Craig, 'Storage, supply, and redistribution in the economy of the Inka state' in John V. Murra, Nathan Wachtel, and Jacques Revel (eds.) Anthropological History of Andean Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), p.61 </fnote>Organised labour has featured in many other states that historians have defined as socialist in nature and here the Inca empire again shares some characteristics. On top of the work carried out on land owned by the Sun and the Inca, ayllu members also contributed to public work through the membership of mit'a. This was a rotational system that called upon men to provide for the empire's needs by supplying the army, messengers and labourers for roads and bridges, to name a few examples. The obligation to enter mit'a when required was another part of the tribute paid in reciprocating the giving of land for communal use, a sort of labour tax in other words. Unlike with the storehouse system, the mit'a were, it appears, a successful form of state organised labour and thus in this feature at least the Inca empire has a socialistic characteristic. <fnote>Mason, The Ancient Civilizations of Peru, pp.183-4 </fnote><fnote>Rostworowski de Diez Canseco, Maria, History of the Inca Realm (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), p.183 </fnote>Lastly one must consider the idea of classlessness, something many would deem the most essential characteristic of a socialist state. This it is certain did not exist. Although obligations were mutual and links between 'classes' strong, stratification was clearly visible and it is unclear whether there was much opportunity for social mobility. As D'Altroy indicates, with Inca dominion came the imposition of their many noble statuses and ethnic rankings. Inca elites were divided between traditional royal descendent kin and those who had risen in status due to performance in war, for example. Although in theory all ayllu members were of same economic status with their communal ownership of land, there still existed layers of ranking, for example those with large families held a high social status. With such a clear system of uneven stratification I would argue that we can never really see the Inca empire as a socialist one because the 'obligation' of the commoner would always outweigh in actual hard labour that given by the elite. <fnote>D'Altroy, The Incas, p.177 </fnote><fnote>Mason, The Ancient Civilizations of Peru, p.193 </fnote>In drawing this debate to a close then I would argue that there are indeed certain features of the Inca economy and social organisation that reflect socialistic ideas, for example the principle of mutual obligation and thus the lack of competition, the organisation of the labour force and the great social engineering projects undertaken. The notion of economic cooperation through the feature of reciprocity within the ayllu in particular seems to have been successful in avoiding the creation of the market system of competition that socialists so despise. However there are other, arguably more important features of a socialist state in which the Inca empire was distinctly lacking. The existence of such visible status stratification seems to me to negate the idea: communal ownership should, in the socialistic sense, result in equality of status between all but here it does not. The overall Inca ownership of lands means that real communal ownership could not be achievable. Equally it seems relatively clear that systems of welfare support did not exist on the whole at a state level. Instead continued ayllu self-sufficiency, in the manner accustomed in Andean civilisation, appears to have been the norm in supporting those in need. Lastly it does not seem that obligations at the state level were truly mutual. While the common man cultivated land of the Inca's behalf, it was the community and not the state that guaranteed their survival. I would argue then that the description of the Inca state as a "socialistic empire" is only accurate in part. The empire seems to have contained some of the features but not the over-arching ideology that would be required in order for it to have been a socialist one. 