Tort is a civil wrong which sanctions any party that has suffered damage from that wrong to claim for compensation. The law of tort basically deals with providing justice to any person who has been harmed by the act of others. Law of tort basically protects both the buying and no-buying consumers. Below are three situations of negligence which falls under the law of tort In the first situation, if Albert were to sue Barry, he would be appealing to the House of Lords based on the grounds of negligent misstatement which cause financial losses. Upon advising Albert regarding this matter, we must see what constitutes the duty of care for negligent misstatement. In Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v. Heller and Partners Ltd., 1963, Lord Reid limited claims in negligence to only few cases since negligent words may have a greater impact than negligent acts.  <fnote>"A reasonable man, knowing that he was being trusted or that his skill or judgement was being relied on, would I think, have three courses open to him. He could keep silent or decline to give the information; or he could give an answer with clear qualification that he accepted no responsibility for it; or he could simply answer without any such qualification." </fnote>First, the circumstances in which the advice was given must be in a professional manner. However, the advice was given to Albert during a lunch break at a conference, which indicates that it was just a social event. Advises should not be given 'off the cuff' but must be on business occasion and accompanied with proper checks on relevant data, none of which Albert has done. Secondly, there must be proof that the claimant knows that the advice is reliable. The decisions made in Mutual Life Citizen Assurance Co V. Evatt suggest that defendant holds no liability unless he was in the business of giving advice. Barry may be a director of Dunmore Ltd., but he is not a professional person to receive advice from. Albert should have sought advises from professionals who acquire specialist knowledge and rightful qualifications on the matter. <fnote>The majority held that; duty applied to defendants who were in the business of giving advice or information or who claimed that they had the requisite expertise. </fnote>Finally, the speaker knows that the advice is reliable and so he undertakes the responsibility to ensure that it is accurate. Albert may argue on this circumstance but, there is a possibility that Dunmore Ltd. is financially stable at the period when the conversation takes place. Again, Albert should have consulted a professional to find out the financial position of Dunmore Ltd. On these accounts, it is therefore not reasonably foreseeable for Albert to rely on the statement. Besides that, the Hedley Byrne theory stressed that in order for the defendant to owe a duty of care, a 'special relationship' must exist. Clearly, there is no 'special relationship' for instance, stating that Barry would undertake any responsibility for his statement. Therefore, it is advisable for Albert to have prove that Barry owed a duty of care in order to claim compensation. <fnote>Where the claimant could reasonably rely on the skill and care of the defendant in making statement and resulted in the defendant undertaking responsibility for the accuracy of the statement made. </fnote>The second case is yet another case of negligent misstatement. Like any other cases, it is first important to ascertain whether Jim owes Mrs Smith a duty of care. First, it may be regarded that the Campus Law Centre is not a proper place to give a valid legal advice. It is more of a place to study and get information on law ideas. Even if it is rather in a business-like environment, it is not sensible for Mrs Smith to rely on Jim without him giving proper facts and figures on the issue. Similar to the first situation, Jim, being a lecturer is not the right person for Mrs Smith to seek legal advice on the matter (Mutual Life Citizen Assurance Co V. Evatt). Mrs. Smith should have consulted a professional who is well informed on the issue and who would have realised any changes in the law. These two points proves to say that no duty of care is owed by Jim. Arguably, the minority view in Mutual Life Citizen Assurance Co V. Evatt was that Jim, the person giving advice owed a duty of care. This is because, Mrs. Smith made it clear that she needed legal advice on her insurance policy and Jim had acted upon it by giving his advice. Based on the proceeding of Esso Petroleum Co. V. Mardon, it is foreseen that Mrs. Smith would sufficiently rely on Jim's advice and that Jim owes Mrs. Smith a duty of care. <fnote>In their Lordship's opinion the duty could arise when an enquirer consulted a businessman in the course of his business and made it plain that he was seeking considered advice and intended to act on that advice. </fnote><fnote>In Esso Petroleum Co. V. Mardon, although the defendant were not in the business of giving advice, it was significant that they were experienced and had special knowledge and skill in estimating the petrol throughput at a filling station, whereas the plaintiff did not. </fnote>Moreover, a 'special relationship' may said to exist in this second situation because the information given by Jim is knowingly communicated to Mrs. Smith for a specific purpose, that is, regarding her insurance policy (Caparo Industries Plc. V. Dickman, 1990). Hence, there is some extent of duty owed by Jim but it may not be a wise idea for Mrs. Smith to incur money on the legal cost considering that chances of winning are not remarkably high. <fnote>Lord Bridge said that, "the adviser must know that his statement is to be communicated to the plaintiff and the plaintiff would be likely to rely on it." </fnote>In the third situation however, is an argument of financial and economic loss suffered by Percy arising from George's negligent act. First, we must not assume that George had been driving negligently. The fact that he veered across the road may be as a result of a damaged road with potholes or even a malfunctioned brake. Chances of George driving negligently may be high but there could well be other possibilities that cause the accident. Hence, it is important that Percy have proper evidence to prove that George was driving negligently before filing for a case against George. If considering that George was in negligence, prior to advising Percy with this matter, it is important to establish, as a matter of law, that George owed him duty of care. The 'neighbourhood principle' laid by Lord Atkin's in the Donoghue v. Stevenson (1932) suggests that Percy is directly affected by George's act by flooding Percy's field with petrol and the harm suffered was reasonably foreseeable because it is expected to happen if George drives in a reckless manner. Thus, given the fact that George committed the negligent act, according to the Donoghue v. Stevenson (1932), George does owe Percy a duty of care. <fnote>Lord Atkin said "you must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which u can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour. Who the in law is my neighbour? The answer seems to be those persons who are so closely affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in my contemplation as being so affected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called into question." </fnote>In this third situation, it is recognised that both financial and economic loss are involved. Therefore, any claim against expected future profits that unable to be made because of the state of the land is purely an economic loss (Spartan Steel & Alloys Ltd. V. Martin & co.). However, it is noted that the loss on future profits were consequence of the damage done and hence recoverable. But then again, the inability to make future profits could be caused by the changes in weather, natural disaster or even negligence by Percy himself. For these reasons, it is likely that the House of Lords would consider that the damage is too remote for Percy to claim compensation. Furthermore, it may be too remote because of the 'floodgate arguments' which may open the door to a host of similar claims (Weller & Co. V. Foot & mouth disease research institute, 1996). As far as Percy could go is, to claim compensation on his financial loss, that is, the damaged crops that were ready for harvesting at the time of the accident. Percy may seek other alternative in claiming compensation. Since George may be working with a company and unlikely to be a sole-trader, it is arguable that, referring to the Century Insurance Co. V. Northern Ireland Road transport Board 1942, George's employer could be vicariously liable on the negligent act of George. <fnote>Vicarious liability is a system whereby an employer is liable for the torts of employees committed in the course of employment. </fnote>In conclusion, in any tort, be it negligent act or misstatement, a duty of care must be established first. However it is not worth the time and money to file for a legal dispute in courts. Lord Woolf said, "The costs of resolving a dispute often being far in excess of the amount issue. Hence, only the very rich and the very poor (thanks to Legal Aid) could afford to litigate. The great majority of the public could not afford to do so." Other alternatives should be taken and settled out of court. 