<heading>Statement of Intent</heading>This report will critically advise on the proposed Organisational changes put forward by the Operations Director at CFS Insurance. It is the intention of this piece to identify key stakeholders in the proposal, analyse the potential risks posed to the organisation - and strategies for management. Aims and Objectives are provided alongside a project implementation strategy that suggests a new IS provision, exploration of the re-engineering and standardization of processes and provides a timescale for implementation that complements advice on the financing of the project. <heading>Project Stakeholders</heading>Identification of project stakeholders is essential in determining the aims and objectives of the project so as to satisfy all those concerned with the success or failure of the project. Here major stakeholders are identified, and strategies for their management put forward. <heading>Employees / Trade Unions</heading>Staff were dissatisfied with levels of recognition and work pressure management following the previous changes with the merging of internal areas of insurance areas. It is imperative that this project has the support of staff on an individual basis, and in turn the support of the Trade Unions that represent 60% of the employees (and also have a significant financial stake as shareholders). The proposed changes will affect 78% of the current staff's job roles. With the large influence of Trade Unions compounding the potential affect of a badly managed implementation employees are deemed to have high stake, and a high level of influence on success. Therefore it is the intention to certainly inform fully with the option of negotiation and possibly participation. <heading>Customers</heading>The existing customers that CFS provides for will have an indirect interest in the undertaking of this project. As CFS strives to provide 'excellent service to customers...' it is of high importance that this strategic objective is not compromised by the activities of this project and that customers do not remove their 'stake' due to this. The customer has a low interest in the project and a relatively low level of influence on the success of the implementation. Therefore informing the customer is the strategy most likely to be implemented if needed. <heading>High Street Agents</heading>With reference to CFS's strategic objective again - '...first-class support for our high-street agents', it is again imperative that a compromise is not reached. The high street agents have a relatively high level of interest in not suffering a reduced level of service whilst the project is undertaken. Whilst this may not be detrimental to the project as such, it could have an adverse affect on the relationship with the company and should therefore be managed. The high-street agents have a high interest in the projects successful and timely completion, but a low level of influence on the success of the projects completion. Therefore the high-street agents shall be consulted so as to satisfy their needs throughout the project. <heading>Shareholders</heading>The shareholders will be concerned with the success of the project so as to realise the financial benefits which completion would bring. As the shareholders are essentially investing the finance for the project a Return on Investment will be critical for maintenance of their stake. Therefore any adverse affect on the business through the carrying out of this project will have to be averted, and risk kept to a minimum as requested by the Operations Director. The Shareholders, who in turn shall make their wishes clear to the directors should be managed as a stakeholder with a high level of interest in the completion of the project and the expected gains, but with a relatively low level of impact on the direct success of the project. Therefore the shareholders shall be consulted about the proposed changes to the core operations of the company. <heading>Aim & Objectives</heading><heading>Aim</heading><quote>'To change CSF Insurance's organisational structure to enable the company to provide multi-disciplinary insurance services (except Life) within regional groups so as to increase operational flexibility and increase competitive benefit via savings made'</quote><heading>Objectives </heading>To have successfully created and trained ten regional teams, where high-street agent and customer opinion dictates that the quality of service has improved by at least 10% within 3 months of implementation date (live date). To have implemented an IT System to handle the new, varying, nature of employee work and to attain at least 80% positive feedback from staff. To empower workers in a learning culture leading to at least a 95% positive job satisfaction amongst employees within at least 2 months of the project live date. To have increased the average claims handled per person by at least 15% within 3 months of the completion of project implementation. To impact positively by at least 10% on overall turnover as a result of the higher operational flexibility provided by the new structure. To have altered the physical layout of the office to accommodate the ten regional teams and the life insurance team as individual entities in an environment geared for group-work by the beginning of the undertaking of the new method of working. <heading>Scope</heading>The project intends to affect the nature of 78% of the current staff's workloads. This change encompasses all areas of operational activity within the company and will require massive effort in terms of staff training, IT infrastructure and day-to-day project management so as to maintain the current level of service over the transitional period of time. The project will affect all areas of insurance except Life, and will require training for all levels of staff involved in each sector to ensure an overall appreciation of all insurance for each region. <heading>Evaluation Technique</heading>The project scope describes the areas that will be affected predominantly by the changes proposed. In order to determine whether the project has been successful, it is necessary to determine a system by which to measure success. Each of the objectives can be quantified and surveyed using focus groups for the more intangible aspects such as the level of empowerment felt by workers, whereas analysis of sales figures and work-rates will yield the statistics required to deliver a verdict on the success of the other more quantitative objectives. <heading>Risk Management</heading>Despite these individual strategies, there needs to an overall policy for risk review, so as to identify new risks, quantify them, responds to them and indeed to monitor and control them. It is proposed that the risks are monitored by the project steering group at every meeting so as to prepare for the eventualities for new risks emerging throughout implementation or indeed at another point in the project. What follows is a list of the direct risks posed to the project, or indeed to the organisation as a result of undertaking the project, alongside advice on the management of such risks. <heading>Staff Resistance to Change (Direct to Organisation & Direct to Project)</heading><heading>Nature of Risk</heading>New Working Practice not welcomed by staff, who become resistant to change and potentially involve Trade Unions <heading>Probability of Impact</heading>Lot of training required, motivation of staff to undertake increased learning may be difficult. Anticipate a medium level of occurrence <heading>Level of Impact</heading>Potentially a very high level of impact. Project is mainly based on staff carrying out new roles effectively. <heading>Risk Management</heading>This risk can be classified as 'Fatal' and therefore must be avoided for project success. Management strategy will be based on experience from previous implementations of strategy on operations. Whereas before staff felt their efforts were not recognised, staff will be fully informed and consulted as to the nature of the new working practices and the way that the implementation of the project shall be carried out. Staff shall also be involved in training aspects of scheme, increasing their empowerment and ideally job satisfaction <heading>Detrimental Quality of Service (Direct to Organisation with impact on Project)</heading><heading>Nature of Risk</heading>Substandard service offered to customers and high-street agents during project implementation damages company reputation and loses further custom <heading>Probability of Impact</heading>If organisational change is not managed effectively, high probability as staff would be under-trained in new positions possessing not enough volume flexibility to cope with the new operations being undertaken. <heading>Level of Impact</heading>Staff inability to meet the demands of the business would have a high level of impact on business operations - meaning the work would not be completed at all, or indeed would be completed to a significantly lower standard than required. <heading>Risk Management</heading>Realisation of this risk could prove fatal to the organisation. A bigger risk is the loss of direct customers, as high-street agents are held to a contract * (assumption stated here), albeit that the contract may not be renewed. Risk is to be managed by using a detailed planning technique to ensure an adequate amount of working hours to meet current business needs is met. Management will be designated to ensure that the work is undertaken using the current systems, and that training and office improvements are run alongside these day to day operations. <heading>Poorly Implemented IS (Direct to Organisation & Direct to Project)</heading><heading>Nature of Risk</heading>Poorly analysed, designed or implemented IT facility adversely affects ability of staff to work under new conditions, leading to disillusionment and dramatic loss of productivity <heading>Probability of Impact</heading>Anticipate low occurrence of risk. Dramatic though the impact may be, effective management of risk should reduce probability of impact. <heading>Level of Impact</heading>Staff inability to process claims, provide any level of service to customer would be hugely detrimental to operations of company, and success of project <heading>Risk Management</heading>Realisation of this risk would have a dramatic effect on operations within CFS. As such, contractors are recommended to be managed at a top level, and participation discussed and monitored at steering group meetings. Comprehensive testing during the training phase is necessary, and a copy of existing systems can provide a backup strategy should the new IS provision fail. <heading>Project Implementation Strategy</heading>It is important that CSF maintain the elements to their service that are working, and indeed attracting customers. It is not the intention of this report to send all the employees 'back to the classroom' to learn about the various types of insurance. Instead, the project implementation strategy will concentrate on existing knowledge dissemination, and standardisation of processes so as to minimise the volume of new concepts that staff have to deal with. <heading>Project Timescale</heading>The pace of change can be refined when the results of the pilot implementation become apparent. It is the initial recommendation of this report that six months are set aside for the duration of this project. As the suggested change is so large, and affects so many staff, adequate time needs to be set aside to ensure the success of this business-critical project is not compromised merely through haste. Conversely, a project that takes too long can lead to issues regarding staff turnover, higher vulnerability to adverse interest rate fluctuation as well as disillusionment and loss of focus throughout. To counter, it is the recommendation of this report to create a steering group in order to maintain the project focus over the six months, respond to newly occurring risks and problems and if necessary to take decisive action using a 'Stop-Hold-Select-Go' philosophy. <heading>Pilot Phase</heading>Before undertaking such a project in full, it is essential that some experience is gained of the potential problems, as well as justifying fully the true viability of such an organisational restructuring. It is proposed that a pilot study is carried out in a test environment where a group is trained and committed to a particular region, working in parallel alongside existing staff. By carrying out the pilot phase of the project, the following particulars should become clearer: <list>The problems that will have to be overcome in a full-scale implementationThe information requirements of workers in their new rolesThe time-scales for implementation on a larger scaleProcedures and techniques for training in IT and insurance-types</list>If the pilot phase is wholly unsuccessful then project abandonment is a route that must be considered by the steering group for the project. <heading>Strategy & Leadership</heading>Existing team leaders are assumed to be in their positions for their leadership skills and product knowledge in their particular area. These members of staff will be core to the training of existing lower level staff members, and due to their leadership skills will be in an ideal situation to share their knowledge in workshops with other staff. These staff will also become critical in the development of a knowledge management system (alongside external consultants) to ease the knowledge burden on existing 'shop-floor' staff. It is also intended to involve these section leaders in the standardization of insurance administration across the various types before the new processes are re-engineered and presented to the workforce. It is essential to gain 'buy-in' from the staff that will be affected. Therefore the timetable for training and the work levels that will be expected concurrently must be negotiated so as to ensure the staff members are comfortable with the change. In terms of top-level empowerment, a steering group is to be setup to head the project. he steering group is to consist of those who have become involved in the process re-engineering (the 'experts' in the new system) alongside senior level support from the Project Manager (chairing the group), the Operations Manager, the Operations Director, the IT Manager, and representatives from select areas of the company as and when they are in anticipation of, or indeed in the process of being affected. <heading>Employee Support</heading>As discussed earlier, processes need to be examined by a core group consisting of innovative staff members and section leaders so as to determine a methodology to reduce the knowledge burden on the 'shop-floor' staff. A clear thought process behind the new job roles will yield significant efficiency benefits as well as reducing the learning curve required before the company can start reaping the benefits of the change. Support for employees is intended to primarily come from other employees and a close knit team that works around one regional leader. The regional leader will be chosen for their inter-personal and efficiency and will not bear any relation to the length of time that he/she has been working for the company. The layout of the office and the new culture of the organisation will embrace knowledge sharing and constant learning in process. Finally, IT will play a major role as the enabler of change via support for employees by providing two main interfaces. The first will be a system that allows consistency between different insurance types, displaying only a change in the context of the operation of the system. The user will then only have to be trained on one system to facilitate the various different types of information that may be required for each. Secondly, the user will be presented with a Knowledge Management System, accessible from all levels of user with read/write access for all. This will allow for the sharing of important information so that staff can maintain their learning even when they are carrying out the business processes. The intention is that the benefits will continue to be seen from the changes on a constant basis in the future, not just on the basis of this one major change. <heading>Contractor Participation</heading>It is proposed to involve contractors in several core areas of negotiating such organisational change. It is assumed that development knowledge for systems such as ERP and KMS do not exist within the IT department at present. As such it is recommended that ERP does not necessarily need to be created from scratch, but an outsourced package from a vendor should be sought alongside training and support facilities. In terms of KMS, it is recommended that this be kept in-house utlilising 'Lotus Notes' or another such recommended product with support from the current IT provision. As processes need to be standardized for the learning curve reduction discussed earlier, it is proposed to consult business experts externally in order to iron out inefficiencies and adapt a policy of activities that will maximise the workload that can be managed under the new system. This is the ideal opportunity to get the processes refined and correct before staff are trained. <heading>Staff Participation & Trade Union Involvement</heading>It is vital that the project commands buy-in from all levels of staff so as to invite enthusiasm over the new processes, and so that trade unions feel no need to intervene in this positive learning experience for staff. Both Trade Unions and Staff have been identified as key stakeholders to the project and their approval is needed for the project to be a success. Consultation with staff on the new processes may well yield the best results. Bottom-up philosophy, especially with IT literate staff as we embrace the digital era can have profound effects on operational activity. In terms of staff empowerment, a largely consultative approach should be taken. Employees have a lot to offer in terms of tacit knowledge and experience, but a natural resistance to change should not cloud the true potential of this project. <heading>Project Planning and Control</heading>The project should be divided into 'stages' with a length of two weeks. After these stages are completed, a meeting of the steering group should take place to analyse the new position the project is in as a result of the completed stage and to exercise control if time or financial resources are not on schedule. The following Gantt chart specifies which activities should take place throughout the proposed 24 weeks. As can be seen from the chart, the project has been divided into 10 work packages that represent the key milestones in the project. Each of these packages can be described as complex, and may contain multiple simple work packages within. <table/>It is important to introduce the group concept at an early stage, before learning takes place. A culture of learning needs to be created within CFS so as to negotiate the steep learning curve employees will undertake before the project actually goes live in stage ten. Most activities will begin at week 6 (stage 3) in terms of system development and group formation. Many theorists from Organisational Management state groups are an effective method of fostering the learning culture, and with the level of knowledge sharing that is going to need to take place, particularly in early stages of the project going live, firm relationships between staff are vital. This system is intended to be quite heavily revisable - for example if the company feels that dedicating more than two weeks to the pilot phase would be desirable then other activities can be duly shifted. This is to be the responsibility of the steering group to decide. Similarly the process re-engineering may require more time dependent on the level of changes required and by no means should such critical areas of the project be rushed when in such an early stage. <heading>Planning and Control of Expenditure </heading>As discussed previously, the ten work packages involved can be described as being part of a complex system of activity. Work packages such as training will subdivide into many areas which may spawn further work packages within. It is beyond the scope of this report to quantify the interior details of routines such as ERP and KMS creation/implementation and training. It is proposed that budgets are assigned to each work package, and evaluated by comparing the earned value of the activity to the cost of the work completed. The Steering Group, meeting on a regular basis can benchmark at select points within the work packages to intervene if costs are spiralling. It is important to create a culture throughout the management of the project that encompasses constant monitoring and review of the progress of the work packages. These must then be acted upon in an iterative fashion. Overhead costs incurred directly attributable to the project shall be booked to the project budget, alongside staff overtime if training needs require. Negotiation of contracts with IS and BPR Consultants shall be left to Operations Director and IT Manager. Time and Materials directly associated to the project must be agreed by the steering group, and will be taken from specific budgets dependent on the purpose. The pilot phase will be budgeted as a proportion of the entire proposed budget for the project, but will most likely identify and make clear what these budgets should be set at in full scale implementation. <heading>Conclusion</heading>To conclude, recommendations are made for a successful implementation of the changes proposed by the Operations Director. Great care needs to be taken not to compromise the current level of service to the customer / high-street agent so as not to breach CFS's main strategic objective A span of approximately 6 months should be used as a timeline for the project, but by no means should haste to persist with such a schedule negatively impact on the quality of the work behind the transition. This project should be seen as a key opportunity to introduce reasoned process re-engineering to reduce the learning burden on employees throughout. A steering group should be created from key members of training, operations and IT senior staff, alongside input from shop-floor representatives to employ strategic control on a project of such magnitude External knowledge is essential for a successful implementation especially with regard to the ERP creation/implementation and process re-engineering provided Knowledge dissemination is one of the most critical areas of the project to get right, and as such sufficient time and attention should be focussed on support for employees in their new role Trade Unions / Employees need to be dealt with in a much more thoughtful manner than previous strategies have been implemented. The pilot phase should cast further light on the task in hand in terms of the change required Successful implementation of a KMS and ERP capable of new processes of work should be viewed as a critical success factor for the project. Teams should be formed early to achieve maximum benefit as prescribed by OM literature. Training and fostering of internal relationships will maximise the sociological gains of the work as well as increasing the ability to form the learning culture required for this change. <heading>Critical Appraisal</heading>Two main areas of project management are given focus in this critical appraisal. The first topic to be discussed is that of risk. The operations director wished particular attention to be paid to risk aversion in such sensitive change. Within this report, risk has been categorised according to a vague scale of probability that should in no way be relied upon as a factual measure due to the lack of real research. In reality, uncertainty plays a less significant but still as vital role. In Project Management literature, the 'Failure mode and effects approach'. The uncertainty in terms of the scale of changes required to fully implement the proposals is relatively immeasurable, but with further research the level of uncertainty about the level of risk posed can become more accurate. Uncertainty can be classified by two main measures - the likelihood that a negative change will occur in terms of the risk, and the impact that such a variation would have on the company and project. Within this report, the risk of staff rejecting the proposed increase in workload and learning requirements was posed as medium occurrence and high impact. The Risk Significance matrix states that such a risk could prove fatal to the project and as a result should be avoided. However, in this particular instance avoidance simply is not an option. Instead it has become visible that mitigation of the risk is a necessity for project success. Project Management literature should not be viewed as a static medium. It is a series of concepts that must be adapted to the management strategy present. At CFS, change needs to be embraced by staff, and shying away from this risk would signal the wrong message. Planning and control of activities was highlighted using a Gantt chart, but after the recommended pilot phase suggested, sufficient projections could perhaps be extrapolated to create a form of network analysis upon the work packages. The scale of resources can be more expressly defined using such analysis and a more overall picture of the resources required for implementation within the company will become apparent. A Critical Path diagram represents each work package as a British Standard as shown in the image below. By forming links of nodes with this format, calculations can be carried out to: ascertain the quickest route through which to conduct operations whereby the project can be carried out in a shorter time period. Other risks, particularly those of an economic nature depend upon the relative short-termed nature of the project (i.e. fluctuation of interest rates on variable rate loan capital). <table/>Significant research will be required to enhance the accuracy of the analysis provided by a critical path diagram. It is important to define the notion of float, particularly as dispensation for delayed activities was not clearly displayed in the report. By assigning activities a sufficient amount of float that can be used as a benchmark to define the packages urgency then the steering control can exercise far more informed strategic and operational control on the project. It becomes important to appreciate the context of the activities to be undertaken. The balance should be struck between resources and time so as to provide an optimal return to the investor - the project manager. 