<heading>Referral information Source of referral and a summary of key information</heading>The patient was brought into hospital (A&E) by ambulance six weeks ago, following a fall in the street. <heading>History All relevant information gathered from the patient about the presenting illness, co-existing problems, current treatment, significant past medical history and the social and family background. The patient's view of the nature of the problem and their expectations for treatment. </heading><heading>PC </heading>Patient had a total of three falls in one day, after the third fall was brought into hospital. <heading>HPC </heading>Had started to have falls two weeks prior to admission. Associated with the fall there was no loss of consciousness or dizziness. There was no weakness down one side of the body, or any headaches prior to fall. No urinary incontinence during fall. No fits were associated with the fall. <heading>PMH </heading>The patient stated that they had not been admitted to hospital previously and had not undergone any operations. The patient does have hypertension and this is controlled by medication. The patient did state that three months ago his GP told him that he had suffered a stroke, but he was not aware that this had happened until informed by his GP. Mr  does not suffer with diabetes, Ischaemic heart disease, Asthma. He has not had epilepsy, myocardial infarction or rheumatic fever. <heading>Family History </heading>Mother died aged 73 cause not known. Father was a miner and died of emphysema. His brother also suffers with hypertension. <heading>Social History </heading>The patient lives alone in a terraced house, he can manage the stairs with some assistance now that an additional stair rail has been fitted. His wife died in  and he has no children. His brother, cousin and neighbours provide social support and help out with domestic tasks. Mr  is a retired postal worker. Smoking - 57 year pack history although has not smoked since admission to hospital. Alcohol - minimal intake 0-1 unit/week <heading>Medication </heading>Asasantin T PO combination of aspirin and dipyridamole taken as secondary prevention of ischaemic stroke and transient ischaemic attacks. Demeclocycline 300mg PO taken for hyponatraemia resulting from inappropriate secretion of ADH (anti diuretic hormone) The patient also has a history of anti-hypertensive medication. <heading>Allergies</heading>Mr  has no known allergies <heading>Systems Review</heading>CVS No chest pain, oedema or palpitations RS Cough present , productive sputum not seen, No Haemoptysis, wheeze, or dyspnoea GIT No Nausea and Vomiting, Significant weight loss (couldn't be quantified), No abdominal pain, Bowel movements normal and no bleeding PR. GUT No urinary problems CNS Some confusion, No headaches, blackouts or dizziness, The patient did seem depressed. <heading>Analysis of history The most likely single cause of the presentation, other possible causes and reasons for these choices. The findings to be looked for on physical examination to help decide the cause.</heading>At the present moment there is no single likely cause as recurrent falls in the elderly can occur for many reasons. Mr  could be having : Transient ischaemic attacks (TIA) this is a possibility as smoking is a risk factor. The falls could be cardiogenic in origin, such as atrial fibrillation which would mean that there is a decreased amount of circulating oxygen in the blood. The patients antihypertensive medication may be too high causing him to become hypotensive, low blood pressure can cause falls especially when rising from sitting. Mr  may be suffering with poor coordination and balance ether due to a cerebellar lesion or a neuromuscular condition. As the patient is on a drug to correct his electrolyte imbalance this could be the origin as his falls, hyponatraemia can cause a fall. Other causes of falls which are not suggested by the history but may need to be checked are poor vision, poor fitting shoes, drugs, alcohol, epilepsy and Parkinson's disease. For this patient upon examination, particular signs to be looked for are irregular pulse, low blood pressure (supine and standing), weakness and loss of sensation; coordination and oedema which may help elicit the cause. Examinations to be carried out are a full general examination and a full neurological examination. <heading>Physical examination and mental state examination Highlight the findings most relevant to your clinical problem solving by underlining them</heading><heading>General Examination</heading>The patient was a thin elderly gentleman who was lying comfortably in bed. Initial observations noted a walking stick and frame beside the bed. There was no Urinary catheter, sputum pot or nebuliser visible. The patient had a productive cough and a visible graze to the right hand. <heading>Inspection </heading>The hands were of normal temperature with a slight tremor. There was bruising to both hands and some obvious wasting of the muscle. The pulse was 84 bpm regular and bounding. The BP was taken lying down and was 152/76 (it was not possible to take a BP with the patient standing up although it should be noted this is of significance in someone presenting with a fall). There was no evidence of jaundice in the sclera but pallor consistent with anaemia was noted in the conjunctiva. The tongue was very dark indicating central cyanosis. No lympadenopathy or pedal oedema. The score of the mini mental examination was 5 It was unfortunately not possible to carry out a full neurological examination as the patients consent could not be obtained. <heading>Analysis of history and examination Reasons for your choice of the cause of the patient's problem(s) and any other cause that still needs to be considered at this stage</heading>Positive signs noted upon examination were pallor in the conjunctiva, this suggest anaemia which is a common cause for a fall in the elderly. The pulse was regular and so atrial fibrillation is not the cause in this case. Postural hypotension is still a possible cause as this could not be tested properly in the examination. The mini mental examination demonstrated that this patient was very confused and possible was suffering with dementia, it should however be noted that this is very crude test especially in someone who has been in hospital for some time. Most people lose a sense of what day it is when admitted for long periods. Multi infarct dementia can not be ruled out. Significantly the patient was cachexic, with a persistent productive cough and central cyanosis. In light of a 57 pack year history a carcinoma of the lung could be present. There is a small cell carcinoma of the lung which is associated with the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH (anti diuretic hormone). These tumours produce ADH which causes water retention and a subsequent electrolyte imbalance which could lead to falls. This diagnosis fits well with the history and examination findings. <heading>Formulation of the patient's problem(s) Encapsulate this in physical, psychological and social terms (the triple diagnosis)</heading>Possible diagnoses for this patient: Anaemia Postural hypotension , the patients anti-hypotensive medication was too high further aggravating the falls Transient ischaemic attacks and multi infarct dementia Lung carcinoma and SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH) Following further investigation, the patient was identified to have a small cell carcinoma of the lung, secreting ADH and causing an electrolyte imbalance. The cancer had already spread to the mediastinum and pericardium and so the patient was not suitable for surgery. Mr  was aware of his diagnosis but would not acknowledge the severity of the condition. He was very distressed being kept in hospital and wished to have no treatment for the cancer but would have treatment for his electrolyte imbalance. As Mr  wishes to go home to die, at present he cannot cope alone and so would need a palliative care package to be arranged in the community. Even though this may be difficult to achieve it is probably the best course of action for the patient as he will most likely continue to become more distressed and depressed in the hospital. <heading>Management Use the framework of RAPRIOP to structure your proposed management. Refer to the guidelines to the writing of portfolio cases for the details of the issues to be addressed under each heading.</heading>The patient needs treatment for his anaemia and close monitoring of his electrolyte imbalance. His anti-hypertensive medication should be reduced to prevent further aggravation of the falls. Palliative care package should be arranged Every effort to allow Mr  to go home as he is very distressed in hospital should be made; social services may be of some help with this problem. <heading>Impact on your learning Describe what you have learnt from this case</heading>This case has given me experience of taking a history and examining a confused patient, it has introduced a condition which I was not aware of previously and shown me that not every patient will want all medical interventions possible. 