<heading>Introduction:</heading>In the literature, academics hold different views of what is happening in the world economy, some researchers believed that strong globalisation is taking place and a notion of a 'globalized' world has been accepted (Ohmae, 1995; Reich 1991); while others suggested that although national economies may in some ways be highly integrated, it is not so much a global world but a more internationalized one. Moreover, there is a great debate on the implications of globalisation (or internationalization) for the role of nation states. On one hand, some globalists indicated that '...in terms of global economy, nation states have become little more than bit actors' (Ohmae, 2000:207); on the other hand, people supposed that nation states have played and will continue to play a key role in the global economic integration process (Weiss, 1997). In order to critically evaluate Ohmae's statement, this essay will firstly focus on the extent of economic globalisation, how far has economic globalisation gone? And then the second part will provide the evaluation of the impacts of globalisation on the power of nation states. A conclusion and further considerations will be given lastly. <heading>How Far Has Economic Globalisation Gone? </heading><heading>The Globalist Position</heading>According to Radice (1999:154), 'globalisation' is most commonly defined as 'a process through which an increasing proportion of economic, social and cultural transactions take place directly or indirectly between parties in different countries'. Although people do agree something is undoubtedly happening, academics hold different opinions of what precisely is happening in the globalisation debate. The globalists argued that we now live in a borderless world in which the 'nation' is no longer relevant (Dicken, 2003). For example, Ohmae (1995: inside front cover) stated that 'Today's global economy is genuinely borderless. Information, capital and innovation flow all over the world at top speed, enabled by technology and fuelled by consumers' desires for access to the best and least expensive products'. Reich (1991: 3) claimed that 'We are living through a transformation that will rearrange the politics and economics of the coming century. There will be no national products or technologies, no national corporations, no national industries. There will no longer be national economies, at least as we have come to understand that concept... As almost every factor of production - money, technology, factories, and equipment - moves effortlessly across borders...'. Believe it or not, this 'globalized' economy is just taking place around us which can be seen from the following facts. Firstly, there is a continuous growth in international trade. In 1960, the share of world merchandise exports in the world gross domestic product was only 10 per, but by 2000, it had claimed to 20 per cent (UNCTAD, 2004). Secondly, the aggregate FDI (foreign direct investment) figures can be used to support those globalists who identified transnationalization of production as the driving mechanisms of economic integration. According to UNCTAD (2004), global FDI flows have grown steadily in the past 30 years. In 2002, world inward FDI stock has grown more than ten- fold during the past two decades. Thirdly, since the world economy is now so integrated that the constraints of location and institutional framework are increasingly irrelevant, the global capital is more mobile thus the footloose MNCs (multi-national corporations) are growing dramatically and playing more significant roles in the world economy. For example, in late 60s, there were only 7, 000 MNCs in the world but in 2002, there are now about 64,000 MNCs engaged in international production, with about 866,000 affiliates located abroad. Moreover, the number of employees of MNCs has grown dramatically, it reached 53 million in 2002, up from 19 million two decades ago and about 20 per cent of working population (outside agriculture) in the developed world work for MNCs (UNCTAD 2004). Finally, since the world economy is now so integrated, capital can simply take a random walk in the world market. According to the BIS (Bank of International Settlements) Study (2005), the average daily international foreign exchange trading volume was about $1.9 trillion in April 2004. <heading>The Sceptical Position</heading>Although such a notion of a 'globalized' world has become widely accepted, there are some researchers who adopted a more sceptical position, arguing that so-called 'globalization' has been grossly exaggerated and we still live in an international rather than a global world (Dicken, 2003). As said by Hirst and Thompson (1992: 394), 'We do not have fully globalized economy, we do have an international economy and national policy responses to it'. Ruigrok and van Tulder (1995: 394) also stated that 'Globalization seems to be as much an overstatement as it is an ideology and an analytical concept'. The proponents of globalisation have overstated the extent and novelty value of transactional movements which can be illustrated through the following evidence. First of all, a number of studies have reported that the level of international openness was in certain respects no less remarkable in the half century prior to World War I (that is, 1870-1914) than in today (Weiss, 1997). According to Hirst and Thompson (1999), prior to 1913, trade and capital flows were not dissimilar compared with the size of flows in the recent post-war period. Between 1870 and 1913, the volume of world foreign trade expanded at about 3. 4 per cent per annum; and between 1973 and the mid-1980s the expansion rate was only 3.6 per cent (Ibid). Moreover, Glyn (1995) pointed that the ratios of capital flows appear even higher during the Gold Standard period than in the 1980s. Therefore, from the above evidence, it is fair to say that today's growing integration of the world economy is not unprecedented (Hirst and Thompson, 1999).Even if we do accept that national economies are more integrated through trade and capital flows than before, it appears that those trade and investment flows constitutes quite a small share of GDP. For example, exports only account for 12 per cent of GDP in Japan. Nowadays about 90 per cent of production is still undertaken for the domestic market (Weiss, 1997). Secondly, although globalisation predicts the world trade, production and investment would diffuse more between North and South; in fact, it remains highly concentrated in the rich North (Weiss, 1997). For example, over the period of 1970 to 1989, around 84 per cent of trade and 90 per cent of investment go the North (Ibid). FDI is heavily concentrated in the advanced industrial states and only a small number of rapidly developing countries (Hirst and Thompson, 1999). According to UNCTAD (2004), the main recipients of FDI inflows remain those developed countries, with about 71 per cent of the total in 2002. Together with more concentrated production and investment in the North, intra-regional trade is becoming more popular and important (Weiss, 1997). For instance, intra-European trade now accounts for about 62 per cent of its total export trade; and intra-regional trade within the American region rose from 68 percent to 79 percent between 1980 and 1992 of total US-Japan and US-EU trade; also the intra-Asian trade between 1986 and 1992 have increased from 32.4 per cent to 47.7 per cent of total exports (Ibid). It is clear that the intra-regional trade is especially important for the Big three (US, Europe and Japan) and in fact the Big three's intra-regional trade was increasing faster than inter-regional trade (Ibid). Finally, as many studies have indicated, the number of genuinely transnational companies is rather small (Weiss, 1997). Also, share of assets, ownership, management, employment, the location of R&D, the importance of a home base remains the rule (Hu 1992). Hirst and Thompson (1999) found that over 82 per cent MNCs were home based in the fourteen major developed OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) countries, the home oriented nature of MNC activity remains significant, MNCs are not becoming footloose as those globalists claimed but rather remain largely rooted in one of the Big three countries. Furthermore, since new technologies place a premium on fixed costs and those knowledge-intensive labour tend to be treated as fixed costs, cost saving gained by moving to low-income, low taxed countries were not the driving force behind the mobile MNCs. Instead, since the new production methods emphasize more about the physical proximity between producers and suppliers, there is a continuous trend for MNCs towards the constitution of regional sourcing networks. Therefore, it shows clearly that the incidence and advantages of mobility of MNCs have been overstated, the advantages of maintaining a firm home or regional base may be more stronger and beneficial (Weiss, 1997). Thus the conclusion to my first part argument is that although national economies may in some ways be highly integrated with one another, the above evidence showed that we still inhabit an international rather than a global world. Now, I would like to turn to my second part of argument, the implication of so-called 'globalisation' for the power of nation states. <heading>Are Nation States Powerless Now? </heading><heading>The Globalists Position</heading>Before entering the argument, it is necessary to provide the definition of 'nation states'. According to Fulcher (2000: 522), 'The nation-state was built on the principle that its citizens were members of a nation living within the borders of a defined territory'. For the globalists, they not only believe that we are live in a 'global' world, moreover they claimed that, 'in terms of real flows of economic activity, nation states have already lost their role' (Ohmae, 2000:207). Gray (1998: 78) stated that in a global free market, 'bad capitalism tends to drive out good'. When the capital can move freely, MNCs will migrate to those countries where the environmental, social costs and labour costs are lowest in order to gain the absolute advantage and highest profits. For example, in 2005, British American Tobacco announced plans to move their production from its main UK factory to Asia (Tran, 2005). Moreover, national governments are forced by the external 'globalisation' pressure to implement similar neo-liberal, deflationary, fiscally conservative policies; deregulate labour market, cut tax and welfare provision (Gray, 1998). Stiglitz (2003: 3) pointed out that one of the constraints imposed by globalisation for nation states are the difficulties of taxation. 'With capital being movable from one jurisdiction to another, if one tries to impose a stronger taxation on capital, capital simply moves out' (Ibid). In addition, national control over exchange rates and interest rates has diminished (Fulcher 2000). Nation states have become vulnerable to the discipline made by people and institutions elsewhere over which they have no practical control (Ohmae, 2000). Just recall the East Asia financial crisis in 1997 and 1998 where governments became vulnerable to a collapsing exchange rate can illustrate this point well (Wolf, 2001). Furthermore, due to the fierce tax competition among states together with aging population, high rates of family break-up, rising costs and complexity of health care and increasing diversification of services, the welfare state model has taken a battering (Fulcher 2000), which can be demonstrated from the example of Swedish crisis in the 1990. Due to the economic difficulties caused by globalization, Sweden has been forced to retreat their full employment policies and cut back their entitlement in its extensive welfare state (Hirst and Thompson, 1999). So if Sweden could not sustain its welfare systems, what hope for other states? Just as claimed by Dani Rodrik, 'the welfare state has been under attack for two decades' (citied in Drucker, 2001). Besides that, global mobility of capital and production have made the central policies of European social democracy unworkable and the crisis of Europe's social market economies is profound (Gray, 1998). For instance, in Germany, besides the major policy errors made on the way to German reunification and some of unavoidable costs of unification, two cornerstones of Germany's model, a comprehensive welfare state and business corporations in which the interests of a range of stakeholders were represented in the governance of enterprises, have been shaken by the competitive environment after reunification (Ibid). The deeper reasons for the difficulties of the German social market came from the world in which a unified Europe must live. Since European unification have allowed workers to enter the labour markets freely, those high educated but low paid labour have attracted MNCs a lot and put great pressure on German high skilled but high paid workforce (Ibid). More than that, German companies are steadily moving their production to the Eastern Europe, such as Czech Republic, Poland; stakeholder relationships become less central and economic inequalities are likely to increase (Ibid). Just as the chairman Heinrich von Pierer stated, 'We are in a global competition for loan and equity capital'. And several German corporations have already taken steps to gain more profits and increase share prices quickly, company's commitment to other stakeholders have been weaken. Overall, the social market economy appears to be "unravelling" in Germany (Gray, 1998: 96). <heading>The Sceptical Position</heading>By contrast, other researchers believed that 'globalisation' has not eliminated the power of nation states; they have played and will continue to play a key role in the integration process (Weiss, 1997). As we mentioned in the first part, for most MNCs, they remain closely linked to their home countries. Hirst and Thompson (1999: 186) noticed that 'All TNCs are anchored in a nation-state somewhere and therefore dependent on the institutions and infrastructure of that state'. In 1992, there are only 42 of the 100 largest TNCs had more than half of their assets, sales and employment abroad, they are indeed much more closely associated with their home state and their competitiveness are more likely depend on the characteristics of the home base (Dicken, 1998). Although many globalists argued that due to the globalisation pressure many states are moving towards the neo-liberal policies, the fact is even if some governments switched towards the fiscal conservatism, it not just caused by the impact of global economic forces, but owes much to the domestic pressure (Fulcher, 2000; Weiss, 1997). Facing the prolonged economic recession, some governments had to raise more taxes in order to support the increasing number of jobless and people retiring from work (Weiss, 1997). For other governments, especially those from the third world, who adopted neo-liberal policies were because the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank make loans conditional upon them (Hobsbawm, 1994). Moreover, not all nation states follow the neo-liberal policies, in practice, governments on average are now collecting slightly more in taxes as a proportion of their economies than they did ten years ago (Drucker, 2001). Such as Germany, which remained aloof from the neo-liberal policies, has recently sustained a massive tax levy to help finance unification. In Japan, the unpopular consumption tax has recently grown a lot in order to help to sustain government's further development of those employment protection programmes which have been seen as the important means to protect employment (Weiss, 1997). Also it is important to clarify that the apparent policy convergence of nation states at least after 1973, are not the result of powerless governments, rather it caused by the common effects of the oil shocks and inflation (Fulcher, 2000). As Hay (2005) indicated that there was no convergence in taxation and public policy for nation states. For example, in 2000, U.S. government collected a little over 30 per cent of GDP in taxes, while for Denmark, its taxes came to 53 per cent (Drucker, 2001). Similarly, Sweden government spent 52 per cent of GDP on public expenditure while Japan only spent 32 per cent in 2000 (Hay, 2005). Moreover, Hirst and Thompson (1999) pointed that the failure of welfare states' reforms should not be identified with globalization, such as Sweden's problems. They may not be intrinsic to welfare states in advanced countries; rather they are caused by a mixture of economic structure, policy errors, heavy dependence of the economy on large multinational manufacturing exports and limited options for public employment. Other countries successful welfare reforms can also be used to demonstrate that globalisation has not eliminated the scope for extensive welfare systems; both Denmark and the Netherlands have been able to sustain and reform their welfare states in an intensifying international competition environment (Ibid). Furthermore, Weiss (1997) noticed that due to historical- geopolitical, institutional and policy differences, nation state capacities differ hence they respond differently, in other words, different models still remain. For example, Japan and those East Asian NICs (newly industrialized countries, such as Korea, Singapore) often facilitate the changes in the process of 'globalisation' while those Southeast Asians countries, such as Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand, have rendered their economies more vulnerable to external pressure (Ibid). Generally, domestically strong states may be able to assist corporations to adjust more effectively to the external environment by creatively adapting its tools and internationalizing state capabilities. For example, the Japanese bureaucracy, MITI (Ministry of International Trade and Industry) has creatively used ODA (Overseas Development Aid) as a new tool to externalize its domestic alliances and facilitate the internationalization of corporate activity (Ibid).In addition, there is a tendency of nation states to seek adaptation to the new challenges by cooperating with other power actors. Consolidation of such alliances is taking place at regional and international level, such as the establishment and development of EU, APEC and NAFTA; and close domestic government-business cooperation (especially in East Asia) is another example (Ibid). The final point worth noting is that many OECD governments have sought to sell their retrenchment policies to the electorate but showing that they are forced to do so by the global economic trends over which they have no control (Weiss, 1997). However, those political leaders' behaviour is just an excuse for absolving states responsibility; they pretended that governments were powerless in the face of global environment. As conclude by Hirst and Thompson (1999), there is a lack of political will to gain extra leverage over undesirable and unfair aspects of international and domestic economic activity. <heading>Conclusion:</heading>To sum up, although some aspects of the world economy are becoming more integrated than before, 'globalisation' is not a single, unified phenomenon, it is a conjuncture of economic, political, cultural and technological forces. Hence the world economy is not genuinely a globalized one, but still an internationalized one with more emphasis on the importance of regional economy. Moreover, the process of internationalization has not eliminated the power of nation states; nation stats have played and will continue to play a significant role in the development of the world economy. Furthermore, since the capacity and adaptability of nation states differ, nation states will response to the international economic changes differently; strong nation state's facilitation will help people to be more successful in exploiting the opportunities. Finally, with the increasing development of regional economy, nation states collectively regulating economic through regional groups and international agencies will become more important; and global governance which express the interests of the nation states embodied will be required. 