Businesses are constantly facing the dilemma to balance between the two basic organizational objectives. One is the need to be flexible in order to tackle emergent changes in the micro and macro environment, whilst the other is the necessity to implement long-term strategic direction. This essay will discuss whether increasing short-term flexibility or pursuing a long-term strategic plan is more fundamental. Most businesses operate alongside a constantly changing internal and external environment. The internal (or micro) environment refers to the infrastructure of a business and is concerned with the relationships between members in the organization. The external (or macro) environment, on the other hand, refers to the market in which the business is operating in. Although the unpredictable environment directs businesses to numerous opportunities, it also generates a high level of ambiguity and insecurity in the firm. In order to cope with these changes and to sustain competitiveness in the market, businesses are required to develop swift responses to internal and external changes. Thus, managers are required to establish the maximum level of flexibility in the short-term to accommodate unexpected changes. However, according to Robbins, businesses generally adopt strategies to plan "the overall direction of the work to be done", which includes "forecasting future trends, assessing actual and potential resources and developing objectives and targets for future performance". This reflects a long-term strategic approach, where businesses arrange carefully and tactfully for organizational goals to be achieved over at least ten years time. These organizational goals are often concerned with establishing clear internal policies and handling relations with competing firms. The managerial role in the long run is concerned with implementing strategic plans to achieve set organizational targets. <fnote>Freeman, J., Croom, S., Kotlarsky, J., Dean, D. and Caldart, A. (2005), Business and Management: Selected Readings for Non-Business Students Volume 1, Pearson Education Limited, United Kingdom, p.14 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. p.14-15 </fnote>Most business strategies allow short-term elasticity and long-term goals to be achieved simultaneously. Studying models of management, such as the Open Systems models, sheds light on how short-term flexibility and long-term strategic plans are equally important in business strategies. Early theorists assumed a business to be a closed system, and hence, focused on the inner arrangements of a business such as altering policies and working incentives for employees. However, the Open Systems models stress on the view that "organizations depend on the wider environment for different kinds of sustenance if they are to survive and prosper". The fundamental idea is that organizations are interdependent. Hence, if an organization is able to respond flexibly and acutely to changes in its surroundings, then the long-term capacity of the organization should, in theory, be amplified as well. <fnote>Ibid. p.60 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. p.57 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. p.59 </fnote>Yet the constantly changing environment makes it difficult for managers to motivate employees to consider both short-term and long-term welfare of their company at an equal standing. Some firms tend to use strategies that consider establishing flexibility in the short-term to be of greater concern. The most distinguishing strategy is the measurement and reward system, where it is recognized that "short-run goals will prevail". Employees are frequently motivated to compete for short-range successes such as bonuses and promotions. Although a well-designed rewards system will motivate employees to be highly efficient, it is difficult to assess whether the long-term interests of the firm will be well-maintained. The reason is because employees are merely driven by self-interest and short-term successes in this system. When the weight is on strengthening a business' flexibility to address emergent changes, long-term strategic plans can be easily overlooked. Since the long-term direction is only dependent on the chief executive officer and a few of the high-ranking managers, the business becomes more susceptible to errors in judgment. <fnote>M.A.C. / Stonish, P. J. (1982), Implementing Strategy: Making Strategy Happen, Ballinger Publisher Company, United States of America, p.134 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. p.134 </fnote>Alternatively, businesses can place emphasis on long-term strategic performance and direction. Pursuing a long-run perspective is crucial to a business' success because every business needs a set goal to work towards. In the case of Chem-Tec Ltd, Bill Johnson has encouraged employees to take on larger roles for themselves. Since Johnson's concept is to develop the business strategy of "managing others at the same time as managing themselves", he taught employees not only the skills, but also the purpose behind the work involved. Johnson eventually transferred his managerial perspective to employees in Chem-Tec, so that "they can now plan production and raise purchase orders" independently. As Johnson decentralizes his managerial responsibilities, Chem-Tec gains flexibility because employees are no longer entirely dependent on the manager to make decisions. Since employees are aware of the long-run managerial perspective, they will be able to base their decisions on the long-term welfare of Chem-Tec. Hence, it is justifiable to propose long-term strategic plans to be more crucial. <fnote>Freeman, op. cit. note 1, p.5, p.11 </fnote><fnote>Freeman, op. cit. note 1, p.10 </fnote><fnote>Freeman, op. cit. note 1, p.11 </fnote>The decentralization of operations is also a situation where businesses face the dilemma of deciding whether an emphasis should be placed on the short-term or the long-term. Texas Instruments, Inc. decentralized their operations as its business grew in size in order to increase the level of flexibility and efficiency. However, managers became concerned about how the division "would become short-term oriented and fail to see and solve problems on a scale appropriate to the total organization". Therefore, Texas Instruments reinstated corporate values into the entire operating system by setting corporate objectives, which acted as guidelines describing the business' general direction. The purpose of these corporate objectives is to satisfy stakeholders in the company, and to create a "psychological rewards" system for motivating employees. The decentralization provides incentive by maintaining a personal sense of identity in the business, whereas corporate objectives reinforce the long-term organizational target that the business is trying to achieve. The decentralization process by itself will not be a successful business strategy, because it lacks a long run corporate vision for employees to follow. <fnote>Quinn, J. B. (1980), Strategies for Change: Logical Incrementalism, Richard D. Irwin, Inc., United States of America, p.189 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. p.189 </fnote><fnote>Ibid. p.191 </fnote>Some businesses initially adopted long-term strategies that lean towards bureaucracy and control, but now, have changed to use strategies that stress on the importance of flexibility and change. British Petroleum Co is an established business in the oil industry, but it is based on a culture so rigid and so inflexible that "financial proposals required 15 signatures before they could be accepted". When new businesses entered into the market, British Petroleum was incapable of responding to the increased competition. It was losing their monopoly in the oil industry. In order to stay in the oil industry in the long run, British Petroleum had to change its business policy from bureaucratic to flexible. As a result, Robert Horton initiated significant change in British Petroleum's business policy, namely 'Project 1990', and promoted the corporate "values of caring, trust, openness, teamwork, and cooperation". These new corporate values encouraged the company to be more flexible when addressing unexpected changes or events. Since the ultimate concern is the long run position of British Petroleum, it can be argued that long-term strategic plans are more critical. The flexibility is, in a sense, a means, whereas the long-term direction is an end. The short-term flexibility is ultimately a tool used for contouring British Petroleum's, or any other business' organizational objectives. <fnote>Freeman, op. cit. note 1, p.61 </fnote><fnote>Roberts, J. (2005), "Organizing for Performance: How BP Did It", Date Accessed: 27 November 2005,  URL  </fnote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote>In conclusion, implementing long-term strategic plans and achieving short-term flexibility are two complementary attributes. Although the long-term direction in a business is more critical, it is unattainable if employees are not motivated to be flexible in addressing sudden changes. Business managers must therefore adopt a structured approach to planning business strategies, so that long-term strategic objectives and the events that enhance these objectives can be accomplished simultaneously. 