Invariably, the U.S public have high expectations of their presidents. Nelson Rockefeller says they must be able, "to lead, to persuade, to inspire trust, to attract men of talent, to unite". To do this, he appears to demand every talent somebody could possibly have to be concentrated in one person. However, the problem is that the constitution grants the president very weak powers, and certainly not enough to fulfil the incredible expectations heaped upon them. Instead, the real power of the president comes from extra-constitutional powers that have evolved over time as well as informal powers that the president alone is in a position to exploit. Yet, the effectiveness that can be extracted from these powers are not constant, and vary with the differing circumstances that every president must face; a foreign or domestic crisis, the make up of Congress, the death of a Supreme Court justice, amongst other problems, can all increase, and decrease, a presidents power. Constitutionally, the office of the president is very weak, compared with popular perception of the office. However, the effectiveness of a president to exploit circumstances, their handling of the media, and even their personality and charisma, can make them more powerful than the U.S constitution should allow them to be. <fnote>Nelson Rockefeller, "Unity, Freedom and Peace" Garden City: Doubleday 1968 (quotation found in David McKay, p170, "American Politics & Society 5th ed. Blackwell, 2001) </fnote>The reason that presidential power is not constant partly lies with the constitution itself. Because phrases like the, "he shall take care that the laws are faithfully executed" are so vague, "these phrases are so widely applicable to virtually everything the president might contemplate doing... The president is in an ideal position to take advantage of this ambiguity". For instance, Lyndon Johnson used the power of the 'Commander-in-chief" to move mass forces into Vietnam in 1964, without the approval of Congress, who should have the power to declare war. He was able to do this, not because the constitution says he could, but crucially, because it doesn't say he couldn't. In this sense, the constitution is a vast source of power for the president. However, this power is only enjoyed at the discretion of Congress, who can simply pass legislation to block or impede such actions. In this example, Nixon was checked as Congress cut funding for the Vietnam War, and then by the War Powers Act of 1973 to give them the ability to withdraw troops against the presidents wishes. So, although the constitution can be a source of power that extends beyond the limited powers set down in article two, the president must also rely on the informal powers, or else he will find that a constitutionally dominant Congress can overrule him time after time. <fnote>Article Two, Section Three of the U.S Constitution </fnote><fnote>Terry Moe & William Howell, p6 "Unilateral Action and Presidential Power: A Theory", Presidential Studies Quarterly, Volume 29, Issue 4, December 1999 </fnote>One of the most important features of the U.S president, recognised by Carter in his farewell address, is that, "The president is the only elected official charged with representing all the people". Whereas Congress is fragmented between contrasting parties, personalities and interests, the president can be united in his actions and policy. This gives the president an enormous source of power, especially in times of crisis. The president can go 'over the heads' of Congress and appeal directly to the people to pass legislation, or pursue policy goals. Bill Clinton did this to great effect in 1995 when a Republican Congress looked to be rejecting his budget proposals. In response, Clinton appealed directly to the people, telling them that, "Congress should act responsibly and stop playing politics with America's good name", to put pressure on Congress to co-operate. No other individual in U.S government has this power, to represent every person in the USA, and it is a power that is rooted in a president's popularity; an unpopular president will not be trusted by the public. Only popular presidents are able to appeal to the nation in this way, and so, although the ability to go over the heads of Congress is constant, its effectiveness is dependent upon the popularity of the president himself. <fnote>Jimmy Carter, 14th January 1981, Farewel Address to the nation (full text found at  URL  Accessed 23rd November 2005) </fnote><fnote>Bill Clinton, 27th January 1996, in a radio address to the USA. Available at  URL  Accessed 19th November 2005 </fnote>Richard Neustadt labelled presidential power as the, "Power to Persuade", and could only be effective to the extent that a president could persuade congress to pass his legislation. Yet the inference that this relies on a president's persuasive personality is only partly true. External events can help a president persuade Congress of the needs of his legislation. It would have been impossible for Bush to convince Congress of the need of the Patriots Act were it not for the 9/11 attacks, and impossible for Franklin Roosevelt to convince Congress to give him such sweeping powers without the Wall Street Crash. Election results can also be particularly useful to help presidents 'persuade' Congress; if a Congressional majority is carried in on a presidents 'coat-tails' (i.e. on the back of a presidents popularity rather than their own), then that president can find it much easier to enact legislation. Arguably, Bush's second term carried with it a Republican majority on his personal coat-tails, but Clinton in 1992 did not. Therefore, even though he had the benefits of united government, he faced hostility from Congress, even on his flagship legislation of health care reform. Although the 'power to persuade' thesis is correct when it says that a successful president must be able to persuade Congress to pass his legislation, it must also be remembered that outside events, besides a personality, are crucial in this ability to persuade, which is another reason why a presidents power expands and retracts over time. <fnote>Richard Neustadt, "Presidential Power", London: Wiley, 1960 </fnote>The power of the president is indeed increased dramatically during crises. In the USA, the president fulfils two roles; he is chief executive of the country, but he is also the head of state. This fusion of symbolic power with real political power allows a president to 'become' America in a state of emergency, and 'wrap himself in the flag'. The patriotic feelings that emerge during a crisis are channelled into an appeal to the president to do solve it, which gives a U.S president incredible power. This was most obvious after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, where George W. Bush's approval ratings leapt from 49% in August 2001 to 82% the following month. Because of the fusion of symbolic power with legitimate political power, this sudden surge of patriotic feeling towards America translated directly into an increase in Bush's power, both to act unilaterally in foreign policy, but also to push through much of his legislative agenda through Congress for the majority of his first term. This is illustrated most clearly with the passage of the Patriots Act 2001; on the 23 rd October 2001, the bill originated in the House, and by 26 th October, the president had signed it into law, with overwhelming support in both chambers of Congress. The power of the president to appeal to the people had not changed between August and October 2001, nor had his personality or charisma. However, outside events changed the very context of these powers, and allowed the president incredible power that he had previously been unable to obtain. <fnote>Zogby International opinion poll.  URL  Accessed 19th November 2005. </fnote>The power of the president also relies heavily upon the expectations of the people. In 1963, Lyndon Johnson declared that the USA "will carry on the fight against poverty and misery, and disease and ignorance, in other lands and in our own". The 1960s was a decade of pro-active government, and high expectations. The people expected the federal government to fight poverty and eliminate discrimination, which amalgamated into LBJs, "Great Society" programme. Johnson had this power, because the US public wanted him to have it. Contrary to this is Reagan's inaugural address, where he famously declared, "government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem". As Schlesinger says, by the late 1970s the people were, "fed up with public action and disenchanted by its consequences", and wanted the president to allow society to regulate itself without federal interference. The U.S public chose a president that matched their desires. Johnson governed in a period of 'public purpose' that demanded higher state intervention, and enjoyed the power that went with it. Reagan was president during a 'private interest' phase of American history, which reduced the role of government and his office's power of direct state intervention. The amount of power these respective presidents had, and every president before and after, depends greatly on which of these 'phases of history' the USA is in. <fnote>Johnsons first speech as President to Congress,  URL  Accessed 23rd November2005 </fnote><fnote>Arthur Schlesinger Jr, "The Cycles of American History", Houghton Mifflin, 1986 (p32) </fnote><fnote>'Public Purpose' and 'Private Interest' is discussed in Schlesinger (1986), chapter 2 </fnote>The constitutional powers give all presidents a weak base to start their terms in office from. Although powers such as appointing top bureaucrats and federal judges are incredibly important, they are also constitutionally checked by the Senate; and the power to veto legislation, and the post of Commander-in-Chief, are also subject to Congressional over-ride. However, there are external factors which can increase a president's popularity, and therefore his 'power to persuade'. Many of these sources can be a double-edged sword; a strong economy can make a president more powerful to persuade Congress, whilst a weak one leads to unpopularity and infers incompetence. Likewise, a successful foreign policy, like the 1991 Gulf War, can 'wrap a president in the flag', and make it difficult for Congress to disagree with him. Unsuccessful policies can create an incredibly hostile Congress, such as the one the Nixon faced after his renewed bombings of Laos and Cambodia in 1972. These 'extra-constitutional' powers rely partly upon the popularity of a president, as well as his ability to convince Congress, and the U.S public, that his policies are correct. This is why the power of the U.S president cannot be generalised across time. All modern presidents have the potential to be incredibly powerful figures. However, it still relies heavily upon the personality of the incumbent, and the circumstances that their time in office brings with it, and the expectations of the people upon it. As Carter remarked, "This is at once the most powerful office in the world - and among the most severely constrained by law and custom".  <fnote> URL  Accessed 23rd November 2005 </fnote>