Motivation can be described as "cognitive decision-making process through which goal-directed behavior is initiated, energized and directed and maintained" (Huczynski and Buchanan 2001, p240), which we gain through learning. We acquire motive through drive, where drive is simply an internal force that produces motivated behavior. (Ellis and Dick 2000) It has been stated that reward and control, are two broad categories, which attempt to explain the motivation of people to work hard; Hobbes stresses the importance of the reward, where Taylor argues that workers only work for an economic reward and thus, strict control is needed. Even though Rousseau aruges that control denies free, creative and expressive nature of people, an appropriate form of control can also stimulate productive behavior and Culture (symbolic control) as Deal & Kennedy argues, is one of them. Moreover, Culture can be looked upon as a reward of work (Peters and Waterman), where he sacrifices much to the organization and culture acts as a form of return on effort. (Oxford University Press 2006) Thus, strong culture under effective leadership, where managers act as culture carriers, can lead to financial success and sustainable competitive advantage of company, while individuals are able to gain intrinsic and extrinsic awards. <fnote> URL  </fnote>One of the biggest theories behind the motivation is the Content theory from Maslow, where he suggests that people work in order to achieve their 'needs'. He argues that people are motivated by the 'need' at the next level of hierarchy and work in order to reach the top level, self-actualization. It is the need to realize one's full potential, which is regarded as a key point of survival in rapidly modernizing society (Fincham and Rhodes 2005). Indeed, self-actualization as a higher-order needs, can be looked at as a form of intrinsic award for an employee and sounds appealing. However, it must be remembered, "the notion has not had much empirical support". (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p132). Indeed many people are keen to self-actualize and to realize one's potential, however a lot of people see work only as a "means to an end and have no desire to engage with it on any other level". (Ellis and Dick 2000 p42) It offers little guidance on how to actually motivate people at work and its theoretical principles are questionable, where it fails to recognize individual choice or social influence. In fact, Malsow had not intended his ideas, based on his observations of patients, to be used as a "theory in the traditional sense of the term". (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p133) Thus, as Rosendfield and Wilson suggests, the theory is more useful at identifying basic values and needs in human beings than as theories of motivation in the workplace. Even though Maslow's theory earned a lot of criticism, it did have influences on the ideas of Alderfer and Herzberg and also on management theory and to an extent on management Practice. "When these content theories were popularized there were two models of men on which management theory and practice could be based; Rational Economic man and that of the social man". (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p136) Also, it led to the development of Theory X and Y by Douglas McGregor in The Human Side of Enterprise (1960), which illustrates the connection between different models of motivation and managerial practices. He argues that a consequence of assuming people behave like rational economic beings is the belief that they require either reward or coercion to motivate them. (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p136) Theory Y suggests that "people will exercise self-direction and self-control in the achievement of organizational objectives to the degree that they are committed to those objectives" (Economist 2006, p19) and Companies are coming to realize that "knowledge workers, who have been identified as the creators of future wealth, thrive only under Theory Y".(Economist 2006, p19) Thus, the role of the manager is to create conditions in which "this reservoir of hitherto untapped human resources can be utilized" (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p137 ) <fnote></fnote>Symbolic leadership and management control is one way of encouraging employees to feel that they are working for something worthwhile. As argued by Peters and Waterman, In search of Excellence, role of the managers is more than rational analyst, where they construct the social reality of organization for members and shape values and attend to the drama and vision of organization. Also as Buchanan and Huczynski (2001) argue, an effective leadership is required in order to sustain a strong Corporate Culture and to be culturally innovative, where the role of the manager is to let the employees understand the internalization of the norms and values to direct them to a common goal. Indeed, Georgopoulos, Mahnoney and Jones found that workers who expected high productivity to lead to values goals tended to produce at a higher level than workers who felt that low production led to valued goals. Managers can also act as Organization's culture carriers, where culture can be looked at as a form of reward, providing meaning, motivation and morale to the work. It has been stated by an American Manager from a well known high-tech company that <quote>"Power plays don't work. You can't make them do anything. They have to want to. So you have to work through culture. The idea is to educate people without knowing it. Have the religion, and not know how they got it". (Huczynski and Buchanan 2001, p646),</quote>Indeed, it has been argued that stronger the corporate culture, the less need there is for detailed procedures and rules and people naturally work towards the common-goal. (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p 418) This also indicates the increase of empowerment, (which is related to the "organizational arrangements that allow employees more autonomy, discretion and unsupervised decision-making responsibility") (Maund 1999, p113) and reduced monitoring, where it has been found from a research that continuous monitoring is perceived as increased indication of distrust, which induces the working agents to reduce their work effort. (Bruno 1993, p663) The role of the manager is crucial when the distribution of the rewards has to be decided. The manager has to be able to handle the tension between an individual's ability and his perception of the effort-needed to achieve the reward. As argued by Maund (1999), there can be two types of rewards; formal (pay and assignment of the tasks) and informal (intrinsic satisfaction, self-worth, achievement). The difference is that it is the latter, which are frequently at the core of an individual's perceptions when he comes to assessing his perceptions of equity. According to the equity theory, developed by Stacey Adam, this can be looked at as another motivating factor, where people are motivated to act in the situation, which they perceive to be unfair and individual acts to resolve that unfairness. However, Individuals have different tolerance level and difference perception of inequity. Moreover, it has been argued by many that Material reward has a little or no influence, where Alfie Kohn found out that people do not perform better when paid more and may even perform worse. (Maund 1999, p86) The result of the research, where they are derived from a survey providing over 3,200 responses was that money and recognition do not appear to be primary sources of motivation in stimulating employees to contribute ideas but in line with Herzberg's predictions, factors associated with intrinsic satisfaction play a more important part (Jones and Lloyd 2005, p929) Moorhead and Griffin (1995) (Mound 1999, p105) identified three clear messages for mangers, The basis of the reward system must be transparent in that it needs to be understood by everyone. Rewards are perceived as being multifaceted because individuals get different rewards. People have different understandings of what reality is, which is based on their perceptions. In expansion of this, Expectancy theory has been developed by Vroom, where his theory is based on the belief that employee effort will lead to performance and performance will lead to rewards, being either positive or negative. The more positive the reward, the more likely the employee will be highly motivated. Conversely, the more negative the reward the less likely the employee will be motivation.(Wilson 2005, p48) Vroom (Buchanan and Huczynski 2001, p79) highlights the importance of valence, instrumentality and expectancy as key issues in effective motivation, where Motivation = Expectancy * Valency E = subjective probability (expectation that the behavior will lead to a particular outcome) V = Valence (strength of preference, for outcome) If performances and rewards are not strongly correlated, and the balance of effort to level of performance required is seen as excessive or unrealistic, the process of motivation will be compromised.(Maund 1999, p120) As an example, the Wallace Company, winner of the prestigious Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award in 1990, can be used to exemplify the expectancy theory. (Halepota 2005, p14) At Wallace, employees had sufficient authority to work on their own and they were trained to improve quality. The reward for improvement was the Baldrige Award: and the workers were aware of value of reward, so this kept them motivated to continue working hard However, this theory is based on the assumption that we are consciously aware of our goals and motives and that individuals are rational and objective, whereas they are more likely to be irrational and lack objectivity (Maund 1999, p109) According to Expectancy Theory, a manger would need to: (Maund 1999, p109) Determine the primary outcomes each employer wants, Decide what levels and kinds of performances are needed to meet organizational goals, Make sure that desired levels of performances are possible, Link desired outcomes and desired performance. Different types of cultures were developed by Charles Handy (1986) which are Role, Task and Power Culture and moreover there are two conflicting views of the culture, analytical and applicable, developed by Wilson and Rosenfield.( Fincham and Rhodes 2005) Analytical school argues that the Culture is a socializing force, which controls behavior of members, where as applicable school argues that the culture should be viewed in terms of commitment to central goals and as a means of managing successful organizational change. Application school argues that culture is a crucial ingredient of organizational success and it is the with the strongest appeal to managers since "it allows the firm to marshal the commitment of its members to achieving the firm's goals" (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p547).As Wilson and Rosenfield stated: "for once it would seem that organizational behaviour has come up with a topic with few ifs and buts, which is readily comprehended and can be applied immediately". (Rollinson, Broadfield and Edwards 1999, p547) The notion that a strong culture leads to organizational success has been criticized. For example, Gordon and DiTomaso argues, "a strong culture might only be a good predictor of performance in the short term" (Rollinson, Broadfield and Edwards 1999, p547) and that there is no such thing as one best culture but rather right culture. Thus, it is right to assume that a strong culture is an aid to success if it is also one that is suitable for coping with the conditions faces by an organization. As Schein argues, "you must not assume that more or stronger culture is better. What is better depends on the stage of evolution of the company and its current state of adaptiveness. Instead of seeking a strong culture, try to understand and use the strengths of the existing culture. (Weiss 1996, p359) There are three aspects of the cultures that should be recognized; (Oxford University Press 2006) <fnote> URL  </fnote>Culture is unifying, where it is consensual and not conflictual; Culture is holistic and refers to the essence of reality of organization. Also, cultures can be positive and facilitate goal achievement; Culture is symbolic and is described by telling stories about how we feel about the organization; Above elements are interlocking, where culture is deep rooted in unconscious sources but is represented in superficial practices and behavior codes. The nature of Japanese culture has been regarded as a successful by Morgan (1977); the cultivation of harmonious relations at all levels in the organization, the merging of individual with common goals, and a reliance on worker responsibility (Bruno 1993 p,663) that is in contrast to Anglo-Anglo-American culture, which is obsessed with bureaucratic system, the need to distinguish winners from the losers. It was found from a research that both innovative and supportive subcultures have a clear positive relationship, while bureaucratic subcultures have a negative relationship. Indeed, bureaucratic subcultures which has received a lot of criticism for being an ineffective form of organization, where often they are unable to achieve their goals in a flexible way or to respond to changes in their market environment. (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p334) Then there is a question whether this complex culture is indeed manageable. As mentioned before, the role of the manager is more than rational analyst, where he constructs the social reality of organization for members and shapes values and attend to the drama and vision of organization.(Ellis and Dick 2000) However, Peters and Waterman, In search of Excellence, argues that managers can change cultures but not by individual manager. Moreover it is argued by Morgan that Managers can influence the evolution of culture by being aware of the symbolic consequences of their actions and by attempting to foster desired values but "they can never control cultures in the sense that many management writers advocate" (Fincham and Rhodes 2005, p429) Various Theories; Hierarchy of Needs, Theory X and Y, Equity and Expectancy Theory, clearly shows any single or unified theory of motivation is impossible to articulate. Individuals themselves are complex enough in their needs, values, beliefs, perceptions and attitudes. Add to these the additional factors of an individual's interaction with an organization and the analysis of what motivates him or her becomes very complex indeed. (Rosenfield and Wilson 1999) However, one thing that is clear is that the role of manager in creating a successful organization is crucial where they try to secure people's commitment to the goals of the organizations as a way of securing their willing and flexible co-operation. They seek to integrate individual and organizational needs so that people use their talents to benefit the organization without constant direction by management. (Boddy 2002) It is also crucial that managers understand and guide the employees to effectively achieve their needs, where the research suggests that jobs designed in a way that meets human needs are more likely to help meet organizational objectives than jobs which ignore human needs (Boddy 2002, p419). Also regardless of many theories proposed, there is the basic belief of functionalism that effective culture is a crucial factor in managing and sustaining a successful organizational culture and that the success of a company and individual is due to ability to understand the culture and being able to modify it. One thing that should be stressed is that culture penetrates to the essence of an organization and the sense of what an organization is such as its missions and its core values seem to have become a necessary asset of what an organization is.(Boddy 2002, p419) 