<heading>Introduction</heading>First of all, the question "Should digital property be given the same protections as physical property?" is a bit misleading. It suggests that we are at a point at which we have to decide this issue. In fact, it has already been decided by governments all over the world. Digital property enjoys a variable amount of protection. This introduction touches on the existing legal frameworks and the way in which they are put into practice. The EU and the US are about to pass or have recently passed corresponding reformed laws. As the German computer magazine PC Welt reported on its website on 23.11.2004, the Senate of the United States of America has passed a new copyright law that is considered stricter than the old one. For example, videotaping films in cinemas is threatened with up to three years imprisonment. In spite of their poor quality, these so-called "cams" have become popular because of their small size. If they like the film, people may also download a near-DVD quality version (DVD-rip) that become available on file-sharing platforms soon after the DVD version is released. On the other hand, some passages were not implemented, especially on ad blockers and content blockers, although the film industry would have liked to see them passed. The discrepancy between the stances of consumerism groups and industry also becomes evident in the debate over a copyright reform in Germany. The news magazine Der Spiegel reports in its online edition on 27.11.2004 that the bill proposed by minister of justice Brigitte Zypries does in fact abolish the right to make private copies, a move harshly critisized by consumer protection. The EU is working on a directive to allow software patents that is facing opposition from the EuroLinux Alliance ( URL ). Their petition has been signed by almost 375,000 people (on 21.12.2004) among these are personalities like Linus Torvalds, Michael Widenius and Rasmus Lerdorf, who have all gained a reputation in the Open Source community and beyond. They claim that software patents are dangerous for the entire economy, especially for the European one. The following screenshot of  URL  taken on 21.12.2004 demonstrates that the list of signatures is ever-growing ... <heading>Abuse of patent rights</heading>A striking example of how patents can prove counter-productive and lead to absurd situations is given by 3D-patents. The online edition of the German science and culture magazine Telepolis published a report about Tektronix, a company now producing high-performance oscilloscopes. In former times, Tektronix used to be active in the printer and display sector. Consequently, they applied for a number of related patents, for instance for projection of foreshortened objects on two-dimensional displays, dithering, fast caching and online games. Tektronix never charged license fees, but was protected against other's claims. Since the patents were due to expire, they were sold to Texan solicitors McKool Smith, who had other plans. Although the techniques may have been in use for more than twenty years now and are at the basis of all current games and many applications, McKool Smith sued virtually all big names in the gaming industry: Electronic Arts, Activision, Lucas Arts, Take Two and Ubi Soft to name but the biggest. Acacia Research, who got rich by buying patents on streaming media, seems to be the role model for this scheme. The American judiciary has to decide in favour of the right holders' morally questionable practice, despite the fact that, as the article points out, laws which were initially intended to protect the inventor serve to finance combines and lawyers. The media is full of other stories where the laws as they are produce less than satisfactory results. It is arguable whether they ever will, but I will show why the stance of the free software fraction is the winning one when compared to proprietary software and how digital data differs from houses, cars or the works of Goethe. <heading>Methodology</heading><heading>Selection of sources</heading>The main sources of information that were used consisted of various contemporary science journals and popular science and news magazines appearing in different countries and respected worldwide. Among those are specialist journals like Telematics and Informatics, Computer Law & Security Report, Computer and Internet Lawyer, Intellectual Property & Technology Law Journal, Intellectual Property Quarterly as well as publications by IDG (PC Welt, Computerwoche), Gruner + Jahr (Der Spiegel) and Heise (Telepolis, c't). They are freely accessible at  URL , through the ATHENS database or at their individual addresses. [check if really used; amend] Besides, less official websites of the free software faction were acknowledged and critically evaluated. [...] <heading>Range and limitations</heading>This essay is not the work of a lawyer or law professor but of a computer enthusiast and computer science student. A comprehensive knowledge of the original texts of laws or of numerous litigations cannot be expected considering the vastness of the field. However, a sound understanding of the underlying technology may prove rather useful when it comes to pointing in the right direction. [intention to address a range of perspectives or areas of emphasis] <heading>Review of the literature</heading>Literature based on US, EU, European national laws and international law widely recognises that the ultimate purpose of granting ownership is to provide an incentive for economic activity and to foster progress and innovation (Dykes 1995, Davis 2001, Wikipedia 2004, Gaita and Christie 2004, Dutfield and Suthersanen 2004). Opinions diverge on how this can be best achieved. There is unanimous support for physical property (except perhaps from hard-core communists) and intellectual property rights seem quite perfected as well after more than 500 years of development. There is a lack of consensus, however, when the law has to respond to new developments like electronic circuits (hardware), new forms of information (documents and media stored digitally, software) and new channels of distribution (internet file sharing). Recent reform attempts in the US, EU and Germany show that the law is in flux and a new compromise in accordance with the maxim stated before has to be found. The two opposing schools of thought are represented by the Open Source or Free Software movement of independent programmers and users on the one hand and a movement led by corporations promoting maximum protection and prosecution. I support the view that "classical" laws should not and cannot be applied to all forms of digital data and that a distinction between digital property and intellectual property should be maintained. <heading>Discussion</heading><heading>The why, how and when of property</heading>The concept of property is an old one. It has been around for so long that we like to take it for granted. It should not be forgotten, however, that it has been constructed by humans for a particular goal and as time progresses, it is essential that we keep examining its validity. John Michael Makoto Dykes explains the why, how and when of property in his paper "Intellectual Property on the Net" (1995) and reaches the conclusion that inconsistencies arise. Dykes refers back to the Romans, who were the first to implement property laws in their legal frameworks that still form the basis of the Anglo-American system. Naturally, it was limited to tangible goods. The idea to protect intellectual property (IP) did not come up until it became possible to store considerable amounts of information in the shape of books. Another reason for the interest in IP lies in the opportunities for economic exploitation of information that arose after Gutenberg. Therefore, copyrights and patents are intended to protect "market value" (Dyson, quoted in Dykes 1995). "The first patent, granted in 1421 in Florence, gave Fillippo Brunelleschi a three year monopoly on his invention, ensuring his monetary income." (Dykes, 1995). And this is exactly what has happened many million times since then and everyone was happy ... <heading>The digital revolution</heading>Until, one day, the digital revolution took place. Some of the implications of the digital revolution are summed up in a research report by UC Berkeley (c.f. press release by Kathleen Maclay 2003). Firstly, the amount of data and information (where information can be defined as "data which have been passed through a particular human mind and found meaningful within that mental context", Barlow, quoted in Dykes; i.e. data becmes information if someone can make any sense of it) has exploded: "Worldwide information production has increased by 30 percent each year between 1999 and 2002, according to the team led by professors Peter Lyman and Hal Varian of the School of Information Management and Systems." (Maclay, 2003). And this only refers to the years 1999 to 2002! Secondly and most importantly, "Some 92 percent of new information is stored on magnetic media, primarily hard drives." (Maclay, 2003), i.e. in digital form. Consequently, we have "to determine if property should enjoy any validity at all on the net" (Dykes, 1995). Dykes concludes that "intellectual property exhibits inconsistency vis-à-vis the net.". Even today, software piracy is seen as "stealing" by some. Dykes argues against this viewpoint by claiming that "piracy develops popularity". This may sound inane, but it makes sense, at least for software applications. He does not elaborate on this topic, so I will explain it here. Companies have to use original software because people will get suspicious if your million dollar advertising company uses neither Photoshop nor QuarkXPress. So "piracy" is actually private copying. When someone uses unauthorised software they may use it for small-scale projects like private homepages. If it was not possible to obtain free illegal versions of professional software, users would have to do with nearly-free home versions, but they would not buy the business version anyway. So there is no damage done to the software industry. Yet, on the other hand, there is a gain. Users who familiarise themselves with the "big" software packages are likely to apply their knowledge at work. Hence their employers will have to buy it. This fact has been recognised by a number of software companies which offer restricted versions of their software for home use free of charge. A successful example of this practice is Adobe Acrobat. The reader for PDF files is free and is installed on virtually every machine. Adobe makes its profits with the professional version used to create and edit these files. Dykes' main argument is that property becomes null through culpable inactivity on the part of the owner. This idea dates back to John Locke. "Hence, it is the responsibilty of a property 'owner' to actively pursue violations of that ownership", Dykes sums up. It can be assumed that over 90% of all users have at least at some point employed pirated software. Obviously, an effective strategy to counter abuse has not been set up thus depriving the "owners" of their rights in a moral sense. It is not an option to pursue individual infringements because of cost and bad publicity which would lead to a "decline in popularity among software buyers" (Dykes, 1995). It is so easy to spread IP nowadays that it becomes "irrelevant and worthless". Later when we take a look at digital protection mechanisms we will see why this generalisation is wrongful. <heading>Innovation dilemma</heading>Dutfield's and Suthersanen's article describes innovation as a process taking place in small steps - "incremental" - and builds upon earlier findings - "cumulative". The balance that has to be found here is between a too low threshold of protection which hinders innovation in the first place because it does not guarantee the inventor an income and too high threshold as it makes follow-on innovation too expensive or impossible. The authors speak of a "fundamental problem" with respect to our property right system. It is clear that this article is focused on the problems of researchers, but naturally this is relevant to the entire society. <heading>]Forms of protection </heading>DRM etc and why Dykes is wrong 