Whenever a set of seemingly indubitable premises give rise to a conclusion that is contradictory or intolerable, a paradox emerges. Paradoxes imply profound flaws in the languages they are based on. For if it cannot be shown that there is some error in the premises then the final culprits must be our reasoning and concepts. This essay will examine and contrast two main semantic paradoxes, namely Quine's paradox and the Liar. With regard to the Liar, only its classic and strengthened forms will be dealt with here. Quine's paradox can be stated as: '"yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation" yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation'. Through substitutional reasoning we acquire 1) it = 'yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation' and 2) its quotation = "yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation". Therefore 3) it appended to its quotation = '"yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation" yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation'. Thus, we obtain the original sentence of Quine's paradox. So, in fact, 3) asserts that "The sentence '"yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation" yields a falsehood when appended to its own quotation.' is false". As a result, Quine's paradox can be simplified into the sentence 'This sentence is false.' This is a paradox because if the sentence is false as it claims to be, then its claim is true and thus, the sentence is true. On the other hand, if the sentence's assertion that it is false is incorrect and is in fact true, then its claim that it is false is correct. In other words, it is true if and only if it is false and false if and only if it is true. 'This sentence is false' is the classical version of the Liar paradox. It is similar in all respects to the distilled conclusion of Quine's paradox which yields falsity when true and truth when falsified. The Liar has developed over the centuries to yield numerous variants, but what they all have in common is self-reference, either direct or indirect. The strengthened Liar is just a Liar that is customised to beat systems that do not believe in the necessity of assigning a true or false predicate to every claim. It is represented as 'This sentence is either false or paradoxical' Now that both paradoxes have been defined, it is time to discuss the similarities and differences between them. This will be carried out by examining how they stand up against the proposed solutions towards solving each paradox. Such an acid test will determine the strengths and weaknesses of each, thus enabling one to observe the intricacies of their paradoxical natures in operation. The classical Liar is the basic model that the two paradoxes possess in common. Quine's paradox can be interpreted as a more advanced form the Liar which was constructed to overcome the proposed solutions of its simpler sibling. Examining the solutions to the Liar first and seeing how they fare against Quine's paradox will enable one to have an understanding of the evolutionary nature of paradoxes. One of the earliest 'solutions' towards the Liar is to ban the use of self-reference. By doing this, the Liar would cease to be paradoxical because the 'this' in 'this sentence is false' would not be able to refer to the sentence it was in. Quine's paradox, however, is specially formulated to deal with the challenge of barring direct self-reference. Quine has constructed a paradox that makes no use of demonstratives (e.g. this), or indexicals (e.g. I). The paradox instead utilises the ability of an English sentence to name itself through the use of quotes, and allowing inherent properties to interact with the sentence named. By encoding latent paradoxical qualities in a sentence that are expressed under the condition of repetition, Quine overcomes the disadvantage of the Liar - namely, direct self-reference. However, banning self-reference would have dire consequences on the rest of the natural languages. Non-paradoxical sentences such as 'This sentence is printed' make perfect sense. Also, Gödel's proof of the incompleteness of arithmetic relies on the foundation provided by self-referential sentences. Additionally, designating sentences that possess non-referring grammatical subjects as meaningless would render such innocuous statements such as 'every unicorn has a horn' to be without meaning, despite being understandable to anyone who possesses the relevant ideas, although the subject matter may not exist. Alfred Tarski, a polish logician, proposed in a 1933 paper a method by which true sentences could be defined that avoided the use of other semantic terms. His formal conception of a true statement was one that satisfied the criteria of material adequacy: X is true if and only if p where `X' is replaced by the structural-descriptive name (or quotation name) of a sentence and `p' is replaced by the sentence. However, under this treatment, named Convention T, a paradox could be obtained upon substitution of a sentence of the form 'U is not true'. The Liar and Quine's paradox are both eligible candidates for this situation (under Convention T a legitimate declarative sentence is either true or else false, so there is no need for the strengthened Liar; not true = false). This is because both expressions make use of natural language's ability to talk about its own semantics. In order to prevent both paradoxes from operating, Tarski set forth his theory of the hierarchy of languages. Under this proposal, the truth of an object language, O, can only be defined by the metalanguage, M. Thus, the liar can only come about in the innocuous form 'This sentence is false-in-O', which must itself be a sentence of M, and hence cannot be true-in-O, and is false instead of paradoxical. This renders the Liar sentence unable to produce a contradiction because its truth or falsity is beyond its ability to state. For Tarski, truth cannot be defined for semantically closed languages, where the global truth predicate "is a true sentence" can be characterised. Instead, truth in a particular language must appeal to another language a step higher in the hierarchy. This is Tarski's 'Undefinability Theorem'. Under this treatment, both the Liar and Quine's paradox are powerless to achieve their desired perplexing ends. However, by forcing Tarski to make this claim, the paradoxes have cornered language into artificiality. As Haack has mentioned, Tarski's theorem seems to lack intuitive justification independent of its utility to combat paradoxes in natural language. The Undefinability Theorem is an ad hoc response in this regard, and offers no further aid in defining what exactly constitutes truth. <fnote> URL : section 2- possible solutions </fnote><fnote>S. Haack, 1978, Philosophy of Logic: 144 </fnote>Saul Kripke's try at rescuing language from paradox involves rejecting the assumption that a well-formed statement must be either true or false. Ordinary sentences acquire their truth value through the concept of groundedness; any declarative sentence X is entitled to be represented in the form ''X' is true'. This can be extended to '"X' is true' is true' and so forth. Kripke rejects the infinite hierarchy of meta-languages proposed by Tarski in favour of one formal object language having an infinite hierarchy of partial interpretations. Only the truth predicate is the basic partially-interpreted predicate in this formal language. Additionally, grounded sentences do not necessarily possess truth values. For example the statement 'the present king of France is bald' is neither true nor false. Sentences such as the classical Liar are ungrounded without truth value, because it is self-referring and unverifiable. Quine's paradox, although being able to be grounded, succumbs to the unavailability of classical truth predicates in Kripke's system and thus ceases to be a paradox. However, the strengthened Liar poses a problem for Kripke. The statement 'This sentence is either false or paradoxical' forces one to abandon the refuge of ambiguity and decided between choices that inevitably lead to contradiction. Both the Liar and Quine's paradox present difficulties for natural language to overcome. They are similar paradoxes because they both self-referentially assert their own falsity. The main difference between the two paradoxes is that of direct and indirect self-reference. Quine's paradox refers to itself indirectly due to it being comprised of two sentences, only to be activated when one sentence is appended to the other. On the other hand, the Liar is a directly self-referring paradox. 'This sentence is false' refers to one and the same sentence and requires no auxiliary semantic equipment to convey its intended paradoxical nature. Quine's paradox is therefore able to dodge solutions that capitalise on the direct self-reference of the Liar. This is the significance of their contrast. However, any solution that neglects focusing on direct self-reference in favour of taking aim at self-reference as a whole is able to attack both the Liar and Quine's paradox, as shown by Tarski's Undefinability Theorem. The advantage of the Liar becomes apparent upon observing the strengthened Liar variation, which surpasses the limitations of Quine's paradox under the treatment of Kripke. However, despite the effectiveness of many of these proposed solutions, they also eschew the naturalness of language. Perhaps in the end paradoxes are something we have to live with; subtle yet recalcitrant gaps in the tapestry of communication. 