<heading>Introduction </heading>This assay is to investigate firms' decisions to distribute cash flow and their choices between paying out in the form of dividends or stock repurchases. Traditionally, dividends were predominant mechanism firms used to deliver their permanent earnings, while share repurchases was relatively unimportant until mid-1980. A study conducted by Fama and French (2001) based on the US companies shows the proportion of firms paying dividends decreased sharply after 1978 (from 66.5% to 20.8% in 1999). Meanwhile, Grullon and Michaely (2002) observed there was an increasing propensity in the recent years of purchasing stocks, and the evidence shows the expenditures on shares repurchase program relative to total earnings increased dramatically from 4.8% in 1980 to 41.8% in 2000( see Figure 1). <figure/>Thus, in order to understand how the firms choose one method over another, the assay will especially focus on the potential motives behind firms to distribute its retained earnings via dividends or stock repurchases. <heading>2 Dividends Policy</heading>A dividend is a cash payment made by the corporation to its common share holders pro rata. It is usually paid out of the current earning of the firm, and thereby represents a partial distribution of profits. Once a company decides whether to pay dividends, they may establish a somewhat stable dividend policy, which might in turn the impact on investors and the perceptions of the company in the financial market. In this section I will discuss two types: regular and special dividends. <heading>2.1 Tax Effects</heading>Miller and Modigliani (1961) present the irrelevance of dividend policy theory. In a perfect world without any taxes, it makes no difference whether the value is delivered via dividends or share repurchases as long as the investment plan is independent. As a result, firm's value is determined only by the cash flows the firm generates for its claimholders. However, in the real world, there is a certain percentage of dividends must be paid out as corporate and personal taxes. The model developed by Farrar and Selwyn (1967) assumes that shareholders attempt to maximize their after-tax income by choosing the amount of personal and corporate leverage and also whether to accept corporate distribution as dividends or capital gains. If firm pays out all its cash flows as dividends, the shareholder will receive  FORMULA  <list><heading>Where </heading>r = the borrowing rate Dc = corporate debtsTc = the corporate tax rateDpi = personal debts held by the individual Tpi = the personal income tax rate</list>Empirical evidence in the United States indicates that the capital gains tax is less than the personal income tax, therefore the model implies that perhaps it would be optimal to pay no dividends at all due to the tax disadvantage of ordinary income over capital gains. Nevertheless, the shareholders with different tax liability do not necessarily have the same preference. Tax rates on dividends income differ across taxpayers since the income tax schedule could be progressive or some agents are tax-exempt. The investors who are facing low marginal tax rate, for example, retired individuals, pension funds and university endowments funds may actually prefer stocks that pay handsome dividends. <heading>2.2 Signaling Models</heading>One of the significant benefits of dividends is that they provide valuable signals. The mitigation of the information asymmetries between managers and outsiders through unexpected change in dividends is the cornerstone of dividends signaling models. These models presume that only managers have all the information about firms and outsiders do not. Investors therefore value all firms as of low quality, which consequently provide strong incentives for the managers in high quality firms to try to convey their firms' true values in a way, such as cannot be mimicked by low quality firms. A firm increases dividends payout is sending an expensive but credible signal to the market as demonstrating its confidence to obtain higher future cash flow, in such a way that it can sustain the permanently higher dividends without increasing the bankruptcy possibility. The historical data suggest the stock prices may increase by average 1~3% after the announcement. The signal of dividends has strong power since they are tied closely to long term cash flow patterns, which can be traded off against the tax loss associated with dividend income. Special dividend is another form of dividends policy, which is typically viewed in the market place as a temporary increase in firm's payout while investors do not anticipate it occurs on the regular basis. As an unexpected positive change in dividends payment, the earning surprise can convey the same information as regular one. Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach (2000) find out if the current cash flow does not appear sustainable, a firm would be reluctant to initiate or raise dividends levels because of the negative stock price reaction can occur if the firm was subsequently forced to reverse the changes. Ghosh and Woolridge (1988) and Denisal. (1994) report an average stock price decline about 6% in approximately 3 days surrounding a dividend cut announcement. As such, managers could use special dividends as a means of distributing cash in a setting characterized by short-term increase in cash flow and prior positive share price performance. Nevertheless, some investors interpret huge dividends payment as a sign of poor investment perspectives, and actually rather to see managers use up all the retained earning to fund rapid expansion. <heading>2.3 Agency Costs</heading>Prudent managers working on the behalf of the shareholders should invest on the all profitable investment opportunities which are consistent with investors' wealth maximization objective. Unfortunately, the separation of management and ownership implies that the manager might not always act in the shareholders' best interests. The Free Cash Flow Hypothesis was firstly presented by Jensen (1986), and he claims that the excess of free cash flow (more than required to fund all positive NPV projects) could tempt managers to engage in value-reducing activities e.g. investing in low-return projects for "empire building". In this case, large dividends payments help to diminish agency costs because it will deduce available free cash flow. On the other hand, Lintner (1956) conducted interviews with 28 carefully chosen US corporations, and his studies revealed: Firms primarily concerned with stability of dividends; Earnings is the most crucial factor to determine the dividends decisions; Firms very reluctant to cut dividends, at the meantime investment requirements generally had little effect on modifying dividends patterns. Therefore, although the managerial efforts are not directly observable, managers' hands are tied and under stress by precommittment of paying big dividends, which Easterbrook (1984) regards as an incentive mechanism to provide incentive effects of debt without risk shifting or overhang. Further, substantial payouts to shareholders reduce managers powers, and making them to incur the monitoring of the capital market when firms has to acquire new capital, where monitoring of managers is available at lower cost. The agency costs theory uses dividends policy to better align the interests of shareholders and corporate managers. <heading>3. Stock Repurchase</heading>It is an alternative program by which a company buys back its own shares from the market place, reducing the number of outstanding shares while allowing shareholders to receive cash payments as a capital gain. Stock repurchase are generally made in the following ways: Open market: it usually involves gradual programs over a period of time. Tender offer: corporations specify a number, a tender price and a period of time during the offer is in effect. Block of shares in on a negotiated basis. Stock repurchase was permitted in the UK only since 1981 and in Japan since 1995. But since 2000, over three-quarters of the companies in S&P 500 have bought back stocks. <heading> 3.1 Tax Advantage</heading>As I mentioned earlier in dividend policy, in absence of taxes and transaction cost, shareholders are indifferent between dividends and capital gains. Now we assume firms decided to implement the policy of translating its retained earnings in the form of share repurchases, in which case all gains are taxed at the capital gains rate. Farrar and Selwyn (1967) model represents the after-tax income of an investor as:  FORMULA  Where Tgi = the capital gains tax rate The implication of the formula is explicit: As long as the tax rate on capital gains is less than dividends, shareholders should prefer share repurchases to dividends payments due to the tax benefits, and the magnitude of tax advantage depends on the costs bases marginal tax rates for the individuals. Moreover, a non-tendering shareholder can defer the tax liability until the shares are actually sold. In this case, the deferred capital gain equals to the time value of money. Despite the theoretical analysis, surveys of executive suggest taxes are the second-order concern in setting the payout policy, and the tax-shield hypothesis has little empirical supports. <heading> 3.2 Flexibility </heading>The primary hypothesis is that dividends represent the ongoing long term commitment of delivering its permanent cash flows, while repurchases are more pro-cyclical thus preserves financial flexibility relative to dividends. The market punishes a company if it fails to achieve historical patterns of dividends annual percentage increases. Given the market expectations, stock repurchases is considered as a sensible option for firms who have a high likelihood of not being sustainable. Grullon and Michaely (2002) report that young firms have a greater propensity in the recent years to choose financial repurchases over dividends. It is consistent with Guay and Harford (2000) results, who demonstrate the aggregate share repurchases are more volatile and vary considerably with business cycle compared to dividends payments. From shareholders point of view, with a dividend, the discretion lies with the firm. Investors will receive the dividends and must deal with the tax consequences. In contrast, a share repurchase gives investors an own option whether to sell or not depend on the timing of cash needed, the tax condition and the current performance of the company etc. <heading>3.3 Signaling Effects</heading>Dittmar (2002) investigates the reasons behind decisions by firms to repurchase stock over 1977-1996, and she concludes a principal severed as a yardstick in judging the rationale of a payback program: a corporation should repurchase shares if the management believes their stocks are undervalued in the financial market meanwhile there are no other better investment opportunities available. If the shares are repurchased near the undervalued price, the company will earn a rate of return greater than market required cost of equity. According to the theory, managers should have more information about the true value and the prospective of the firms than outsiders. Therefore, the share repurchases send a favorable signal to the market as the management perceives the current share price is lower than the intrinsic value. Vermaelen (1981) claims abnormal price increasing 3.37% in the US after the announcement of a repurchase plan by increasing its return on equity and earning per share. In addition, repurchasing details also affect the significance of the signaling power: The higher the percentage of stocks companies buyback, the greater management's conviction; The size of the premiums reflect the management's expectation the scale stocks are undervalued; The inside selling creates extra motivations for employers to work harder when the company's performance closely associates with their wealth. Guay and Harford (2000) research discovers the price reaction to positive dividends increases is more positive than the reaction to repurchases. Some latest studies indicate a number of repurchase program are announced with the attention of misleading investors. A few companies announced buyback plans were merely trying to boost the share price in the short term. Moreover, similar to dividends payment, a big repurchase announcement may suggest the firm has exhausted profitable investments opportunities because payback is rational only if investments expected to yield a rate of return less than share repurchases. Brennan and Thakor (1990) recommend signaling impact does not determine the choice between repurchases versus dividends. They also notice if there exists a fixed cost to gathering information, shareholders with large position would have more incentives to become informed than the others with small positions. The uninformed investors run the risk of being expropriated by others with more information, hence stock repurchases may act as a redistribution mechanism from small shareholders to the larger better informed ones. <heading>3.4 Takeover Defense </heading>The manager repurchases shares to block a takeover only if the cost of doing so is not too high. Since the cost is inversely related to the value of the firm under his management, a repurchase signals that the value of the stock is high, blocking a takeover. While a repurchase increases the expected value of the shares, it also makes to stock riskier. The model also indicates that there are too few takeovers for efficiency. <heading>3.5 Agency Problems</heading>Share repurchases may contribute to more responsible use of free cash flow. Firstly, managers return excess cash through repurchase programs can be acting at the best interests of owners by not wasting the fund for negative NPV projects, which is analogous to dividends payments. Secondly, share repurchases raise the proportion of non-selling ownership in the firms. If the manager proportionate ownership increases as he does not tender the shares in the repurchase program, the substantial percentage will reduce the conflicts and align the interests between owners and management, thereby the firms will be strengthened. <heading>4. Dividends Puzzle </heading>Financial economists have now for a long time tried to explain why corporations pay out its retained earnings via cash dividends instead of share repurchases. It becomes a persistent puzzle because dividends often subject to higher tax liability than buying back stocks. This assay has quoted a number of insights from different researchers, theoretically as well as empirically, into the dividends puzzle by elaborating the relative virtues corresponding to two different payout policies respectively. Nevertheless, the issues as to why firms pay dividends is yet unsolved. Several rationales for corporate dividends have been published in the literature, but there is no unanimity among the financial economists, despite everyone agrees the issue is important, dividends payments is still the most commonly used mechanism in corporations worldwide. <heading>5. Evaluation</heading>During my assay writing process, I have shared a same question with many researchers: is share repurchase replacing the dividends payment? Grullon and Michaely (2002) found the phenomenon that dividends substitute for repurchase in the state. In their paper, they exam the average annual growth rate of repurchase, say 26.1%, is larger than the average annual growth rate of cash dividends, 6.8%, in past two decades. In contrast to Grullon and Michaely, Dittmar (2000) presents a different all-round research for this issue. His paper defines the shares repurchases by setting repurchases equal to zero for any firm that doesn't repurchase at least 0.05% of its market value of equity instead of 1%, and he concluded the repurchasing does not replace the dividend. In my opinion, according to the historical total payouts patterns, the smoothness of dividends series combined with the volatility of repurchase series do not appear that one is replacing the other, rather repurchases seem to serve the complementary role of paying out short term cash flows. They are more or less equivalent way of paying out retained earning, while stock repurchases indeed have become an important source of payout in the recent years. 