<abstract><heading>1. Abstract</heading>The purpose of this paper is to discuss whether the alignment of business with information technology (IT) could be a possible way to gain a decisive competitive advantage on organizational performance. The paper examines on the possibilities and necessities of alignment by evaluating sources, ideas and researches of different authors and provides an insight on the diversity of prior research on alignment. Such a deduction provides firms with a platform on several contingency factors of alignment where they position within their respective industries. </abstract><heading>2. Introduction</heading>The fervent debate concerning strategic alignment of business and IT is under discussion for many years. Businesses are investing decades of time and billions of dollars to struggle for achieving competitive advantage by using information systems. However, as Luftman and Oldach (1996) state, organizations seem hard to position itself and identify their long term benefits by harnessing the capabilities of IT. This 'competitive advantage' paradox has been both generally supported (Venkatraman 1989, Niederman et al 1991, Earl, 1993, Boynton et al 1996, Davidson 1996) and condemned (Carr 2003) in the literature. As a consequence, there is no precise, commonly agreed notion of preposition of alignment as well as the contribution of information technology to the success of organizations. Business-IT alignment is defined as a process of 'applying IT in an appropriate and timely way and in harmony with business strategies, goals, and needs'. (Brier and Luftman 1999) In this paper, applying business-IT alignment as a mean to strive for competitive advantage in dynamic marketplace as the underlying theory (Adcock et al 1983, Cardinali 1992, Faltermayer 1994), possible antecedents of alignment are analyzed to give insights on the extent in which IT contributes to the business success. <heading>3. Business - IT Alignment: Possible?</heading>The importance of business-IT alignment is widespread in IS research literature. Papp (1995) indicates that this concept has documented since the late 1970s (McLean and Soden 1977, IBM 1981, Parket and Benson 1988, Mills 1986, Brancheau and Wetherbe 1987). Alignment addresses a coherent goal across different departments with IT perspectives. Such cohesive organization goal and IT strategies enable better leveraging the business - IT partnership. This harmony can be extended and applied to help the organization in identifying new opportunities. (Papp 1999) Brier and Luftman (1999) point out that the traditional methods for planning the business strategies have not taken full advantage of IT. That is one of the main reasons why organizations fail to realize the underlined potential of their IT investments (Barclay et al 1997). Brier and Luftman (1999) adopt and modify Henderson and Venkatraman s' (1989) strategic alignment model (Fig. 1), which in concert with their enablers (enabling activities) / inhibitors (inhibiting activities) research from 1992 to 1997 consecutively. <figure/>Brier and Luftman (1999) interviewed the executives and obtained the data from consultants' engagements and eventually identified six most important enablers and inhibitors for business-IT alignment. They argue that by maximizing alignment enablers and minimizing inhibitors through a six-step approach, strategic alignment of business with IT can be achieved. <heading>4. Critique on Brier and Luftman s' study</heading><heading>4.1 Source of idea </heading>Brier and Luftman s' (1999) study on enablers and inhibitor based on the strategic alignment model (Henderson and Venkatraman 1989) which help us to understand the relationship between the organization/IT process and strategies required in organization. This is a leading principle both for research (Barclay et al 1997) and for practical (Luftman and Oldach 1996, Brier et al 1999) purposes. However, the model presumes that management is always taking full control of what the situation is and clearly understanding what is going on, meanwhile, information infrastructure can deliberately be aligned with emerging management insights (Ciborra and Hanseth 1998, Ciborra 1998, Maes 1999, Galliers and Newell 2003). As Earl (1996) states, it takes a considerable time and effort to examine and investigate the processes and applications in the organization. This can be done in a future plan, but it is not an immediate panacea. Also, this model might become ineffective particularly in the rapid changing environment because flexibilities can be gained by allowing certain misalignment within the organization (Ives and Jarvenpaa 1994). For example, paper-based fax machines are still widely used in the organization as people can check and read the fax documents in his own time, though video-conferencing technology can greatly reduce the processing time for communication and provide streamline business process. What's more, according to Maes's (1999 p.5) study, a 'lack of balance' (the existence of non-alignment) between business and IT is often a source of innovation and success in the organization. Social dimensions are another aspect being neglected in the model. This lack of attention resulted in a misinterpretation of alignment - solely integrating business and IT s' strategies and infrastructures (Benbasat and Reich 1998), whereas ignoring the impacts of 'organizational learning'. (Ciborra 1998) <heading>4.2 Assumption on ideas</heading>Brier and Luftman (1999) develop the ideas of alignment enablers and inhibitors rested on several antecedent assumptions, as summarized here. <heading>4.2.1 Successful IT History</heading>A successful IT track record in department tends to improve its relationships with other business units (Earl 1996). Benbasat and Reich (2000) argue that the communication between business and IT executives can be enhanced by the degree of IT successful implementation. Brier and Luftman (1999) find that lack of IT track record - 'IT fails to meet its commitments', ranked third in the list of inhibitors, contributes to the failure of alignment. They presume: Successful IT History facilitated the business - IT alignment. <heading>4.2.2 Knowledge Sharing Between Business and IT Executives</heading>Prior researches on strategic business IT alignment highlight the importance of knowledge sharing between business and IT executives (Carrico and Johnston 1988, Venkatraman 1989, Gurbaxani et al 2000). This importance of knowledge management and sharing mechanism within organization - 'IT understands the business', ranks third in the top six enablers of business IT alignment (Brier and Luftman 1999). Therefore, the assumption of the study is: Knowledge sharing between business and IT executives enhances the business IT alignment. <heading>4.2.3 Strategic Business IT Planning</heading>Strategic business IT planning has been widely accepted as a core Brier and Luftman (1999) tool of managing IT resources and business strategy (Ives and Jarvenpaa 1993). conclude business IT planning in his findings as second most important factors both in enablers - 'IT involved in strategy development' and inhibitors - 'IT does not prioritize well'. Thus, the second assumption here is: Well-defined and comprehensive strategic planning process promotes the alignment of business and IT. <heading>4.2.4 Business and IT Executives' Relationship Management</heading>Successful relationship management between Business and IT executives plays an important role both in planning and implementing the IT projects. (Earl and Feeny 1997 Feeny and Ross 2000) As Brier and Luftman (1999) state, 'senior executive support for IT' and 'IT/business lack of close relationships', the most important enablers and inhibitors respectively, are critical to the successful implementation of business - IT alignment. They assume that: Active business and IT executives' relationship management is positive related to business IT alignment. This paper examines the assumption of these four factors, three of which - successful IT history, knowledge sharing between business and IT executives and strategic business IT planning - are directly based on prior empirical research on alignment (Kirs and Sabherwal 1994, Benbasat and Reich 1996, Benbasat and Reich 2000, Cragg et al 2002, Chan et al 2006). The effect of the forth factor - Business and IT executives' relationship management has been empirically examined by the antecedents discussing the evolving role of CIO and IT executives. (Earl and Feeny 1997, Feeny and Ross 2000) <heading>4.3 Research method</heading>Rather than simply developing a theory-based, deductive study of alignment, Brier and Luftman (1999) employ an interpretive, data-driven approach to examine the critical factors on alignment. Research covers 1,051 business and IT executives over 500 Fortune 1,000 US organizations attended seminars addressing business IT alignment. Attendees are assisted to assess the contribution of IT and identify their role in the organization. Even the most comprehensive researches are not able to capture the whole picture of the multidimensional world. (Mingers 2001) Luftman and Brier s' (1999) study adopts generally a single positivist approach which might often gain only limited views of the particular research situation. For example, the findings might be limited to the attendees to be measured or quantified. Also, according to Habermas's (1979, 1984, 1987, 1993) theory of communicative action and adopting by Mingers (2001), there are three worlds relevant to research methods, namely the 'Material World', 'our Social World' and 'my Personal World'. Each domain has its specific mode and relationship to the research. In Luftman and Brier s' research, individuals' subjective meanings might be amplified and thus neglecting the more general social and material context in the alignment. A pluralist methodology combining several different paradigms is suggested to enrich the research results (Mingers 2001) and as a consequence, getting a more reliable picture of the research situation. The study examines several large organizations in US in both private and public sectors (Brier and Luftman 1999). However, it is questionable whether these findings (enablers and inhibitors of alignment) are still valid to different sizes of organization in different nations. For example, small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) tend to use centralized structure to coordinate their working units. Therefore, 'IT resources shared' - ranked eleventh in enablers, might be more significant to the business - IT alignment. <heading>5. Business - IT Alignment: Too Difficult and Not Necessary?</heading>Even the fervent adherent in the context of business IT alignment cannot deny that the frameworks and concepts developed is not at all unequivocal. Various dimensions of strategic alignment, such as the degree of alignment against productivity, are amphibious. It creates rooms to explore whether all organizations are well-served and benefited equally by allocating scarce resources to improve alignment and whether the adoption of particular business strategy or industry influences the extent to alignment matters. Not surprisingly, severe critique has been given on the difficulties and necessities of business IT alignment (Keen 1996, Ciborra 1998, Ciborra and Hanseth 1998). Carr's (2003) theory on the role of IT is well known in the literature. He claims that as IT's power and availability have expanded, strategic value of IT investment decreased. IT is shifting from a potential source of competitive capabilities to just a cost of doing business. It is essential, but not strategic resource in the organization. Therefore, IT and business alignment do not matter anymore as IT can no longer provide the organizations with competitive advantages. In his opinion, the key of managing IT and business units is not seeking advantages of alignment, but is defensively cautioned for the cost and risks in IT investment. Several possible antecedents of alignment deal with business - IT alignment as illusory, even inexpedient (Ciborra 1998, Maes 1999). Business developments are not solely depended on IT development. Even the rigid installation of IT infrastructure might be confined by the industry standards or political requirements. That's what Arthur (1988, 1994) called self-reinforcing mechanisms to the organization in economics. Chan (2002) argues that total business and IT alignment is complex and difficult to achieve. Earl (1996) further states that alignment is hard to achieve unless an understanding and shared vision within the organization, from top managers to front line staff. However, objectives are not always fully appreciated down the line in an organization, where series of decisions are taken by various level of management. For examples, details of the hardware, software and operation platforms might be reflected in an emphasis on cutting costs rather than adding value by the line management. Besides, many authors (Coakley et al 1996 and Ciborra 1998) question the measurability of the degree of business IT alignment. As alignment is a continuous process that requires monitoring over a long period of time and handling contingencies if necessary, difficulties on evaluating and measuring its effectiveness remain a major obstacle to alignment. <heading>6. Critique on Carr's theory</heading>Nicholas Carr's (2003) discussion on the role of IT has been widely examined. His source of idea based on the argument that IT - carries digital information just as railroads carry goods and power grids carry electricity, has become merely commoditized product and no longer confers competitive advantages, and thus contribute to the unnecessary to any alignment with business. His theory of commoditization of IT, with electricity and railroad analogy, however, do have their limitations and constraints. (Brown et al 2003) IT systems are not analogous as standard electricity or the railway gauges, rather than any confinement or standardization, the continuous improvement in processing power and performance have had a multiplicative effect coming together, leading to an extension to its reach to other areas like biological organisms and RFID. Furthermore, IT brings about new practices and possibilities for the organization to create and compete in the marketplace (Brown et al 2003). <heading>7. Conclusion</heading>Although the prior studies on business - IT alignment has been helpful in general, many previous researches have ignored the notion of context dependency employed in the real world (Goedvolk et al 2000). This paper thus examines and evaluates the antecedents of alignment and provides insights into why prior research on business - IT alignment may have reported diverse and sometimes conflicting findings. In fact, different organizational structure (both formal and informal), social dimensions, industries and business practices are likely to apply to different approaches and degrees of alignment (even it is misaligned) (Brown and Magill 1998, Ciborra 1998). In other words, implications of alignment (or misalignment) depend on various contingency factors, like organizational size, marketplace, social and political concerns, internal and external relationship, industry or strategy. The influence of contingency factors on business - IT alignment can be illustrated in the well established typology of business strategy, including Prospector, Defender, Analyzer and Reactor (Miles and Snow 1978, Chan and Sabherwal 2001). Prospectors are those who seek for new product opportunities and emphasis on flexibility and innovation. They usually engage in dynamic marketplace and efficiency - oriented operations. Defenders desire for stability and cost containment. They function in a predictable environment with a mechanistic organization structure. Analyzers concentrate on pursuing the flexibility and efficiency simultaneously. They employ a matrix structure to achieve innovation while maintaining the economies of scale to their core products. Reactors are excluded here as they employ an unconscious strategy, according to Pearce and Zahra (1990). Chan and Sabherwal s' (2001) study reveals an insight where different business approaches contribute to different degree of alignment. For examples, in mining industry, organization strategy tends to be defensive as the market environment is largely predictable (Defender). It is easier for them to achieve alignment but lesser advantages provided (Chan et al 2006), perhaps due to the fact that they do not have an urgent need compared to the Prospectors and Analyzers (Keen 1996). To conclude, for IT managers, this paper provides a platform to consider on various approaches of alignment. However, towards a contingency approach, this suggests that future study should be more market, structural or strategy specific in order to gain a more reliable result in a given research situation. 