<abstract></abstract><heading>Background</heading>The microprocessor industry is one of the most profitable industries (Intel's gross margins can reach 47% on average), virtually dominated by Intel (Kharif, 2002). AMD gained its share from 13% to 20% in 2001. However, the industry is changing in profound ways. Since the introduction of the first microprocessor, processor manufacturers have applied themselves to one aim: squeezing ever more transistors onto a single chip (IBM, 2006). The number of transistors (the electronic devices used to power the calculation) per every unit area has been increased dramatically over years (Intel, 2006). In general, this can be translated into a significant increase in the performance of computer processor. Gordon E. Moore (Intel, 2006), co-founder of Intel, claims that the semi-conductor (microprocessor) performance would double every two years for the foreseeable future. Appendix figure 1 indicates the evolution of microprocessors' performance (Tuomi, 2002). <heading>Natural Technological limit of microprocessor</heading>From appendix figure 1, the evolution of microprocessor's performance shows a classical S-curve for the industry life cycle (Rogers, 1995). It explains that for a particular technology reaching its natural limit (the limits of miniaturization at atomic levels), there would be little improvement in its performance over a long period (Chaia et al, 2005). As soon as the developed of a new technology that can serve the mainstream customer's needs, a new S-curve is evolved, rewriting the rules of competition and the industry structure (appendix figure 2). <heading>Homogeneous market demand of microprocessors</heading>The demand from microprocessor industry is relative pure characteristics among different groups of customers in the market (Song, 2004). Users in all groups tend to believe that a better processor with higher clock speed and larger memory capacity inside (the level-two cache) would apply to a better performance (Chaia et al, 2005). It means that the more advanced the product they develop, the better chance to acquire the market share from the competitors, further enhancing the competition and reducing the product life. <heading>Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)</heading>AMD was founded in 1969 as a producer of logic chip (Wikipedia contributors, 2006a). In 1975, it successfully cloned the Intel 8080 microprocessor by reverse-engineering. In 1982, because of multi-sourcing policy of the some large customers like IBM, Intel approached AMD to sign a cross-licensing contract, appointing AMD as a second source chip marker of x86 processors. However, the corporation only lasted for 4 years, ending after Intel built the "copy-exact" manufacturing methodology that allowed them to easily transfer the product from research laboratory to commercialize through standardized procedure (Intel, 2006; Yager, 2004). Intel then pulled the plug on its AMD agreements and refused to hand over technical details of their next generation i386 part. AMD challenged this decision and won under arbitration eventually. AMD first completely in-house processor, named K5 launching in 1995 (Wikipedia contributors, 2006a). Afterwards, AMD's product introductions followed tightly with Intel's competing in clock speed and memory capability (Appendix figure 3). In 2001, Intel teamed up with Hewlett-Packard (HP) to jointly design an entirely new chip based on 64-bit architecture called Itanium, trying to kick AMD out from the next generation standards (Kirkpatrick, 2004). At the same time, AMD decided to build its own 64-bit chip based on current x86 architecture. A new battle of competing industrial standardization begins. <heading>Industry analysis</heading>The two underlined game rules in microprocessor industry are "being first" and "being popular". "Being first" means that the player need to pursue in the technological race. The first company who can build the next generation processor and produce in volume could win a large market share. The followers have to adjust their strategy and development constrained by the first mover's decision. "Being popular" means that the players in the game need to build up their complementary assets, like brands and partnerships. This helps them to penetrate the market and gain the support and adoption from the customers for their innovations (Chaia et al, 2005). In order to understand the competitive forces that act on the industry, Porter's five forces analysis of microprocessor industry is shown in table 1 (Porter, 1980, Porter and Millar, 1985). <table/>According to Professor Henderson (2006), there should be at least two more competitive forces in a particular industry, namely "Complementors" and "Political, regulatory and institutional context". Complementors are referred to two businesses with respect to a customer which they sell a product (or products) that complement the product of another company by adding value to them. For instance, "Wintel" alliance (Microsoft and Intel) creates more value in the eye of customer than promotes each product alone. That's also Andrew Grove, former CEO of Intel called "the Sixth force" (Brandenburger and Nalebuff, 1996). Political, regulatory and institutional force refers to the guidance and power influence exerted from political parties and professional bodies that might shape the industry. A good example is the restriction of technological transfer from United States to other countries. However, the industry structure is not static and the actions of the different players will deeply influence the evolution of industry. For instance, the adoption of Intel strategic moves has not only shaped the nature of competition in the industry but also likely changed the industry structure as well (Chaia et al, 2005). <heading>AMD's innovation capabilities</heading>Innovative capability, as Francis and Bessant (2005 p.172) define, is "an underlying capacity to gain advantage by implementing more and better ideas than rivals". They further point out that the capability might not be necessarily a set of attributes, but indeed, different kinds of innovation might require distinctive approaches. <heading>Types of innovation in AMD</heading>According to Francis and Bessant (2005), innovation can be targeted in four main types (appendix figure 4 and table 1). From the analysis of AMD's innovations in appendix table 2, the company possesses most of its innovation capabilities in advancing the product (appendix table 3) and process technologies. <heading>AMD's customer-centric innovation strategy</heading>AMD's innovation strategy is closely related to their customers (table 4). For years, AMD adopted a "me-too" strategy both in clip design and marketing. After the new CEO Hector Ruiz arrived, they understood that in order to against Intel in the industry, competing in the race of clock speed would not give them any competitive advantage. From early 2002, they start to shift their focus from building more transistors to adding more features on their chips (Kirkpatrick, 2004). By changing the focus, AMD is able to reap a significant market share from its competitor. <table/><heading>Strategic partnership</heading>AMD use industry partnerships as a means to counter Intel's superior financial resource (Wikipedia contributors, 2006a). Notably AMD established strategic relationship with VIA (which builds the controller chipset essential to AMD processors) and IBM as well as enlisted some Web publications (which helps to benchmark their processors). However, AMD's approach to partnerships differs from Intel's. Intel has long been established their private standard of their microprocessor, whereas AMD is building through open cooperation with their customers and complementors (Yager, 2004). For instance, the latest "Hammer Emulator" was available to developers as a free download and comment on it long before the technology becomes a chip. <heading>Innovation advantage</heading>Under current customer-centric innovation strategy, AMD can now build up their research on the basis of the market needs. Instead of concentrate solely on product or technology, they focus on providing solutions to the customers. The strategy aims to creating distinct value proposition to their customer. They are now able to respond to the market quickly and build up relationship with some of the big clients (Yager, 2004). This is particularly important to AMD for their long term development. The partnership strategy enhances AMD's innovation capability not only by allowing them to assess to some least and patented technologies, but also they are now able to build up their own "complementor ecosystem" which is essential to their product introduction (AMD, 2006). Product penetration used to be one of the main problems for AMD in the past, because Intel has tried to force their partners not to cooperate with AMD in the promotion of their product (Yager, 2004). <heading>Innovation disadvantage</heading>The main disadvantage of customer-centric innovation is that it might limit the creation of new products because AMD are now tried to meet the customer needs instead of pursuing the ultimate technological advancement. For instance, though the laboratory might possess a new technique in clip making that might lead to open a new market, it is abolished because of uncertain market needs. The partnership might vanish easily if the commitment from the partner is vulnerable or from Intel's blockade. For example, AMD could not convince IBM on a commercial PC business partnership because Intel offered IBM millions of dollars in market development funds (Kanellos, 2005). Also, through the open source policy with their partners, they would not charge for accessing to their licenses, together with the low price strategy, AMD come up with much lower product margin (7% sometimes) (Kharif, 2002). Intel commands a 30% to 40% premium over AMD's chips and enjoys 47% of profit margins. According to Hax and Wilde II (1999), Intel is able to position itself to lock-in their customers by its close and proprietary standards in the system. This put AMD into a vulnerable position in the industry. <heading>Threats to AMD</heading>From the analysis of industry background and company capabilities, it is obvious that AMD main threat is coming from its enormous competitor, Intel. With its huge market influence and resource, Intel is able to shape the industry structure as well as the forms of competition. They lock out AMD by their complementary capabilities on innovation speed, complementor system and proprietary standard (figure 5). <figure/><heading>Innovation speed</heading>For years, though sometimes AMD introduced its new models prior to Intel, Intel was able to capture and regain the market share in a very short period (Krewell, 2005a). In the process innovation, AMD is also lagging behind Intel by about a year in the transition to 65 nm, which does not allow them to add performance-enhancing features in the processor with a reasonable size (Krewell, 2005b). <heading>Complementor and Alliance</heading>One of the most powerful manipulations for Intel is that they are capable to maintain a huge system of complementors and alliances. According to Hax and Wilde II (1999), Intel adopts the system lock-in strategy which invests most of their efforts on building up their complementor network. That is also one of the strategic moves for the umbrella brand "Intel inside" strategy. <heading>Proprietary Standard</heading>As the market leader in the microprocessor industry, Intel was able to establish proprietary standard that is most favor to their long team development strategy. According to Oshri and Weeber (2006), Intel is approached the "Sponsored" standards, where they sponsor one or more entity and induce other firms to adopt those sets of technical specifications and then restrict access to licenses from competitors. It should be noticed that the model is not static. Instead, those three complements are interacted and influenced each other all the time. Once Intel exert a pushing force on one side, a new model of processor for instance, it will pass not only to the innovation side, but also transfer to their proprietary standards and lock up the complementors due to the wider adoption in the market. The dynamic of the model thus blockades AMD for entering into Intel's market. Apart from the Intel's "cage" threat, several disruptive technologies and substitutions were emerged that might potential influence AMD's competitive position in the market. Appendix table 5 summarizes the potential innovation based on technologies and concepts available today using Henderson and Clark's (1990) innovation framework. <heading>Recommendations</heading>To combat with the Intel's blockage, there is a call for the strategic review of existing innovation strategy at AMD. <heading>Free from the cage</heading>As table 4 shows, AMD's customer-centric innovation strategy included three components: connection, solution and differentiation. Solution and differentiation strategy shift the focus from the race of clock-speed to creation of the distinct value proposition to the customers. It is not implied the speed of innovation is not important, but instead, by changing the rules of the game, AMD is able to complete with Intel in a more equal basis. The identification of customer needs is not easy. As this paper states, the first mover could enjoy a larger market share. However, in order to develop a customized product faster, it is necessarily to identify the earlier market needs. Lead User research might be adopted in this case (Hippel, 2006). Connection strategy can be translated to the build up the influence in the complementor and customer society. This involves the high level management involvement on how to create the win-win collaboration. Those three innovation strategies can be used to "balance" the pressure from Intel's "Innovation speed" and "Complementor and Alliance" (Figure 6). However, in order to break down the deadlock, an extra opposite "force" is needed to against the force from the proprietary standard. Those three balancing efforts should be exerted together in order to take the "effect". As AMD pursue for the "open source" policy, the lack of formal innovation strategy on building up its proprietary standards is likely to be the reason that AMD cannot defect Intel in a long run. Thus, the developing of new competence on proprietary standards as well as reviewing the open source policy are vital. <figure/><heading>Implementation strategy</heading><heading>Short term</heading><heading>Lead User research</heading>Lead Users are users that have needs that foreshadow general demand in the market and expect to obtain high benefits from a solution to their needs. By tracing the Lead Users innovation, firms are able to identify the earlier market needs and thereafter coming up with effective innovation prior to the general marketplace (appendix figure 7) (Hippel, 2006). According to Professor Hippel (2006), there are four steps to implement the Lead Users research: Select a specific market and specific major trend that is interested in; Brainstorm those possible lead users within that possible target market; Brainstorm possible lead users outside possible target market; Specify what thing can be learnt from each type of Lead User. An example of lead user opportunity is shown in appendix table 6. However, drawbacks of Lead User research should be justified (appendix table 7). <heading>Medium term</heading><heading>Developing competence on proprietary standards</heading>The widespread adoption of a company's proprietary standards widens its own market and raise barrier to the rivals. AMD has now possessed larger number of patents than Intel (AMD, 2006). However, AMD does not own much proprietary standards in the industry. For instance, the expansion slot on the motherboard which support or work together with the processor, Intel developed its de facto standards for PCI and AGP slot which are now the basic layout on any motherboard (Intel, 2006). AMD should start to build up their competence on capturing and promoting their proprietary standards. And one of the best ways to develop this competence is through corporate venturing (Tidd et al, 2005). Corporate venturing is the innovation management in which a firm develops a separate organization within itself, with different structure, processes and culture (Tidd et al, 2005). This is a particular useful management technique for developing new competences and at the same time spread the risk and cost of R&D. According to Tidd and Taurins (1999), as the development of proprietary standards requires highly leveraging the existing competencies as well as acquire the new competencies, therefore it should set up as a new venture department or division (appendix figure 8). For the implementation, Tidd et al (2005) suggests six distinct stages, divided between definition and development (appendix table 8). <heading>Long term</heading>In the long run, AMD should start to change its open source policy to a close standard. By retain its proprietary source code, AMD is able to reap higher profit and at the same time, avoid commoditization. It gives the company a sustainable profitability and decision on which industry will move. However, caution move should be taken here as it might be vulnerable to the relationship built up with complementors and discount the company reputation. 