<heading>Introduction</heading>Information strategy is generally accepted to be of considerable benefit and increasingly recognised as critical to organizational success. However, most of the academic researches are focusing on reaping the advantages from large company prospects. The developed frameworks in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are sparse. This paper aims to provide a discussion on how to develop a sustainable management information strategy (MIS) / information system strategy (ISS). By analysing the specificity of a SME, Rembitt in our case, the strategic importance of systems integration (SI) in the formulation of MIS/ISS is highlighted, attaining an extension of MIS for achieving competitive advantage. <heading>Information strategy/information system strategy</heading>Information strategy becomes popular in many industries. However, the definition is ambiguous. The Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC, 1998) describes it as a set of attitudes and values that lead to a shared vision of the future of the organization. Rather a nebulous concept, Orna (2004 p.8-9) stated information strategy as the "detailed expression of information policy in terms of objectives, targets and actions to achieve them for a defined period ahead. Information strategy provides the framework for the management of information". Some authors (Galliers et al, 1999; Levy and Powell, 2000; Earl, 1989) tend to use the concept of ISS to explain the issue. Indeed, the majority of this paper is devoted to discussing the ISS rather than the MIS, and there are two reasons for this. Firstly, information systems play a central issue in MIS in most of the organizations, including the SMEs in the case. Information systems give us the means to collect, sort, analyse and query data to support the strategic information process (Levy and Powell, 2005). Thus, ISS is an important subset of MIS for the organizations. Secondly, there are more academic literatures or reported works on ISS than there are solely on MIS that are of relevance to the interpretive approach in SMEs. In teams of the nature of ISS, Earl (1989) provides a useful framework to distinguish between the formulation or development of ISS, and management perspectives to its implementation which he describes as information management (IM) strategy. All of these aspects are closely-related, demonstrated in figure 1. <figure/>Earl provides a wide range of description of different approaches in each of these areas. Essentially, these three levels of strategy recognise the different prescriptive views of academic literature on ISS. However, as most SMEs do not have an IS department (Levy and Powell, 2005) or plan their IS (Hagmann and McCahon, 1993). The inter-relationship of strategy is not well-defined. In this paper, instead, Levy and Powell's ISS model (Levy and Powell, 2000) for ISS is introduced which could broadly be considered to be in the spirit of SMEs specificity. <heading>ISS for SMEs - Rembitt case</heading>Levy and Powell's ISS framework (Levy and Powell, 2000), adapting from Walsham's themes (1993) for IS strategy, defines the key issues that should be addressed in developing a sustainable ISS (figure 2). It focuses on the role of information and information systems in supporting strategic objectives of the company. There are three main areas to be discussed, namely business context, business process and strategic content. They provide the insights on the analytical approach towards the issues in SMEs perspective. <figure/><heading>Business context</heading>The business context refers to the understanding of environment SMEs operated. This encompasses the various relationships with suppliers and customers, the market awareness and the understanding of the firm's competitive position. The owner's knowledge and vision is crucial as the business strategy in SMEs is likely to be implicit. <heading>Business Process</heading>The business process stage (Levy and Powell, 2000) addresses the understanding of value-adding work flows that contribute to the business and identifies the sustainability of the relevant information systems that supporting the business strategy and those value-adding activities. In particular, information that is available in the process to the SMEs is identified. Also, as current information systems are being reviewed and assessed, it constructs the platform for existing information requirement. <heading>Strategic Content</heading>The strategic content focuses on the comparison of business strategy requirements with organizational analysis in order to eliminate the capabilities of the development of the company by the use of information systems. The scope of the strategic goals on the systems should match the ability of the organization constraints by limited resources in SMEs. The choice is made to addressing the real needs and the priority of the company. However, in most cases, the means of changing are determined by the vision from the owner, and therefore reduction of fulfilment in information systems might result. <heading>'Application of ISS approach to Rembitt</heading>So, how does a company renew its ISS in such a way as to enable it to be the kind of organization it would like to be? Rembitt Ltd, a SME specialised in timber packaging and component manufacturing, was introduced as an example of how the ISS approach can be managed. Rembitt has traditionally operated as a solution provider for timber packaging. The original owners did not see the value coming from information systems investment and consider it as an expense rather than a strategic tool. Also, they only had the stand alone personal computer in the accounting department and manufacturing division. The systems were not integrated and designed to serve individual department needs. In the front office, they did not really understand what actually customers want and the demand was fluctuated rapidly because of the new supplies from other parts of the world and the fierce competition. This results as the delay of orders and thus customer satisfaction was low (Figure 3). <figure/><heading>Critique</heading>Although this three-stage framework provides a thorough analysis of ISS requirements for SMEs, it is hard to distinguish the strategic content from business issues, in particularly when owners are involved in all the business areas and processes (Levy and Powell, 2000). This is not clear cut from the three stages, and therefore resulted in some overlapped areas. Also, different sets of tools are needed in order to address the understanding of the information systems requirements (Duhan et al, 2001), in particular the knowledge-based SMEs. Through the understanding of business context, business process and strategic content, the key issues in developing a sustainable MIS / ISS are highlighted. This also raises some interesting points on the specificity of SMEs and ISS. <heading>Specificity of SMEs and ISS</heading>Most of the frameworks and models are developed on the basis of large company. However, the problems encountered by SMEs are different, requiring different approaches. The aspects of specificity in SMEs might have effects on the development and implementation in ISS and therefore should be considered. Blili and Raymond (1993) state five characteristics of the specificity of SMEs with respect to strategic ISS: environment specificity, organizational specificity, decisional specificity, psycho-sociological specificity and information systems specificity (Appendix). In the Rembitt case, the challenges in figure 3 encourage a radical transformation of its information systems. A system integration approach is introduced as a solution by the new Managing Director (MD), Alan Thompson. <heading>Systems Integration</heading>Systems integration (SI) is becoming more and more popular to be one of the major drivers for ISS, and it is demonstrated by the massive investments in Material Requirement Planning Systems and later Enterprise Resource Planning Systems, and extend it forward to the integrated Customer Relationship Management Systems and Vendor Management Systems with the channels (Finnegan, 2006). However, the complex nature and functions of SI have made it difficult to define and bound (Wainwright and Waring, 2004). Boykin, Corbitt and Sandoe (2001, p.7) define SI as "(bringing) isolated information systems together with the goal of providing a whole or complete information resource for organizations" consist of the external integrations with supplier and customers and internal integrations within the organization. <heading>Systems Integration of SMEs in developing ISS</heading>Most of the theories and literatures are developed on the basis of researches in large corporations (Platts, 1995). As for SMEs, the main goal is to survive in the market and seek for growth (Levy and Powell, 2005), it is arguable that the SMEs are equally well served by allocating scarce resources in SI. Finnegan (2006) provides a usable SI framework for a SME setting (Figure 4). <figure/>This model provides a means for SME to achieve SI, which is essential to develop an ISS (Figure 5). Discussions are given in Rembitt case as follow. <heading>Top and Bottom Sponsorship</heading>Top sponsorship is particularly important in SMEs because of its highly centralized structure and rigid controlled funding (Blili and Raymond, 1993). Due to limited resource and investment, the support gaining from top management is crucial in implementation of SI projects. Bottom sponsorship gives the feedbacks and wins the supports from the users down the hierocracy. This provides a channel to address the need of understanding and evaluating the current information systems investment. Both the top and bottom sponsorship create the pathway for the communication of existing information (Figure 6) in order to achieve a better understanding of current information systems (Business Process) in formulating the strategic opportunities from information systems investment (Strategic Content). The new MD, Alan Thompson has in-depth knowledge and experience towards SI and strongly supports the development of a new unified information system - Fourth Shift. However, his enthusiasm cannot be passed. Bottom sponsorship is weak, demonstrating by the hesitation and reluctance to change amongst staff. <heading>Match needs with channels</heading>One of the major parts of SI is the matching with the needs from the suppliers and customers. An integrating systems approach is critical for companies competing worldwide. Success integration is determined on the basis of an in-depth understanding of competitive environments (Business Context) and how you adopt it in your information systems planning (Strategic Content). In Rembitt, customer behaviour is collected and analysed to trace for the buying behaviour and habit. Online ordering is initialized to match the needs for faster response and shorter life cycle of customers. In the future, the feasibility of SI with major suppliers is being studied to achieve shorter lead time and flexible delivery. <heading>Business Process Reengineering (BPR)</heading>As Wainwright and Waring (2004) state, successful system integration involves a rethink and changing of business structure and process in coping with the business strategy and information systems requirements. It is an on-going process with continuous reviews and improvements. BPR is an important building block of ISS and the outcome of analysis of business activities and their support systems (Business Process). It helps to streamline the work flows and at the same time cope with information systems requirements. Rembitt has some on-going business process changes, for example, by using CAD software, Rembitt are now able to create the "Design Clinic" helping customer to improve their packaging. <heading>Data Migration</heading>Data Migration forms the backbone of IS. Operations involved include the selection, validation, transfer, creation and transformation of information from the legacy systems and data sheets, to the new system. Migrating data takes part in all core tasks of ISS development. The integration of information from separated systems creates the major challenges of what Wainwright and Waring (2004) called technical domains of ISS. Rembitt transfer the data to the new systems in 6 months. Also, production scheduling and technical information are now available and up-to-dated in a centralized system which is easier to manage and analyse. <heading>Change Champions</heading>Change champion is defined as the people who initiate the change. In SMEs, the precursor is likely to be the owner or the third party systems providers. Change champion plays a significant role of strategic planning of ISS (Strategic Content) due to the lack of system integration experience. This might lead to a great risk and decision might strongly bias to the operational efficiency and multi-purposed design inhabiting the strategic implications. In Rembitt, Alan Thompson is the change champion. He had the experience of developing Fourth Shift and recognized the strategic benefits from a centralized system. He also introduces Pre-actor to aid in stock control and CAD systems to add value in his timber packaging business. <heading>End User Training</heading>End user training is essential for acquiring the user acceptance towards SI. The feedback from users provides a source to make further adjustment. The user training is the crucial to the implementation of ISS. It forms the major part of ISS and provides assessment of the acceptance of information systems. In-house training is conducted by Thompson on the application of Fourth Shift in Rembitt. <heading>Sub Cultural Integration</heading>' Sub culture can reduce the effort of system integration as it might inhabit the knowledge sharing across divisions and along the hierocracy. Sub-cultural silos of knowledge and culture gap between business and IT professionals involve the influences of psychological contacts and power-based relationships in the adoption of the new systems (Finnegan and Willcocks, 2005). The challenge in ISS is the knowledge sharing across employees who have different sets of beliefs. As the owner tends not to transmit information to their subordinates (Kets De Vries, 1977), it is clear that SI involves overcoming the structural barrier and subculture barrier of knowledge integration as well. In Rembitt, knowledge sharing happens amongst the senior managers only. Subculture is developed along the hierocracy and across the departments. For example, in an interview with Rembitt's directors, the Finance Director expressed his concern on the various standards from people in inputting information. <heading>Neutral Meeting Places / Shared Benefits and Rewards</heading>A neutral and informal meeting place can provide a pressure - free environment for mutual communication and knowledge sharing. An adapted rewarding scheme will further motivate people to actively share what they have known. These two issues further facilitate the knowledge integration and thus create incentives for effective information communication. In Rembitt, however, there is no clear establishment of such places or scheme. <figure/><heading>Critique</heading>Finnegan's (2006) SI framework provides a useful guidance on how to achieve SI in SMEs. However, it is doubtful that some aspects are more difficult to achieve than the others. For example, BPR is easier to perform because of the clear understanding of core capabilities and simplicity of structure, however, matching the needs with supplier and customer channels are more difficult, due to the fact that SMEs do not have much bargaining power. It is more significant when customer dominant is high in the market (Levy and Powell, 2000). In particular, in some cases, SMEs do not have the choice to choose their systems; rather the usage is imposed by major customers or suppliers, in turn increasing the dependence on those customers or suppliers (Blili and Raymond, 1993). <heading>Conclusion</heading>In summary this paper discusses the key issues in developing a MIS/ISS. From Rembitt case, the extent to which SI can play a critical part of developing an information strategy is illustrated. Two frameworks are also discussed with reference to the specificity of SMEs in adopting ISS and SI. Further research is needed to examine the extent to which power issues influence the adoption of particular SI practices in developing ISS. 