The term "Logos" is notoriously enigmatic. Its meaning is not clear, and can be interpreted in several ways. Possible meanings include word, statement, reason and law. Generally a logos is something that is said, but in Heraclitus' thought its meaning is much more fundamental and important. The work of Heraclitus is open to almost as many interpretations as the word Logo s, and indeed it is no wonder that he chose such a word as the basis for his writing. In the following interpretation of Heraclitus, the idea of Logos shall be taken to mean the unified being that is the true nature of the world. It is this definition which is vital to Heraclitus' ideas, and has a bearing on his notion of the nature of reality; the effect of language on our conception of that reality and his ideas about the path to true knowledge. The key ideas of Heraclitus can be interpreted as follows: The world is in a constant state of flux, upon which we as humans have constructed a language that attempts to define and separate the world: the creation of identity. In reality the flux as a whole is in a single harmony. It is this unity and harmony that Heraclitus calls Logos and this is the true nature of the world. It is no wonder that we have difficulty pinpointing the meaning of the word Logos in such an instance, its meaning is undoubtedly vague and hard to grasp. Our understanding of Heraclitus is in no way helped by his style of writing. Little survives of his work, and that which does is so enigmatic as to be possible of multiple interpretations. He uses many paradoxes, such as "The road up and down is the same road" and "Sea water is both the most pure and impure". These may be to emphasise how our view of the world is completely relative, but may also be an attempt to show how our ideas on identity, and hence contradiction, may be flawed. Perhaps we are unable to use the law of non-contradiction at all; in order to be sure that something is a contradiction, one must be absolutely clear on the nature of identity, something which Heraclitus believes we aren't; at least not when trapped in our own narrow point of view. Alternatively, or additionally, the paradoxes may be the only way Heraclitus can express himself clearly in a fickle language. By working out the puzzle of his language we can also realise the true nature of the world. This insistence on the use of Paradoxes leads to criticism from Aristotle, who dismissed the arguments of Heraclitus because they broke the law of non-contradiction. Aristotle apparently couldn't, or refused to, understand that the Paradoxes are pointing to a deeper meaning. It is easy to get stuck pondering the meaning of Heraclitus' words and miss what the words are pointing to. As he said himself: "It is wise for those who listen not to me but to the principle to agree in principle that everything is one". A final, less satisfying explanation for Heraclitus' unique writing style is expressed in a quote from Jean Paul: <quote>"Generally speaking, it is quite right if great things - things of much sense for men of rare sense - are expressed but briefly and (hence) darkly, so that barren minds will declare it to be nonsense, rather than translate it into a nonsense that they can comprehend. For mean, vulgar minds have an ugly facility for seeing in the profoundest and most pregnant utterance only their own everyday opinion."</quote><fnote>Quoted by Nietzsche in Philosophy in the Tragic age of the Greeks. </fnote>While it is unlikely that Heraclitus wrote as he did simply to confuse the ignorant, it may well be the case that he found it impossible to express his ideas in easy to understand language. Regardless of why Heraclitus writes in such a way, the fact remains that it is easy to misinterpret his meaning, and this can lead to many views that conflict with each other without directly conflicting with the text. Heraclitus is clear from the very beginning that the vast majority of men view the world in a flawed way. This flawed reasoning is expressed in our use of language. He writes: <quote>"The universe for those that are awake is single and common, while asleep each person turns aside into a private universe". </quote><fnote>Waterfield: The First Philosophers p.38, T1 </fnote>Assuming that Heraclitus is talking about something more than simply physical sleep, this fragment explains his belief that the majority of people, although not necessarily all people, view the world from their own highly relativistic viewpoint. From this subjective view we see distinction between objects, and are able to identify things as "the same" or "different". The creation of language allows us to make sense of the world and strengthens our ideas of identity. However it is unclear whether our mental distinctions came about as a result of language or whether the introduction of language necessitated our already being able to distinguish between objects. Logical contradictions arose as a consequence of the creation of language, but are only viewed in such a way because of our superficial conception of identity caused by our narrow, relativistic viewpoint. As Heraclitus points out, God sees no contradiction, because ultimately there isn't one. In this case by "God" Heraclitus is referring to the Logos rather than any personal deity. In Greek thought there is no transcendent creator god; the cosmos and its laws come first, and even Zeus is bound to a certain world order and lives within it. For example Heraclitus writes: <quote>"Helios will not depart from the path described for him, or else the Erinyes will find him out"</quote><fnote>Pohlenz: Freedom in Greek life and though p. 48 </fnote>The law of the cosmos, or Logos, encapsulates and controls the whole universe. One of the main points of Heraclitus' thinking is his idea of flux. By flux Heraclitus means constant change, something which he believes is happening to everything at all times. At first glance it is hard to see how the idea of constant change can be reconciled with his view of a constant, never-changing Logos. The solution lies in the relation between the two ideas of Logos and flux. The idea of flux, as we shall see, leads Heraclitus to believe that nothing can truly exist, at least not in the sense that we consider objects to exist. Without any concept of a distinction between objects, the idea of a single being within a unified Logos essentially becomes the only alternative. In his work "Philosophy in the Tragic age of the Greeks" Nietzsche explains this in the following way: <quote>"From such intuition Heraclitus derived two connected negations. One, he denied the duality of totally diverse worlds. He no longer distinguished a physical world from a metaphysical one, a realm of definite qualities from an undefinable indefinite". </quote><fnote>Nietzsche: Philosophy in the Tragic age of the Greeks p.50 </fnote>This is clear enough. Logos unites the world as a single existence and being, so any idea of separate worlds is impossible. But Nietzsche continues: <quote>"And after this step, nothing could hold him back from a second, far bolder negation: He altogether denied being". </quote><fnote>Ibid p.51 </fnote>Nietzsche is right to call this a bold claim, as the denial of being seems to contradict the nature of Logos altogether. But when viewed in the context of the idea of flux the meaning is more obvious. By "being" is simply meant the existence of specific identifiable objects, which the idea of flux has already ruled out: Our notion of identity is our own creation and not part of actual existence, where constant change makes identifiable objects an impossibility. To replace identity in this way, the world of flux can be viewed as a constant state of "coming-to-being". Nietzsche imagines Heraclitus saying: <quote>"I see nothing other than becoming... You use names for things as though they rigidly, persistently endured; yet even the stream into which you step a second time is not the one you stepped into before". </quote><fnote>Ibid p.51 </fnote>The idea that nothing really exists as anything other than the Logos is essentially the heart of Heraclitus' thought. It is far from an intuitive idea, and is hard to comprehend. Nietzsche dramatically claims that: <quote>"The everlasting and exclusive coming-to-be, the impermanence of anything actual, which constantly acts and comes-to-be but never is, is a terrible, paralysing thought". </quote><fnote>Ibid p.54 </fnote>The last paragraph introduced one of the most famous consequences of the theory of flux: Heraclitus' apparent claim that "you cannot step into the same river twice". This statement can be interpreted in at least two ways. The first view accepts that Heraclitus' views on flux confirm that the river will indeed be different the next time we step into it. But the idea of flux as expressed above would also suggest that not only has the river changed, but so has the person stepping into it. In fact if the constant change of flux denies the possibility of identity outside of our narrow mindset then how can that person exist at all? This apparently leads to the view expressed by Cratylus that we cannot even step into the river once. <fnote>"We step and do not step into the same rivers, we are and are not" Waterfield: The First Philosophers p.41, T3 </fnote>The second interpretation alters the meaning of Heraclitus' words. Instead of a "new river" it is likely that Heraclitus simply pointed out that "ever different waters are flowing". This view is perfectly coherent with the river as an entity staying the same. In fact, the fact that the waters are ever-changing is exactly what gives the river its existence as a river rather than a lake. In this case, it is as if Heraclitus is saying we both do and do not step into the same river. This statement is much more reminiscent of a Heraclitean paradox. The river has to be constantly changing in order to be a river, but it remains the same river. So the river doesn't just stay the same despite its flux, it retains its identity precisely because of the flux. Heraclitus often talks about war as being the natural state of all things, which at first glance appears to contradict the idea of the harmony of Logos. But the word "war" is misleading, and would be better replaced with "tension". Heraclitus uses the example of a bow or lyre to show how apparently conflicting opposites can form a harmony. The tension is not damaging, but vital to a bow's function. In a broader sense, the continuous flux of the universe is a form of conflict. But like the bow, ultimately the flux creates a harmony that is Logos. This view is reflected in Heraclitus' insistence on writing in paradoxes. The two sides of the contradiction appear to be in complete conflict, but ultimately they are united, even if only by the fact they are contained within a single sentence. So Heraclitus claims that all things exist alongside and at the same time as their opposite. It is this constant tension between opposites, with each side temporarily taking precedence, which ensures harmony. This is also the true nature of flux. Nietzsche imagined Heraclitus saying the following: <quote>"Everlastingly, a given quality contends against itself and separates in to opposites: everlastingly these opposites seek to re-unite". </quote><fnote>Nietzsche: Philosophy in the Tragic age of the Greeks p.54 </fnote>Our reluctance to accept such contradictions again is caused by our views on identity. Nietzsche continues: <quote>"Ordinary people fancy they see something rigid, complete and permanent, in truth, however, light and dark are attached to each other and interlocked at any given moment". </quote><fnote>Ibid p.54 </fnote>This view of flux, rather than denying any possibility of being, requires that the tension between conflicting opposites provide the harmony of Logos. Whether this view is compatible with the earlier denial of being is debatable. Perhaps Heraclitus intended only to deny our own conception of objects as distinct from their opposite, rather than to deny the existence of objects altogether. Heraclitus clearly establishes that the majority of people are unaware of the true nature of being and remain in their "own private universe". He writes: "They tend away from that with which they are in the most continuous contact". But it is also made clear that this does not necessarily have to remain the case. Although undoubtedly difficult, according to Heraclitus "Everyone has the potential for self-knowledge and sound thinking". This fragment argues against those who would claim that Heraclitus is nothing more than an elitist aristocrat raising himself above the masses. While it is true that only a tiny minority have true knowledge, this is not because of any special status they have as chosen people. How then, are the rest of us to attain this knowledge of true being? One of the only clues we have is the fragment which states: "I searched for myself". This, combined with Heraclitus' reported scepticism about the reliability of our senses and the words "self-knowledge" in the above quote, suggests it is a purely internal affair. There is nothing in the world around us that will lead us to truth that isn't already inside us. Considering the nature of Logos, any kind of soul we posses would be inextricably linked to, and in communion with, the universe as a whole; and as such this view makes sense. The fact that Heraclitus later writes "You will not be able to discover the limits of your soul...so deep is the principal it contains" helps to confirms this. <fnote>Although admittedly the first part of the quote ("you will not be able to discover the limits of your soul") appears at first glance to contradict the view that we all have the potential for self-knowledge. </fnote>Our ability to attain true knowledge does not, however, lead to any kind of obligation to do so. Heraclitus establishes that most men are irrational and narrow-minded, but this is perfectly compatible with the harmony of Logos. Nietzsche writes: <quote>"Man, generally speaking, does not live consciously by the standards of the Logos, which is no contradiction of the fact that in all aspects of his nature the law of sovereign reason is fulfilled". </quote><fnote>Ibid p.63 </fnote>Man has no special status over the rest of the world, and he continues: <quote>"There is no obligation on man to recognise the Logos just because he is man". </quote><fnote>Ibid p.63 </fnote>This can be viewed as an attempt to relieve Logos from any position as the basis of a moral principle. Logos simply exists innocently, and cannot be seen as a guiding principle in itself. According to Heraclitus we are subject to the law of Logos to such an extent that all human laws are derived from this divine law. Zeno was heavily influenced by this view, and made it the corner stone of his ethics. A law is good if it is harmony with divine law, but either way it is still superficial when compared with the "Law of nature binding on all men eternally". As shown above, it is very tricky to base any kind of moral statements on the idea of Logos. If contradictions do not truly exist in the world, then how can concepts such as injustice, suffering and guilt? Heraclitus would answer that they only exist for the human mind which sees things as separate and not connected, not for the aware god. As Nietzsche says: <fnote>Pohlenz: Freedom in Greek life and though p. 135 </fnote><quote>"For him [god] all contradictions run into harmony, invisible to all but those who are related to the contemplative god". </quote><fnote>Nietzsche: Philosophy in the Tragic age of the Greeks p.61 </fnote>He goes on to clearly state that any moral statements based on Heraclitean philosophy are impossible. The idea of Logos provides a firm basis upon which the idea of flux and constant tension can rest. Without it the world of Heraclitus would appear to be trapped in chaos and constant conflict, but thanks to Logos there is an underlying harmony. The idea of a unified Logos is also essential to Heraclitus' belief that everything is ultimately one, and that our world of separate objects is an illusion. This is a prevalent view throughout the history of philosophy, and would play a large part in influencing both Parmenides and Zeno. It forms the basis of Heraclitus' ideas on the nature of reality, the role of language, the path to knowledge and ethics. 