The 'you' and 'someone else' in the title of this question refer to individual persons, and so it is our definition of the word 'person' upon which the answer will depend. In order to answer 'yes', we must arrive at a concept of personhood that remains distinct from the body. Whatever it is that comprises this 'person' can be transferred into a new body and still retain its identity as the same person. If, however, we can only define personhood in such a way that relies, even partly, on a physical body then any such swap will be impossible without changing or destroying the original person and our answer will be 'no'. Locke and Williams both attempt to address this issue of personal identity. Locke's attempt at pinpointing personal identity relies on a consciousness with a continuation of memory, without reference to a body. Because of this he would answer 'yes' to the original question, and he even outlines such a situation involving a prince and a cobbler. Williams attempts through the use of elaborate thought experiments to show that any of our definitions of identity, whether based on the mind or physical bodies, are flawed when we subject them to close scrutiny. His arguments may reveal weaknesses in Locke's purely mental definition. Locke's empiricist idea of identity is driven by a desire to move away from metaphysical assumptions and instead find an understanding based on the trustworthy data of our senses. He tackles the issue by creating a distinction between man and person, and in so doing avoids many of the traditional problems surrounding identity. He writes: <quote>"If person, man and substance are three names standing for three different ideas; for such as is the idea belonging to that name, such must be the identity; which, if it had been a little more carefully attended to, would possibly have prevented a great deal of that confusion which often occurs about this matter, especially concerning personal identity."</quote><fnote>Locke: An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Book II, Chapter XXVII, Section 7 </fnote>What Locke calls 'man' we would probably now call a 'living human organism'. While this definition of man may rely on the body, his concept of personhood does not, and the two remain sharply separated. When the prince's soul inhabits the cobbler, the 'person' is the prince whilst the 'man' remains the cobbler. Locke's man-person distinction makes it possible for more than one person to inhabit or exist within a single man. It is Locke's definition of 'person' rather than 'man' that we are interested in when deciding whether or not we can swap bodies. His idea of 'person' is as a continuous awareness of thinking and experience. Our self will exist as far back as we have a continuous awareness of memories. For example if I have memories of my childhood, then I was that child; if I have memories of being Socrates, then I was the same person as Socrates. If we accept Locke's definition of personhood then yes, we can swap bodies with another person. As long as the brain contains an awareness of a person's memories then that person can exist in any body. But his view is open to a number of criticisms, largely aimed at his focus on memory. Locke has been criticised for failing to address the issues of amnesia or memory loss. I may remember all of my childhood except my sixth year, in which case, according to Locke, a different person existed in my body for its sixth year. Similarly, Locke's descriptions of memories are never anything other than perfect copies of events or ideas. In this sense they are passive, unable to be biased or constructed by a person. And yet it appears that our memories are often flawed, either through genuine forgetfulness or an intentional attempt to change them in order to protect our own self-esteem, for instance. If our identity hinges on our memories then the fact that these memories can be distorted would appear to weaken Locke's argument. However, the point may not be the content of the memories so much as their continued existence as the same memories. It is the fact that we continue to have the same memories and the fact that they continue to influence our thoughts and behaviour that gives us our continued identity, not the memories themselves. If I have always had a childhood memory of wearing green shoes when in fact I wore blue shoes this does not mean I wasn't the child in question, or that this memory hasn't been a feature throughout my life, only that the memory is flawed. Another possible issue relates to our awareness of the passage of time. According to Locke, this awareness can only come from the comparison of memories to the present moment, hence memory allows for our continued identity. But it can be argued that within the small span of the 'specious present' I can be directly aware of the passage of time without recourse to memory, in the same way I can be aware of both ends of a drawn line at the same time without having to look at each end individually. Because it is 'I' who has this awareness, I must have a continuous identity over this length of time. This argument against Locke relies on the possibility of being aware of time in the absence of memory, something that it is hard to prove empirically. If it is possible, we can discard memory as the only guarantee of continued identity and perhaps suggest a physical, body-based alternative. But we can just as easily present an alternative that remains a purely mental exercise in no way linked to the body. Because of this, arguably this criticism merely highlights an error in Locke's memory argument and has little impact on any attempt to answer our original question. The objections do not rule out the idea of a purely mental definition of personhood, and so the answer to our original question may remain 'yes'. Williams' thought experiments attempt to point out the confusion surrounding the question of identity. In his first scenario, involving two test subjects who swap minds, we are lead to believe that the 'person' is transported with the brain or mind into a new body. The second scenario, in which the subject remains fearful of impending torture despite being told his brain will have new thoughts and memories, suggests the opposite: the 'person' remains firmly attached to their body despite the mind changing completely. The two scenarios are different perspectives on the same thought experiment, and yet the conclusions are contradictory. From this Williams concludes that the subject's, and hence our, ideas about identity are confused. The first perspective suggests we can indeed transfer our mind, and hence ourselves, into another body, and it is only when the second perspective is introduced that we see how we may remain more attached to the body than we had first thought. However, Williams' second scenario differs from the first in one crucial aspect. The subject is not informed that as well as his body being tortured tomorrow, another body will wake up with all of the contents of his brain. If told this he may still remain fearful, and from this Williams concludes that the additional information has no impact. But, as in the first scenario, upon waking up in a new body with all of his normal thoughts and memories, this personality or mind, whether it is the same person or not, will no doubt be relieved at escaping torture. If we add this element to the second scenario, and equate this personality and collection of memories with a person, as we did in the first scenario and as Locke does, then the second scenario no longer contradicts the first and we can conclude that the person moves with the mind into a new body. Williams set out to show how our ideas about identity are confused. But as has been shown, with a minor adjustment to the second scenario, his thought experiment ends up supporting Locke's purely mental conception of identity. The answer to our original question depends on a definition of personhood. If we accept Locke's definition of personhood as a mental affair without reference to a physical body, even if we don't accept the vital role of memory, then swapping bodies is possible. When the subject of Williams' second thought experiment is tortured he will not be the same person as he was when first informed of the impending torture because the brain now contains a new personality, thoughts and memories. In my view it is our memories and personality that form our thoughts, and it is our thoughts that make up the 'self'. If individual identity exists at all, it resides in our thought and our reflections on these thoughts. While undoubtedly strongly influential, the body is not a necessary component of a person, and so transferring or swapping into a new body is possible. 