In this essay I will first outline Locke's model of perception as involving primary qualities that are related to actual physical objects, and then explain Berkeley's objection to this view. I will then introduce Locke's notion of resemblance as an attempt to justify our belief in these mind-independent physical objects, before assessing the success of Berkeley's arguments against the feasibility of such a resemblance. Finally I will briefly suggest that there are alternative models of resemblance that may survive Berkeley's arguments, but that these alternatives are not open to Locke within the confines of his system of perception. As a committed empiricist, Locke relies on perception to provide the basis for his entire conception of knowledge. Knowledge lies in our perception of the agreement between simple ideas which in turn arise from our perception of a mind-independent physical world. Simple ideas provide the basis around which Locke can construct a theory of knowledge and rational argument. This view is contrasted to the rationalism of Descartes, for whom indubitable, purely rational premises provide the building blocks of knowledge. Such a view leaves Descartes with absolute certainty about the rational or mental realm but doubtful of the reliability of our perception. Locke, on the other hand, is confined to certainty about the simple ideas that arise from perception and is left agnostic about the nature of our rational mind. Locke's simple ideas are images in the mind of actual objects in the physical world. Our perception of these objects consists in perception of the individual properties each object contains. Locke makes a distinction amongst these properties between primary qualities and secondary qualities. Secondary qualities are effects produced in the mind by an object that does not contain this effect in itself. The typical example of a secondary quality is that of colour. We call an object red not because it actually contains the property of redness, but because it has a disposition to produce the idea of red in our minds. The redness is purely mental; it resides in our perception of the simple idea but not in the object itself. Contrasted to the idea of colour is the property of extension, which is a primary quality. Primary qualities reside in the actual physical object, so my idea of the four sides of a square object is directly related to the actual extension of the square object. So while secondary qualities are only indirectly caused by the physical existence of an object, primary qualities commit Locke to a belief in the absolute existence of mind-independent objects with properties such as extension. It is this view that Berkeley rejects. In many ways Berkeley operates from the same framework as Locke. Being empiricists, they both accept that the perception of ideas in the mind provides the foundation for all knowledge. But Berkeley places great emphasis on the fact that all we perceive is ideas in our mind, and as such he cannot accept Locke's insistence that there must be physical objects independent of the mind that our ideas relate to. Locke's attempt to justify the existence of mind independent objects relies on a causal correlation between objects and simple ideas. He believes that simple ideas of perception are signs of their regular causes: Ideas point to their causes in the same way that smoke points towards fire. The problem with this view, as Berkeley points out, is that necessarily limited as we are to the internal workings of our mind, the idea that we can know anything about causes existing in a world of inanimate objects is if not incomprehensible then at least empty. If all we ever see is smoke then how can we know what fire is like? Any reliance on causal correlation between objects and ideas will face the same problem of how we, subject only to the effects, can have any conception of the cause. This is not to say that Berkeley is doomed to solipsism. He readily accepts that there must be causes for our ideas external to our mind; this is necessarily so given our inability to control what we have perception of. All he is rejecting is the view lead to by Locke's idea of primary qualities that we can know about the existence of objects external to the mind that bear some relation to our ideas and yet can exist independently of our perception of them. If Locke's theory is to survive therefore it must respond to the following challenge by Berkeley: How can sensory-based perception provide a conception of objects which may exist independently of any such perception in a sense independent reality? It is in attempting to answer exactly this problem that Locke introduces the notion of resemblance. Put simply: our idea of a primary quality resembles the corresponding primary quality of an object; therefore our experience of primary qualities tells us what physical objects are like in themselves. Note that Locke only appeals to resemblance regarding primary qualities, when it comes to secondary qualities he accepts that they exist only in the mind. He writes: <quote>"I think it easy to draw this observation,- that the ideas of primary qualities of bodies are resemblances of them, and their patterns do really exist in the bodies themselves, but the ideas produced in us by these secondary qualities have no resemblance of them at all." 2:8:15</quote>There are multiple conceptions of the notion of resemblance, and it is not clear which Locke was utilising in his arguments. For now I will deal with the traditional, intuitive view. This is also most likely to be the view that Berkeley had in mind when formulating his objections to Locke. On this view of resemblance, one entity is said to resemble another if sufficiently many properties are shared by both. In the case of perception, a simple idea would resemble a physical object if a significant number of the same properties existed both in the idea and in the object. Berkeley has a number of seemingly irrefutable arguments against this view. The first, and simplest, is that nothing but an idea can resemble an idea. He writes: <quote>"But say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without the mind, yet there may be things like them whereof they are copies or resemblances, which things exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance. I answer, an idea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure can be like nothing but another colour or figure."</quote><fnote>Berkeley: Principles of Human Knowledge. Dover 2003. p.33, section 8. </fnote>It is not easy to identify Berkeley's justification for this view, but we can get an idea from one of his early philosophical notebooks, where he points out that we cannot point to a resemblance between two things until we can compare them. Of course, limited as we are to our own ideas we can never actually compare our ideas to an object and therefore could never justify a claim of resemblance between them. Because we are limited to ideas we can only point to a resemblance between ideas. More fundamentally, we can point to the vast differences between ideas and objects as ruling out any kind of resemblance between properties. An idea, being by its very nature purely mental, cannot be extended or contain any of the other physical properties that a mind-independent object has. <fnote>Berkeley: Philosophical Commentaries. Section 377. Quoted at plato.stanford.edu/entries/berkeley </fnote>Berkeley continues to make a more general argument about our conception of the primary qualities of simple ideas. Locke has accepted that it is only primary qualities and not secondary qualities that can resemble an object but, Berkeley asks, how are we to conceive of an idea or object that contains only primary qualities? Every image we have of an object must have colour to be imaginable and colour is a secondary quality, therefore to talk of our knowledge of primary qualities independently of secondary qualities is mistaken. This argument is convincing but perhaps not irrefutable. Admittedly we need colour to be able to visualise the extension of an object, but this is the only purpose the colour need serve. The colour is a tool that allows us to conceive of the boundaries of an object, the actual colours used are irrelevant. In this case any doubts we have about the existence or location of colour are unimportant. Berkeley's next argument is an argument from modality specificity. Primary qualities are modality specific. In other words the idea that results from the sight of a square is different from that which results from touching a square. Similarly the modalities of hearing, taste and smell produce different types of idea in the mind. Berkeley is not admitting that we see or touch an actual square, just that our ideas of sight and touch, however they are caused, are of different types. Each of these radically different ideas can be an idea of a primary quality of an object. However, no one of these modalities has any more authority than any other, and therefore our notion of resemblance between primary qualities breaks down. Does the extension of the physical object resemble our idea of the sight or touch of this extension? As we shall see later, it is perhaps possible to refute this argument by individuating objects prior to experience, but Locke is already committed to the view that there is no intersection between modality packages, and that the ideas resulting from each are entirely different conceptions. He believes that the apparent unity of our modalities is learnt by a constant association between sight and touch and so on. We can demonstrate this commitment of Locke's by referring to his negative answer to Molyneux's question. Molyneux outlines the following situation: <quote>"Suppose a man born blind and taught by his touch to distinguish between a cube and a sphere... Suppose then the cube and sphere placed on a table, and the blind man be made to see: quaere, whether by his sight, before he touched them, he could now distinguish and tell which is the sphere, which the cube?"</quote><fnote>Quoted in Locke Chapter 9,8 </fnote>Locke's response is this: <quote>"I am of opinion that the blind man, at first sight, would not be able with certainty to say which was the globe, which the cube, whilst he only saw them; though he could unerringly name them by his touch."</quote><fnote>Locke Chapter 9,8 </fnote>This clearly shows that Locke believes in the radical difference between ideas caused by different modalities, and thus we see the impossibility of two ideas resembling the same primary quality of an object. In a similar vein to the modality specificity argument is the argument from subject specificity. In this case the different conception of primary qualities exists between differing subjects as opposed to modalities. There are many examples of how what are apparently primary qualities can be conceived of very differently by differing subjects. An obvious example is the fact that an object may appear very large to a small subject but appear small to a larger subject. If two subjects have two radically different ideas of the extension of a single object, then how can the object be said to resemble the ideas in a way that can tell us anything about the object? This argument is perhaps less convincing than the argument from modality specificity. Calling something "large" or "small" is not an accurate method of gauging extension. If we have a standard of measure, such as metres, and a standard of how to apply this measure then any subject, no matter how small or large, will arrive at the same definite measure of extension of any object. However, when we talk of simple ideas of extension it is likely we are not talking about specific measurements but only how the image appears before the mind. In this case we can accept that ideas vary wildly between subjects. A final argument against this simplified view of resemblance is levelled against Locke's belief that objects cause ideas. Berkeley believes that it is impossible for anything mind-independent (independent of any mind, not necessarily only mine) to initiate anything, and therefore such mind-independent objects cannot exist. This objection arguably operates only from within distinctions Berkeley has already made about causality. Berkeley has argued earlier that it is only spirits or minds that can initiate causal processes, but when responding to Locke's arguments there is no reason why we should accept this premise. We have seen that if we take Locke's idea of resemblance as simply a sufficient sharing of properties between an idea and an object then Berkeley's arguments conclusively refute resemblance as a justification for our ideas being caused by similar mind-independent objects. However a more convincing model of resemblance involves objects being individuated prior to experience. We group objects, and then define our perception in terms of properties of these objects. This view would suggest a positive answer to the question posed by Molyneux earlier: a newly sighted man will be able to tell a square object from a circular object purely by sight having only touched the two objects previously. However, we have already seen that Locke is committed to a negative response to Molyneux's question, and as such this model of resemblance is not open to him. Berkeley convincingly refutes the intuitive model of resemblance that an idea resembles an object because they share a number of properties. He shows firstly that in order to justify resemblance we must be able to compare the idea with the object, but we are always limited only to the idea and have no access to the object itself, and as such can only conceive of a resemblance between two ideas. Secondly he points out that a non-physical idea is so radically different from a physical object that to claim that they share properties such as extension is incomprehensible. There are however alternative models of resemblance. Some of these can be refuted by Berkeley's arguments from modality and subject specificity, but others, such as individuating objects prior to experience, appear to survive. However, this view allows for a positive answer to Molyneux's question, something which Locke is committed to avoiding. We can therefore conclude that while resemblance as a concept cannot be dismissed completely, the models of resemblance that Locke is limited to are successfully refuted by Berkeley's arguments. 