In the majority of life's situations, we seem to have no problem identifying what we call people. And yet when we are pushed to examine what exactly it is we are pointing to, often there is no clear answer. On the most basic level, we may point to a human being's body and call that a person, and yet many people, and most religions, believe a person will continue to exist after the death of this body. Even if one does not believe in any kind of soul it is still possible to maintain that what makes a person a person is not characterised by their body but by their mind or consciousness. Whether it is coherent to believe that a person can be identified solely with reference to a mind is questionable. Descartes is committed to a distinction between mind and body. In his meditations he makes it clear that what defines an individual can be separated from the body. He writes: <quote>"What then am I? A thing that thinks. A thing that doubts, understands, affirms, denies, is willing, is unwilling, and also imagines and has sensory perceptions." </quote><fnote>Meditations on First Philosophy, 28 </fnote>All the things that compose who he is are limited to mental states; there is no reference to the body at all. Even having sensory perceptions he distinguishes from any actual objects his body might perceive. It can be argued that Descartes's explanation is simply a list of things that the mind can do, without any firm idea of what makes it the same mind and hence a person. He simply writes: <quote>"The fact that it is I who am doubting and understanding and willing is so evident that I see no way of making it any clearer". </quote><fnote>Ibid. </fnote>Strawson accepts that a single mind has a sustained existence, but he believes we can only identify this mind with reference to a certain person; the idea of 'person' incorporating more than simply the mind. He writes: <quote>"Since the anti-Cartesian regards the concept of mind or consciousness as secondary to, or derivative from, he can advance the following simple rule: 'one person, one consciousness; same person, same consciousness.'"</quote><fnote>Stawson: Self, Mind and Body in Reading Philosophy, p.32 </fnote>When we talk about the 'same consciousness', what can we mean other than the 'same person's consciousness'? Strawson does not provide a satisfactory definition of personhood, but he points out that an anti-Cartesian can accept that the question of the criteria of personal identity is a difficult one, while at the same time using adequate criteria for most ordinary cases, and may intelligently adapt these criteria when extraordinary cases arise. Without a higher concept of personhood, Strawson points out that it is just as coherent to suggest that there are a whole series of minds transmitting their state and consciousness from one to the other as to think that there is only a single mind. If a Cartesian reduction is feasible then it must be possible to independently define a single identity and consciousness, but Strawson suggests that "there is not the slightest reason for thinking that this can be done".  <fnote>Ibid. p.33 </fnote>It is this claim that Foster confronts in his book The Immaterial Self: A defence of the Cartesian Dualism Conception of Mind. In order to define a person independently of anything other than mind he writes that the essential nature of a non-physical 'basic subject' (which can be taken to mean person) must be a purely mental attribute that it necessarily possesses at every point in its history. It must be sufficiently broad so as to be a constant feature throughout the subject's widely varying mental conditions. Descartes thought this property was the cogitatio, but the varying ways in which this word can be interpreted will alter the argument significantly. If it is taken to mean simply 'thought' then Foster points out that it is not sufficiently generic as to cover all of our mental activity: it is just one of a group of mental states and not its common factor. If it is interpreted as meaning 'consciousness' then it cannot be an attribute that is necessarily possessed at every point in a person's existence because a subject is not conscious when asleep or under Anaesthesia. If the Cartesian insists that consciousness is the essential attribute of personhood he must make a choice between two alternatives. Either there is a constant stream of consciousness during sleep of which we have no memory, or we cease to exist as people when we are asleep or otherwise unconscious. In light of this it seems the meaning of cogitatio must be expanded further to mean simply 'mentality', i.e. all mental activity. But is this the 'unitary intrinsic attribute' that Foster was looking for, or simply a disjunction of all the states it covers? There must be a common factor that binds them, something in virtue of which they all qualify as mental. Descartes identified this common factor as the ability to all be accessible to introspective awareness when the subject is conscious. In this case a mind is more like a rope. There are many mental processes taking place through time, like the many threads that make up a rope. They overlap with each other and vary in size, without any single process, or thread, lasting for the entire length. They are united by our introspective awareness of them. <fnote>Principles of Philosophy, Part I, IX </fnote>It is interesting to note that Descartes does not suggest memory as the answer to the problem of continued identity. The majority of his illustrations are snapshots of the mind at a single point, without any real consideration for its continuity. Surely, if anything, it is our memory that assures us that we remain the same person, and allows for any conception of continuity at all. Perhaps the answer lies in Descartes's attributing the same level of doubt to memory as to perception of the external world. Nothing so doubtful can be relied on to guarantee our identity. However Descartes's cogitatio is defined, the whole notion of defining personhood solely with reference to mental activity raises problems. A baby has very little brain activity, and is certainly not capable of 'introspective awareness', whilst a very early foetus has no brain activity at all. And yet many people will argue that both of these, certainly the former, are persons. We seem to have no problem identifying what we think are people. But it soon becomes clear that many of our seemingly natural judgements do not stand up to analysis. Generally we will combine an individual mind and body in order to come up with our idea of a person. Whether either of these on its own still constitutes a person remains a matter of debate. If forced to make a choice, we would most likely say it is the mental processes and personality that define a person rather than their body, hence the belief among many that a person continues to exist after the death of their body. But as has been shown, it is very difficult to pinpoint which of the multitude of mental states, if any, constitutes who we really are. 