<heading>Introduction</heading>Commercializing a new invention or a new technology, never invented before, requires a deep understanding of drivers which lead to a successful commercialization. Such factors can be complex (e.g. the transfer of technology, the team building processes, the project evaluation). Several theoretical frameworks of commercialization potential facilitate the evaluation of an innovation. In this paper, we have chosen to critically discuss one of those theoretical frameworks called WIN2 (Udell 2002). That discussion will be based on a new technology or invention, which is not yet in the market. However, we deliberately exclude arts, paintings and fashion. WIN2 develops an evaluation criterion which follows 5 generic steps that we will review individually: <list>Impact upon societyMarket attractivenessBarrier to AcceptanceFeasibility of conceptExperience and Strategy</list><heading>Impact upon society</heading>The issue that a new invention faces is...its novelty. For example, along the path to commercialization, nanotechnology's biggest liability is its novelty (Mazzola 2003). Thus, Win2 requires that the impact on society is studied thoroughly as a first step. This impact considers people's welfare, laws and regulations, the safety consequences of the innovation's misuse and the environment aspect. People's welfare: According to Win2, an innovation which is introducing new diseases or affecting people's health or happiness should not pass the test of impact on society. This is assuming we can assess with exactitude the consequences on the health of people before the product is launched. Often, new drugs show side effects not spotted during the preliminary tests, e.g. lotronex (Lewis 2001). Indeed, the effects vary from person to person and it is difficult to know the entire spectrum of these effects. Laws and regulations: Also, an innovation should not break laws or regulations according to Win2 evaluation criteria. Should the product development of a very useful innovation be stopped because of current laws and regulations? Most of the areas where biotech is finding application are heavily regulated. Unfortunately, the regulatory agencies are serving as bottlenecks for the commercialization of technologies (Fildes 1990). We argue that the regulations and laws are made by people for people; if people's interest is to benefit from a new invention, those laws or regulations should be abolished or amended to allow exceptions. Obviously, it might take time to change laws but that is not a reason to inhibit new inventions. Safety consequences of the innovation's misuse: Similarly, the safety implications of using or abusing the innovation are advocated by Win2. We must however separate the possibility of abusing the innovation from the faculty of using it, assuming we know all forms of normal usage. An electronic toy which can easily be dislocated in tiny pieces by a baby is dangerous to be commercialized. Yet, it is difficult to assess to which extent we can define the pass/fail test for abusing the invention. Quite all drugs, though excellent to cure diseases when used properly, can be dangerous when abused. Is that a reason to stop the commercialization? The answer is open to debate and we argue that when there is clearly more benefit of using than damage of abusing an invention, the commercialization should proceed. Win2 do not offer clear criteria to find the line of separation, in order to fail the test. Environment aspect: Finally, the impact on society includes the environment consequences. The analysis of this issue is close to the first point where we examine people's welfare. By definition, we do not have enough experience on the new technology or invention itself. It is therefore completely unrealistic to expect determine with exactitude the potential damage on the environment. Since the nuclear energy was invented (discovered) in 1951 (French Nuclear Energy Society), no researcher can announce with certainty that s/he has complete knowledge of the impact on the environment. Chemical research shows that knowledge can be acquired much later than the commercialization. Evaluating the impact on society as suggested by Win2 is a critical way to assess the risks of commercializing a new invention or technology. Yet, it is often ignored in the literature. Perchorowicz (1995) states that "the evaluation of the commercial potential includes assessments of technical feasibility, patentability, and marketability, risk and time factors, costs, and estimated revenue". However, we do not always have enough experience, research time and knowledge to assess the impact of the new invention with exactitude. Yet, a negative impact on society does not hinder the commercialization potential (e.g. weapons). Using this criterion solely cannot define whether to stop or continue the commercialization and Win2 recognizes that. Eventually, the market is the only decision-maker as we will see in the next point. <heading>Market attractiveness</heading>As expected in any theoretical framework, the evaluation criteria of Win2 include the market attractiveness. Basically, any new invention should address the key issue which is to find whether there is any potential market for the invention. This assessment is even more important for new inventions for which markets are virgin. The inventor might have an idea of its invention market although the market knowledge and product definition are often very sketchy at earlier stages. However, market research is mandatory to get a more precise idea of the market size and dynamics. Indeed, Success depends on knowing whether there is a market opportunity for the technology. <heading>Market size</heading>Win2's principles barely indicate which detailed processes to follow to assess the market size. Perchorowicz (1995) states that "the goals in market assessment include determination of the technology's expected value in marketable products, identification of potential licensees, and development of a commercialization strategy". Using that definition to evaluate the size of the market means that we have to look at segments of the market where the new invention can generate value, depending on the commercialization strategy. That value can be triggered by the intrinsic benefits of the new product, the  price of the product and the  trade-off between costs and benefits of selling the product (advertising, distribution). Intrinsic benefits of the product: Understanding the intrinsic benefits of a new innovation can give an idea about the population which might be interested: the potential market size. For example, Compaq understood the intrinsic benefits and was the first to market a laptop with a hard disk (Olesen 1990). Another example is the "pro cork" idea which looks at the number of bottles sold per year (see Evaluation of Innovation, Simon Mosey, UNIEI, 2006). For new inventions to integrate to other products (e.g. pro cork), there might be an existing need of assessing adjacent markets for the integrated product. The exercise is less complex because data is already available in general, helping to look at the intrinsic benefits of the new combined product. Price of the product: Pricing is a key element to determine a market size and it is difficult to find the right price range. There is a huge amount of literature about pricing methods from the economic to the strategic point of view. Providing details of pricing methods is beyond the scope of this paper. Various methods suggest analysing use value, substitutes in adjacent markets, using conjoint modelling based on potential competitors data (Weiner 1994), meeting focus groups to generate a price level. Choosing a method is not easy for a brand new invention although there is some literature about first-movers price. No matter which method is used, the idea is to generate a price level or range with enough confidence that a typical market range is willing to pay the product at that price. Trade-off benefit/costs of selling the product: Win2 principles do no go into detail for the evaluation processes of this trade-off. In assessing the market size, we have to look at the costs of selling as constraints but also opportunities. The constraints are the added costs of advertising and distributing the new invention while the opportunities are the potential access to wider or niche markets. Marketing the new invention might need specific advertising and distribution models. Will the invention need new models to emphasize the newness of the product/service or will it have to use existing channels? There is no universal answer as it will depend on the type of the invention. For integrated products, there might be no choice than using existing distribution channels and present the new invention as a competitive advantage into the advertisement message: e.g. automatic wipers that detect the rain, lights switched on automatically after detecting the darkness. Understanding the value-added of the invention helps to quantify the market. However, for stand-alone new inventions, the inventor might be willing to use her own shop network and word of mouth for advertising, at the extreme. Alternately, she can choose to build packaged products with partners and gain from that partner reputation and relationships. Using proprietary distribution networks is costly and very risky, unless the product benefits allow selling enough products to cover the costs and provide margins. On the other hand, using word of mouth requires fewer investments but slows down the process of information (and hence reduces the potential market size), in comparison with a national advertising campaign. Because the Blackberry product was so novel, no existing channels of distribution were ideal for the product. RIM, [the owner] did not have the needed sales force nor could it easily acquire them in order to approach companies individually and encourage adoption of the product (Carayannopoulos 2005). Finding the right market size can be very problematic for a new invention, not in the market yet. When this new invention addresses a clear problem faced by several segments of the market, the market size can be fairly obvious. Otherwise, the inventor needs to break down the evaluation to product, price and trade-off benefits/costs of selling. That is certainly not enough to assess the potential failure as indicated by Win2. The Marketer will also need to analyse the market dynamics. <heading>Market dynamics</heading>The distinction between integrated products and stand-alone products is helpful to address the market dynamics. Win2 framework addresses clearly the market dynamics criterion. For a brand new product, the direct competition does not exist. However, there might be substitutes, which power has to be considered in order to assess the market attractiveness of the new product. For Sony's walkman, the substitutes were huge radio not really portable. At that time, people, mainly young men, were handling their big radios broadcasting loud music. Sony did not convince those who wanted to share their loud music but did create new markets among youngsters, female and adults population. For integrated products, the competition circle is much clearer. To steal some market share or extend the market, the new invention must clearly provide intrinsic benefits and switching costs must remain low. The evaluation must consider the competitive advantage of the new invention. In the automotive industry for example, the first mover who introduced the automatic windscreen wipers could build on the advantage of being more focused on the road (surety) than on switching the wipers on and off. Depending on the invention specificity, this competition criterion might not be relevant. Alternately, the number of competitors, "complementors" or "substitutors" might be a clear indication of the attractiveness of the market, giving opportunities for the new invention to succeed. For example, specialized applications would aid blackberry's adoption, but RIM [owner] lacked the resources to produce a wide variety of complementary goods (Carayannopoulos 2005). <fnote>Companies selling complementary products (e.g. external sound system for Apple's Ipod) </fnote><fnote>Companies selling substitutes (e.g. PVC is a substitute of aluminium) </fnote><heading>Barrier to Acceptance</heading>The barrier for acceptance is closely linked to the previous steps in Win2. For some industries, it has a direct consequence even though not always the expected one. Perchorowicz (1995) indicates that "public acceptance generally follows approval by regulatory authorities but there are exceptions: [Recent] products that encountered consumer resistance despite regulatory approval include genetically engineered tomatoes and milk produced using hormones". For new inventions, this barrier is absolutely important as the market has no experience whatsoever about the invention to assess it. Factors like complexity or budgets can affect the acceptance. Most IT departments strongly resisted new products such as the Blackberry as complicating an already complex environment. Particularly when the technology was unproven, their fear was that the product would create more problems than it would solve. Also, given the significant leap in technology and function that Blackberry represented, most organizations did not even have resources budgeted to this type of product. They typically would have to shift resources from other areas in order to adopt the Blackberry (Carayannopoulos 2005). The barrier for acceptance can also be based on real or imaginative reasons. Those barriers can be difficult to overcome especially when the underlying assumption is unclear. Communication can help to lower the barrier without guarantee. Many people suggested that a synthetic cork would prevent the wine to have a specific taste for example. In fact, a barrier also can be based on the limitations of a product like the first clockwork radios (BBC 2002). <heading>Feasibility of concept</heading>This fourth step in evaluating the commercialization potential for Win2 is problematic. It is broken down to two sections (see below). In general, the first section of this criterion would be more valuable at the innovation stage, not at the later commercialization step. The second section is very difficult to assess prior to any commercialization especially for a new intention. Therefore, we argue that this stage in Win2 is much less relevant for new inventions than other evaluation steps reviewed above. Can the innovation be made and will it work? : "perfection" is unlikely to happen the first times. For inventions that do not exist yet in the market, it is not rare to see unproven technologies go to market and being refined afterwards. The clockwork radio is a typical example. At first, two-minutes of winding provided 14min of listening; it is now an hour on a 25-second wind. Although far from perfect, clockwork radios are now very popular in areas like South-Africa (BBC 2002). Will the innovation make money? : Neither Win2, nor any framework can provide guarantee of making money on a new invention. Win2 recognizes that fact. At best, Win2 can provide "likelihood" of success or failure without complete certainty. However, replying to this question helps to convince investors about the new idea. As such, it is a valuable step to consider when evaluating a new technology. <heading>Experience and Strategy</heading>After having decided to market the innovation taken, Win2 suggests to evaluate whether the founders have or can find the necessary skills and strategies to realise the commercialization. <heading>Marketing and distribution:</heading>Evaluating the market attractiveness in Win2 greatly facilitates to identify the experience required for both the Marketing and Distribution. Basically, the experience is much more important for the new invention, when it is a stand-alone product. Indeed, for inventions integrated in products, the experience is relying more on the partner's abilities than on the inventor's. As stated in the market attractiveness part, it is truly risky to "go it alone" as the required resources are huge: finance, labour, infrastructure. <heading>Technology development/manufacturing:</heading>'Once the concept proved, Win2 suggests evaluating the experience in technology development and manufacturing. This is a critical step for brand new inventions and the technology transfer must be done by using proven processes. Failing to control the technology transfer can delay the business process and result in budget overruns. Following a successful technology transfer, manufacturing the product should be less complex, especially for integrated products. For stand-alone products, a great deal of partnership (licensing) or professional service might be required to succeed during the manufacturing process. Prior to this step, there is a need to secure the technology with patents. The development of an intellectual property base and strategy is vital to successful commercialization. In practice, infringements prove difficult to detect and costly to prosecute case by case. (Perchorowicz 1995) <heading>Venture structure</heading>An existing venture which creates an innovation usually has the skills to market the idea, either with spin-outs (Xerox, Kodak) or by licensing the technology (Sony CD). Inventors like academic researchers do not always have a mature knowledge of business management issues and concepts. For that reason, spin-outs can also be useful. Those spin-outs can be put in incubators to increase chances of success. Boeschal. (2002) research shows that entrepreneurs who participate in an incubator program have a success rate of approximately eighty percent, compared to twenty percent for non-incubator businesses. There are many considerations in choosing between creating a spin-out company or licensing the technology, including the size and geographical scale of the market to be addressed, entry points to the market, development times, and resources needed to create a product. The business plan is a key guide to this decision, but so too is networking with industrial and financial contacts to ensure that all key factors are identified and addressed at an early stage. (Searle, Gravesal. 2003) For new inventions, the idea of cooperation seems to be quite consensual in the literature and Win2 fails to emphasize that importance. Kwak (2002) observes that start-ups were significantly more likely to choose a cooperative strategy when managers believed that complementary assets, such as channel relationships or a well known brand, were both critical to a product's success and expensive to reproduce. Indeed, the costs of commercialization are a key factor to the decision of cooperating especially in the biotech industry (Studt 2003). Another reason for cooperating is the sustainability of the business: potential users of Blackberry would not allow a small company to become a central element of their infrastructure unless that company was sustainable (Carayannopoulos 2005). Win2 does not clearly emphasize that idea of sustainability which is crucial for a brand new technology to succeed in the commercialization process. The cooperation can have wide forms, from simple licensing to joint-ventures. Biotech firms create more products than they can commercialize and thus require partners. The biotech field has proven to be highly creative in the area of corporate alliances. Research and development agreements, royalty arrangements, co-marketing deals, manufacturing contracts and joint-ventures have been used to achieve commercial objectives (Fildes 1990). In general, when intellectual property protection is strong and complementary assets are critical for success, start-ups can earn the highest returns by becoming ideas factories and auctioning their innovations to established corporations (e.g. pharmaceutical industry); then the greatest returns may flow (Kwak 2002). The generic idea is that small firms bring the new technology and the big firms provide the resources. Start-up companies are consistently better at introducing breakthrough products and/or creating new markets than their large, established competitors (Watts 2001). The choice between cooperation versus competition may require a thorough analysis of the costs and benefits of each option. <heading>Finance structures:</heading>Finding funds for the commercialization of a new technology is a core part of the process. Finding the right finance partner to get "smart" money (see below) is much more difficult than just getting the funds. There are several ways of financing a brand new technology and structuring the funds has a huge impact on the ownership. That is precisely why experience is crucial to find the right structure and Win2 properly emphasizes that importance. What Win2 fails to highlight is timing issue in financing. Obtaining the right type of funds at the right time is difficult to do and yet important. The key management issues facing a spin-out company at earlier stages will be creating a prototype product or proving the concept for the technology within the limits of the seed funding available. Assuming the early development program is successful, managers will then seek further rounds of finance. Experience in developing strong connections with venture capitalists, business angels, corporate funds, and other sources of finance, facilitates matching the appropriate finance source with the needs of the venture. Technological entrepreneurs often lack the operating capital to intensively research an interesting idea, to develop the idea into a prototype, and/or to commercialize the product. Government involvement in early stages of technological development can provide the boost necessary to launch the technology and to develop an industry (Zolinal. 2005). Many investors are waiting for an early indication in product development. Following Government funds in the high risk, high payoff new technology, private or corporate investment will ultimately be required to carry the process to fruition (Mazzola 2003). For those government funds, the equity stake can decrease progressively afterwards whilst another private investor takes the lead. <heading>Management and teams:</heading>Instead of looking at the new technology, empirical research shows that investors (especially VCs) often look at the management team which brought the technology. That demonstrates the importance of experience for the management as advocated by Win2. <fnote>Venture Capital firms </fnote>Once a new invention has been discovered, the development team requires a mix of invaluable skills, including expertise in intellectual property assessment, conduct of due diligence, market research, business development and licensing. External consultants might also be called when the team lacks a specific skill required to commercialize the technology. Boeschal. (2002) suggests that the founder specific advantages (prior experience) are an important factor for the success of the commercialization. <heading>Conclusion</heading>In this paper, we have assessed the commercialization potential for a new invention that does not exist yet. We did this assessment by using Win2 framework and, throughout the report, we found some strengths and weaknesses of this framework for a new invention. To summarise, Win2 offers a clear list of steps to evaluate an innovation idea. Using that list helps greatly to think about important commercialization issues in general. The exceptions for a brand new invention have been discussed above. Win2 helps inventors to think about the society impact before trying to run complex exercises to find suitable markets. However, the list of steps cannot be linear as there are strong mutual relationships between different steps like the barrier for acceptance and the impact on society for a new invention as reported above. Finally, several steps like "financing" in Win2 depend on timing issues. For example, the major operational challenge for the biotech manager is the timely acquisition of downstream capabilities. Hiring a Sales force too soon has financial consequences which are as dire to a small company as hiring one too late (Fildes 1990). Despite these limitations, Win2 framework is definitely very useful to assess a new technology, not yet in the market. 