<heading>Introduction</heading>Parity conditions play a key role in the comprehension of international financial markets and in a decision maker's strategic posture towards the markets. The parity conditions are 'benchmarks'. When they hold, they imply points of indifference between two financial choices and when invalid they indicate market forces favoring one alternative over another. Empirical analysis and evidence on departures from parity are most intriguing, as a violation of parity implies that opportunities exist which can be exploited or arbitraged away. Purchasing power parity (PPP) is a theory of exchange rate determination; a way to compare the average costs of goods and services between countries. The theory assumes that the actions of traders, motivated by cross-country price differences, induce changes in the exchange rate. In another vein, PPP suggests that transactions on a country's current account, affect the value of the exchange rate on the foreign exchange market. <heading>Model and Methodology</heading>The Law of one price (LOP) forms the foundation of the PPP theory, which states that in the absence of transportation and other transaction costs, competitive markets will equalize the price of an identical good in two countries, expressed in the same currency. Algebraic representation:  FORMULA  Where St is the nominal exchange rate expressed as the domestic price of the foreign currency. The absolute version, states that the exchange rate is equal to the ratio of prices of the two countries in the long run. Another form - Relative PPP, suggests that the percentage change in the exchange rate is equal to the percentage change in the price for two countries. This theory suggests that exchange rates act in a way to counteract changes in the price levels between countries and equilibrate the purchasing power of the currencies. Formal version:  FORMULA  Real exchange rate (RER) is the, nominal exchange rate deflated by a ratio of foreign and domestic price levels:  FORMULA  Where R t is the respective real exchange rate and P denotes price level, UK is the home country and US, the foreign country. The logarithmic form:  FORMULA  PPP implies that the nominal exchange rate is equivalent to the difference in price levels. Consequently, short run deviations are equal to the log of the exchange rate plus the difference in price levels where d represents short run deviations from PPP.  FORMULA   FORMULA  If d is equal to zero, then PPP subsists. An important consequence of PPP is that the RER between countries should not vary in the long run: Arbitrage and other effects should act to negate differences in purchasing power. These long run stabilizing forces implied by PPP thus make stationarity a vital consequence to the theory. <heading>Empirical research on PPP </heading>Empirical evidence about the validity of the PPP hypothesis has produced mixed results and developed along with advances in econometric techniques. Empirical tests confirm that PPP is a poor description of exchange rate behaviour in the short run due to exchange rate volatility and sticky prices, but in the longer run, PPP offers a good guide. The LOP was tested by the Big Mac Index published in 'The Economist'. This 'Hamburger standard' shows the difference in the average price of a Big Mac in various countries. As Peter Isard (1977) stated, "...the law of one price is flagrantly and systematically violated by empirical data..." Frankel (1980) found evidence in favour of PPP in hyperinflationary countries and no evidence for countries with low and moderate inflation. Examination of the RER equation provided the need for stationarity. This is - currencies go through periods of undervaluation and overvaluation that can be large, but there is tendency for PPP to reassert itself as time passes. Such investigations have tested the hypothesis of non-mean reversion against the alternative of mean reversion. Roll (1979) and Adler also tested the hypothesis that PPP follows a random walk. Kenneth Rogoff (1996) suggests that for a broad sample of countries, deviations from PPP maybe around 3 to 5 years, PPP deviations dampen out at the rate of 15% per year. According to Mark Taylor and David Peel (2000) the speed of return to PPP may increase when the deviation is larger. Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964) posited the productivity differential model concluding that the biggest difficulty in testing PPP is that the RER may change, thus leading to the failure of PPP. <heading>Econometric techniques for testing PPP</heading>Present research tests PPP under three different specifications 1: <list>As a univariate analysis of the RER, as defined by -  FORMULA A bivariate relationship between the nominal ER and the domestic to foreign price ratio -  FORMULA A trivariate relationship between the nominal ER, the domestic price level and the foreign price level -  FORMULA </list>Since all variables in the PPP relationship are prices series so we may assume them to be non-stationary. We can establish the univariate non-stationarity of the series in our data set by the following analysis and tests: 1. Visual Inspection of the data: An observation and study of the line graphs and the correlograms of the logs of the nominal ER, and the domestic and foreign price level can be very informative. The ACF does not decay if the series is non-stationary. However, this inspection needs to be supplemented. 2. Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) Tests: The ADF test offers a formal test for nonstationarity in time series data. The principle behind the ADF equation is to test for the presence of a unit root in the coefficient of lagged variables. If the value of the coefficient of a lagged variable is one (1), then the regression exhibits the properties of a nonstationary, random walk process indicating that shocks imparted to the RER will be permanent, it won't be mean reverting and its long-run equilibrium will not exist. The regression model for the test of the RER is:2  FORMULA  The H 0 for the test is whether is equal to zero; if equals zero then a unit root is present and the series is nonstationary. The ADF Test is conducted first in levels and then for the differenced series until the H 0 is rejected, implying that the series has unit roots. The choice of lagged variables is very important as any misspecification can lead to errors. Phillips - Perron Tests: Similar to the ADF Test, the only difference being that this test has a more comprehensive theory by applying non parametric Neway West correction to the standard errors to take care of the serial correlation in the error terms without adding lagged difference terms. Both the above-mentioned tests suffer from the problem that the H 0 is never accepted, which makes it difficult to interpret the data. KPSS Tests: This test statistic tests the null hypothesis of level stationarity against the alternative of non-stationarity. Such a test is more meaningful in testing PPP to have the economic hypothesis of a constant RER coincide with the statistical null hypothesis of stationarity. We now explain the multivariate cointegration tests, which imply mean reversion. As Granger notes, " A test for cointegration can be thought of as a pre test to avoid spurious regression situations." Cointegration analysis tells us that any two non-stationary series that are integrated of the same order, are cointegrated if a linear combination exists, which itself is stationary. That is the non-stationarity of one series exactly offsets that of the other, establishing a long run relationship. 5. Engle - Granger 2 Step Estimator: To test the co-integration between variables we use the Engle-Granger Theorem, which suggests that the presence of Cointegration indicates the existence of an Error Correction Model (ECM). The first step is to estimate the long run relationship:  FORMULA  We test the residual term for a unit root, if this null hypothesis is rejected it indicates that Cointegration exists, which is a necessary condition for long-run PPP. Therefore we estimate an ECM for the spot exchange rate in step 2. However this model suffers from a number of problems. Firstly, the model assumes that the regressors are weakly exogenous for the long run parameters. Secondly, it is not possible to carry out any hypothesis tests of the cointegrating relationship at stage 1. In addition, there could exist a simultaneous equation bias. 6. Johansen's FIML: This test acts as an improvement on the Engle-Granger Model by allowing more than one cointegrating relationship and not assuming weak exogeneity between regressors. Full information implies that the all the equations in the system are utilized. Maximum Likelihood means that parameters are chosen in a way that they will maximize the likelihood of generating the sample data. The first stage in implementation is estimation of the unrestricted VAR (Vector Autoregressive) Model and the choice of a lag variable, to ensure that the error terms are normally distributed and linearly independent. We use the Maximum eigenvalue statistic and the trace statistic to obtain the Cointegration rank. Secondly, we test the hypothesis based on the cointegrating vectors and adjustment parameters which can be used to test the validity of PPP, as well as the weak exogeneity assumption of the Engle-Granger Model. <heading>Summary analysis of the data</heading>This analysis was carried out, to test the PPP relationship between UK and US using the wholesale (PPI/WPI) price series for both countries as well as the spot exchange rate USD/GBP as data, which was downloaded from Ecowin database. <list>Time Horizon - 31/01/1957 to 31/03/2006Data Type - MonthlyNumber of Observations - 591Notation:Home Country (UK) - p Foreign Country (USA) - pstarExchange rate - s</list>1 Mohammad S. Hasan - 'A century of PPP: evidence from Canada and Australia' 2 Roger D. May & Dr. Philip Rothman - 'An econometric evaluation of purchasing power parity' <heading>Presentation and Interpretation of the main results</heading><heading>Univariate Analysis</heading><heading>1. We first find the logs of the sample data. </heading>Visual Inspection of the data (Appendix 1.1A) - The graphs indicate that the series show a trend when we take variables in levels, which can be removed by using the first difference of the data. The differenced series - DLNP, shows a probable structural break (Appendix 1.1B). 1.2a Correlograms of PPP variables in levels (Appendix 1.2A) - The Correlograms shows that the series are non-stationary. 1.2b Correlograms of the PPP variables in differences (Appendix 1.2B) - The ACF of the spot rates indicates that the returns are a white noise. <table/><table/><heading>2. ADF Tests (Appendix 2) </heading><heading>a. Levels of the series (lnp, lnpstar, lns, lnrer)</heading>The given data shows: The Test statistic does not exceed the Critical values at the 1% as well as 5% level. This implies that the null hypothesis of a unit root for all the four series in levels cannot be rejected. <heading>b. Differences of the series (dlnp, dlnpstar, dlns, dlnrer)</heading>In all the four difference series, the test statistic is more negative than the critical value; therefore we strongly reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in differences, implying that all the series have at most one unit root. <heading>3. Testing the real exchange rate for nonstationarity (Appendix 3) </heading>a. Visual Inspection - The presence of a unit root, may be visible, as the series appears to show long swings, also as the series often crosses its mean, it could imply that the series is stationary. b. Levels of the RER series show that the real exchange rate is non-stationary. c. Differences of the RER series imply that real exchange rate returns are stationary as the real exchange rate has one unit root. This provides evidence against PPP. <heading>4. Phillips-Perron Tests (Appendix 4) </heading><heading>Levels - </heading>We find results similar to the ADF tests, showing that the test statistic does not exceed the critical value at both the 1% and 5% levels for lns, lnp, lnpstar and lnrer. Hence we cannot reject the null hypothesis of a unit root. <heading>Differences - </heading>The test statistic exceeds the critical value by a very large amount. Therefore we strongly reject the null hypothesis. PPP doesn't exist between the UK and US, as the RER has a unit root. <heading>5. KPSS Tests for Stationarity (Appendix 5)</heading>The test statistic is greater than the critical values at both the 1% and 5% levels for levels. This implies that RER is significant; since, in KPSS tests the null hypothesis is stationarity. Hence the KPSS test provides some evidence that the real exchange rate is stationary. <heading>Multivariate Cointegration Analysis </heading><heading>6. Engle-Granger 2-Step Estimator - </heading><heading>Step-1 (Appendix 6)</heading>The obtained coefficients are (C=-1.528361, LNP=0.294881, LNPSTAR= -0.057067) These coefficients are different from the values required by PPP (C=0, lnp= -lnpstar= 1). We also test for the residuals, as we cannot base the validity of PPP based on this equation. Cointegration Residual: Using MacKinnon's Critical Values for n=3, constant no trend, we calculate the correct critical value for a 5% test.  FORMULA  = FORMULA  = FORMULA  This value implies that the residuals are non-stationary, as (-2.819735 > -3.5750944) Therefore we conclude that - There is no Cointegration between the exchange rate and the relative prices There is no long run PPP relationship between the UK and US. This result implies that no ECM exists for the exchange rate. <heading>Step-2</heading>We now observe that all the coefficients are insignificant, confirming both, that it is a poor model and that we found no cointegration at Step 1. <heading>7A. Johansen FIML - </heading>We estimate the VAR and its lag order using the information criteria (Appendix 7A). The Schwarz's Bayesian criterion suggests a VAR (1) model since it penalizes errors more severely in case of extra parameters whereas the Akaike & Hannan-Quinn criteria suggest a VAR (7) model. We use the VAR (7) model, as it has more significance. The test for normality shows that it is highly non-normal. Estimating the Cointegrating rank, vectors and adjustment parameters (Appendix 7B) - Since a VAR (7) model, implies a VECM (6) model therefore we specify lag intervals 1 6 to do cointegrating testing. Both the trace and maximum eigenvalue tests, demonstrate the presence of two cointegrating vectors. However, the presence of the second cointegrating vector has no economic interpretation when testing for PPP. The cointegrating vector obtained is  FORMULA , as compared to the required vector of  FORMULA , indicating the normalising of the first coefficient in the vector. Thus it shows that that PPP is likely not to hold between UK and US. There is no autocorrelation in the VECM residuals, but White Test displays heteroskedasticity, a probable symptom of non-normality. Finally we test the model imposing restrictions. The Cointegration restriction test indicates that the model is significant which implies that PPP restrictions do not hold. (Appendix 7C) Lastly the model is tested imposing the weak exogeneity restrictions (Appendix 7D). The joint test of weak exogeneity and PPP restrictions are both strongly rejected. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The Purchasing Power Parity between the UK and US is tested by employing the different methods described. Results signify only a partial evidence of long-run PPP between UK and US. The ADF and P-P tests indicated stationarity in levels and non-stationarity in differences of the series. Conversely the KPSS test provides evidence that the real exchange rate may be stationary. The Engle-Granger Model found no Cointegration between the nominal exchange rate and inflation in the two countries. Alternatively, the Johansen tests established that there exist two cointegrating vectors. PPP restrictions on the long-run parameters were rejected. It is not an unusual finding in empirical tests, and calls for better quality financial information on prices and reduction of measurement errors. Consequently, the results conclude that 'the use of PPP theory should be approached with a general caution'. The only authentic conclusion that can be drawn is that, further extensive studies are necessary to promote our understanding of the exchange rate behavior. 