Economic growth is defined as an increase in the value of goods and services produced by an economy. It is measured in the percent rate of real GDP and is considered to be an increase in the income of a nation. The existence of massive difference in the standard of living all over the world made economists to find the causation of lower living standard in poor countries and the possible ways of helping them to grow faster and catch up with rich ones. The neoclassical theory of economic growth was developed in 1956 by Robert M. Solow, hence, also known as the Solow growth model. It presents the Harrod-Domar model, but adding labour as a factor of production. Solow argued that a key determinant of people's standard of living is how much a nation saves and invests. However, capital accumulation alone cannot explain the persistent growth in living standards. The model assigns continues long-run growth to technological progress, but leaves unexplained the economic determinant of that technological progress. It is simply assumed. Saving, technological progress and growth of population affect the level of output and growth of an economy over time. The basic model assumes that there is no technological progress and that the labour force is fixed: Y = F (K, L), where Y is output, K is capital and L is labour force. The real economy, however, experiences both population growth and technological progress. Express the function in per capita terms: Y/L = F (K/L, 1), the new production function will finally take form of: y = f (k), where output and capital are measured in per head terms (Fig.1). The slope of this function equals the Marginal Product of Capital (MPK) which shows how much extra output a worker produces when given an extra unit of capital. Despite of positive correlation, the function still experiences constant returns to scale. Diminishing marginal product explains why the economy does not grow forever, but reaches a long-run level of output and capital called steady-state equilibrium where per capita capital and per capita output will stop growing and remain constant. Consumption and investment are two components of demand for output: y = c + i. People tend to save a part of their income s, which is a number between 0 and 1, and consume only (1-s). Therefore, c = (1-s) y. Substitute (1-s) y for c into equation y = c + i, we get: y = (1-s) y + i.. After simplifying, the equation will take the look of i = sy, implying that investment equals saving (Fig.1). By saving we mean not only private saving, but public saving as well. Overall, the capital stock in the production function determines how much output the economy would produce, and the saving rate determines the distribution of that output between consumption and investment. Expenses on new equipments increase capital stock while wearing out of old equipments causes it to fall. So the economy has to find a level of capital stock where depreciation is just compensated by investment. At point k1 in Fig.1 the saving per worker is greater than the necessary amount to maintain a steady level of capital, so capital per worker increases. Output per worker increases from y1to y* due to capital deepening. At point k2, there is not enough investment to balance population growth and depreciation. Capital per worker is falling leading to a decrease in output worker from k2 to k*. Intersection point A is the steady-state with constant capital stock and output per worker. This implies that: sy* = sf(k*) = (n+d) k*, where the savings rate is exactly equal the population growth rate n plus the depreciation rate d . k* is the capital widening point because capital is increasing at a rate enough to keep pace with population increase and depreciation. Figure 2 shows effects of a movement in the saving rate from s to s1. Saving per worker is now greater than population growth plus depreciation, so capital accumulation increases, shifting the steady state from point A to B. Capital and productivity per worker are now permanently higher, but economic growth is the same. 'The extra savings are taken by the extra replacement investment implied by the higher level of capital stock, and the extra net investment required to equip each worker with the higher level of capital stock per person' stated Gartner. When the saving rate rises in this model, consumption and the price level both decline. The interest rate has to fall to stimulate sufficient investment to guarantee that saving and investment will remain in balance. An increase in population leads only to a higher steady-state of total output growth, but the steady-state level of per capita output and capital per head would actually be reduced (Fig. 3). Income would follow. Ironically, population growth itself depends on income. As incomes rise, death rates fall (especially reduction in infant mortality) and population growth rises. At a point where the income becomes high enough, birth rates will start to fall. In many highly developed countries the population growth almost equals zero. It is extremely difficult to reduce the rate of population growth in poor countries, where the next generation is seen as social security, since having children ensures that the parents are taken care of in their old age. According to Solow growth theory, rich countries should be at a higher point on the production function than poor countries, which implies that the slope, marginal product of capital (MPK), is much steeper compare to rich countries. Therefore, the rate of return to capital in poor countries must be much higher than rich countries. Investors from rich countries should be attracted by this possibility of high rate of return and apply massive capital inflows. Sadly, in the real world all that we cannot observe this. It is reasonable to conclude that the poor countries may not be operating on the same production function as the rich ones. According to Solow growth model, poor nations tend to have a lower capital to labour ratio, i.e. they start at a level of the capital-labour ratio that is well below the equilibrium value. Therefore, economies with same saving rates, population growth and access to technology can achieve absolute convergence. Technology must be freely available to all nations. The rich nations will reach the equilibrium earlier because they started at a higher point and thus required a shorter period of investment and saving. Poor countries are left behind because their capital is smaller, but as long as their saving's rate is the same as in rich countries and have access to the same technology, they will catch up. The convergence process might be slow, but eventually countries would end up with the same steady-state income. Few industrialized countries, notably Japan after World War Two, do appear to have converged with rich countries. To oppose predicted convergence, Robert Barro in his recent papers observed that developed countries appear to have grown at faster rate than the developing world for the period of last fifty years. The unexplained technological progress has led to development of Endogenous growth theory in late 1980's with chief inventors Paul Romer and his adviser Robert E. Lucas, Jr. Endogenous growth theorists emphasize on knowledge accumulation. A small improvement to neoclassical model will change the original production function to: Y = AK, where A is a constant measuring the amount of output produced for each unit of capital. This production function does not exhibit the property of diminishing returns to capital. One extra unit of capital produces A extra units of output, regardless of quantity of K (constant marginal product). In the Solow model, saving leads to growth temporarily, but diminishing returns to capital makes the economy to reach a steady-state. Hence, growth depends only on exogenous technological progress. By contrast, in endogenous growth model, saving and investment can lead to permanent growth. If capital can be seen in a more broadly way, rather than just equipments and plants, the effect of diminishing returns will disappear. Assume there are two sectors in the economy. In the first one, firms produce goods and services used for consumption and investment. The other half produces knowledge. The production function is manufacturing firms will look like: Y = F (K, (1-u) EL), where u is the labour force in universities. The efficiency of labour is meant to reflect society's knowledge about production methods. Instead of counting the number of physical bodies, we count effective labour input taking function relating per person output to per person capital into account improved education and technology. EL stands for the number of workers L and efficiency of each worker. If we increase K and E by some multiple, the output of both sectors in the economy would be increased by the same rate. The growth continues endogenously because the creation of knowledge would never stop. While saving determines the steady-state stock of physical capital, the labour force in universities (u) determines the growth of knowledge. Both of them affect the level of income, but only u affects the steady-state growth rate of income. Human capital is the value of the extra earnings made possible by education. Educated people can produce more output and a higher standard of living. In contrast to the neoclassical growth theory of unexplained exogenous technological change with no potential for policy effect, endogenous growth theory argues that policy measures can have an impact on the long-run growth rate of an economy, even if they do not change the aggregate savings rate. Romer and Lucas have built a model in which the key to growth is the development of ideas and transferring them to new goods. The incentives to production of ideas rely on monopoly power that is reinforced by patents and copyrights. Efficient international trade makes sure that consumers can enjoy all the benefits of new goods from anywhere in the world. Government policies can positively influence growth rates by taxing consumption subsidizing investment and research, shifting resources from government consumption to government investment. For instance, invest more on infrastructure such as airports, highways, electricity. The legal system must have fair property rights and protect owners from thieves. The tax system must be well-managed. There must be open opportunities for new investors to start a business. Geographical location of countries still causes problems for poor countries to develop. Jeffrey Sachs of Columbia University argued that technologies developed in the temperate zones may not be applicable to tropical areas as a result of weather difference and soil structure. Human capital investment in tropical areas is still not enough. This fact pulls down the demand which for high tech products. Alwyn Young carefully studied growth of Asian Tigers and concluded that all four countries (Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan) have remarkable high growth which is most explained by increased input, not by higher productivity. Since in 1960's these countries were quite poor, the labour force was extremely cheap. The number of workers dramatically increased due to women's participation. Large amounts of money were spent on improving the college and university system to improve and thus increase productivity. The education system was reformed at all levels ensuring that all children attended elementary education and compulsory high school education. Domestic consumption was discouraged through government policies such as high tariffs. A high degree of economic freedom, political stability, clear property rights, encouragement of export, high savings rate ensured their rapid transformation from poor countries to highly-industrialized rich nations in thirty years. Economist Joseph Stiglitz commented that in these countries 'the Government created an environment in which markets could thrive'. Because of the focus on export driven growth, Asian Tigers experienced currency devaluation. These economies focus exclusively on export demand and put high tariffs on imports which heavily affect the economic health of their export nations. In addition, these nations have met difficulties after losing their initial competitive advantage, cheap labour. Many economists argue that nowadays, India and China with their fast-growing economies are following the steps of the Tigers. Since gaining independence in 1971, health and education levels in Bangladesh have improved remarkably, and poverty has been declining. Yet it remains one of the poorest countries in the world. The income level is very low. Based on Barro and Sala-i-Martin report, for the period from 1960 and 1985 investment in Bangladesh averaged 4.6 percent of GDP compare to Japan's 36.6 percent and USA's 24 percent. The effect of both low saving and high population growth is as theory would predict. Hostile climates for foreign investment, low investment in human capital, unsustainable public sector spending and weak governance are all causes of its extreme situation right now. Since the intervention of non-governmental organisations the improvements are highly significant. Reducing population growth and attaining gender parity in school enrolments rates are notable achievements of recent years. In the past decade, infant mortality has been reduced by half. Adult literacy rates have been increased on average by seven per cent. On the other hand, inefficient state-owned enterprises, in particular those providing utilities and infrastructure, have resulted to significant loses by not meeting national demand. Poor governance and pervasive institutional weakness still remain biggest problems in Bangladesh. Although Solow's model ignores some important aspects of macroeconomics, such as short-run fluctuations in employment and savings rates, his resulting paper (A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth, 1956) still contains a number of very useful insights about the dynamics of the growth process. The success of some fast-growing nations like the Asian Tigers and the miraculously quick recovery of Japan and Germany after World War Two are 'balanced' with the failure of other poor nations. Thus it is extremely difficult to prove the triumph of any particular economic theory. . <figure/><figure/><figure/>