<heading>Introduction</heading>Yahoo is an internet communications and media company that offers online navigational directories. It is a market leader in generating branded advertising from traditional marketers, which contributed 88% of total revenues in 2004. This advertising appears on a range of its internet and mobile services, of which the major ones will be discussed in the context of the essay. The market for internet products and services is characterised by rapid change, converging technologies, and constant competition. In such a competitive environment, an understanding and continuous scanning and analysis of the macro and micro marketing environment for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT analysis), and the lookout for strategic windows, are essential for the company's survival and success. The analysis of the marketing environment should result in the formation of a marketing mix programme to implement the marketing strategy. The macro and micro marketing environment forces affecting the company and consumers will be analysed in turn, and the likeliness of their influence on the development of a suitable marketing mix will be considered. The marketing mix will be considered in terms of the influence of these environment forces on the "5 P's" of the marketing mix (Product, Place/Distribution, Promotion, Price, and People). <heading>The Macro Marketing Environment Forces</heading><heading>Political/Legal/Regulatory forces</heading>The internet is a recent technology and is expanding and changing faster than the rate at which the laws governing it can be produced. Nevertheless there are several laws in the EU and US which are likely to influence the development of a suitable marketing mix. <heading>Personal Privacy</heading>Surveys show that the vast majority of websites collect personal information. Public concerns about on-line privacy remain, and many in the industry are urging self-policing on this issue to head off potential regulation. Few laws specifically address personal privacy, but the most serious strides in this regard have come from the EU with the 1998 EU Directive on Data Protection which requires the company to explain how the information will be used and to obtain the individual's permission to use their information. Since Yahoo relies on customisation of its services (email, instant messenger, personals, advertising) based on user profiles (which include personal information), such legislation has far reaching consequences for the level of customisation of its products/services and for the associated customised promotions that can be targeted at customers. Thus the Product (service) and Promotion variables in the marketing mix are very likely to be influenced by the laws and regulations surrounding personal privacy. <heading>Child Protection</heading>In the US, the Children's Online Protection Act and the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act are intended to restrict the distribution of certain materials deemed harmful to children. This restriction on distribution is likely to influence the Place/Distribution variable of the marketing mix. In addition, the Protection of Children from Sexual Predators Act of 1998 requires online service providers to report evidences of violations of federal child pornography laws. Such legislation may impose significant modifications to the services, and is thus likely to influence the Product variable of the marketing mix. <heading>Intellectual Property</heading>Since many parties are actively developing search, indexing, eCommerce and other Web-related technologies, Yahoo may be subject to intellectual property infringement claims that are costly to defend and could limit its ability to provide certain content or use certain technologies in the future, thereby affecting the Product variable of the marketing mix. This aspect of the marketing environment is highly likely to influence the marketing mix since currently, the company's subsidiary LAUNCH is engaged in a lawsuit regarding copyright issues. In addition, another subsidiary, Overture, is in litigation with several companies, each of which has claimed that allowing advertisers to bid on certain search terms constitutes trademark infringement. <heading>Unsolicited Mail (Spam)</heading>Many internet users believe unsolicited email (spam) violates their privacy and steals their resources. Most commercial online resources, including Yahoo, offer users the option of filtering out email from certain internet addresses that generate a large amount of spam. This impacts on the readiness of Yahoo to use email for marketing purposes and in so doing influences the marketing mix variable of Promotion in that promotion through email campaigns is less likely. <heading>Societal/Green forces</heading>The internet is generally seen as an asset to society. It facilitates communication, provides consumer information, entertainment, and so on. It is generally "green" in that its effect on the natural environment is not harmful in the way that for example the oil industry is. A societal concern is in the areas of parental control of content. This influences the Product variable of the marketing mix in that several products and services will have to be modified to allow for parental control of content. <heading>Technological forces</heading>Technology has been defined as the application of knowledge and tools to solve problems and perform tasks more efficiently (Dibbs et al). Often this knowledge comes from research carried out in universities, and by large businesses (e.g. Yahoo itself, and its competitors). Consumers' technological knowledge influences their desire for goods and services. To provide marketing mixes that satisfy consumers, marketers must be aware of these influences. The Product variable of the marketing mix will be influenced by the consumers' desire for specific goods and services. Technology also affects the types of product that marketers can offer. Yahoo's products are highly technologically based and so technology influences the Product variable of the marketing mix to a large extent. Database technology together with email, internet and mobile text allow marketers to send their advertisements or sales specifications directly to selected groups of customers who want their products, thus influencing the Place/Distribution as well as the Promotion variables of the marketing mix. The cost of advertising on the internet is often dependent on the response to the advertising campaign. The response rate to an advertisement (click-through rate) is determined by the use of internet technology and so technology influences the Price variable of the marketing mix. In developing countries, where internet and mobile usage is less advanced, the Product and Price variables, especially, of the marketing mix, need to be adjusted. The products need to be appropriate for the level of technology available in the country (for example, mobile and internet infrastructure), and the prices need to be relative to the economic status of the country. <heading>Economic and Competitive forces</heading>The general economic climate at present is one of prosperity in the USA, UK and Japan, the three largest markets for Yahoo. This means that marketers can expand their marketing mixes to take advantage of high consumer buying power. However, constant scanning of the marketing environment is necessary as these conditions could change at any point in time. In times of economic prosperity, the level of discretionary income is high. Yahoo's three largest advertising markets are entertainment, cars, and pharmaceuticals. Consumers spend on these three markets with discretionary income, which is generally high in times of prosperity. However, should the economic climate change to a recession, the marketing mix would need to be adjusted so that the Product variable focuses on the functions buyers want and the Promotion variable focuses on the value and utility of the products. The competitive structure in which Yahoo operates is closest to an Oligopoly. Yahoo needs to identify unique marketing mixes in order to carve out its market share. The problem with using Price as part of its differential marketing strategy is that competitors will often match or beat the price. Differential product features can be introduced to make the products and services distinctive, for example in the US, Yahoo's broadband service includes free subscription to its music service, LAUNCHcast Plus. Distinguishing promotional methods can be used, for example Yahoo is the official internet partner of the Fifa World Cup 2006. <heading>The Micro Marketing Environment Forces</heading><heading>The Business</heading>When creating marketing mix programmes, the marketing function's recommendations must be consistent with the corporate goals and with the colleagues' views, to ensure internal take-up. In this way the internal business itself affects the marketing mix. <heading>Suppliers</heading>These forces include anything prone to altering the business's receipt of its required supplies. A break in supplies could affect the marketing mix variables such as distribution of the product, amongst others. Yahoo's principal suppliers are LAUNCH (for music), Overture (for search), BT in UK and SBC in USA (for broadband) and its many Advertising suppliers. These suppliers are critical to the company's operations and so continuous scanning of the marketing environment is crucial to ensure the marketing mix variables remain competitive. <heading>Buyers</heading>Consumers and business customers should be analysed and a marketing mix developed to satisfy these customers' requirements. "What do customers want?" is central to the marketing concept and to the formation of a suitable marketing mix. <heading>Competitors</heading>Marketers must strive to satisfy their target customers in a manner that differentiates their product, brand and overall proposition from competing companies' marketing mixes. In the case of Yahoo, its main competitor across the full range of its services is AOL. However, it is important that Yahoo focuses its attention not only on like-for-like rivals, but also on erecting entry barriers to substitutes or new entrants. If it ignores these, then it may face similar problems to Coke and Pepsi who, due to their focusing their attention on each other, allowed new entrants to enter the market for soft drinks. Substitutes exist for individual Yahoo services e.g. Itunes (for music), and many internet service providers (for broadband) and new entrants are continuously coming in (e.g. Pandora, for online music, offers a similar service to LAUNCHcast, but is currently free). Google appeared as a new entrant in 1998 and gained a large share of the search market, and is continuously expanding its market share and range of services. A further barrier to entry is switching costs. It is costly to switch broadband suppliers and this could be used to Yahoo's advantage in that it already has a large broadband subscriber base through BT(UK) and SBC(US). Lastly, backward integration is a further barrier to entry. Yahoo's merger with Overture and LAUNCH means that it is the supplier of its own search and music, creating an entry barrier to other companies competing in these markets. <heading>Publics</heading>A public is any group that does or could impact on a business's ability to satisfy its target customers. Most notably in the case of Yahoo is the major effect that the media has on its reputation. Both Yahoo and Google have suffered from bad publicity surrounding their activities with China in recent months regarding either the disclosure of private information (in the case of Yahoo) or the filtering of information (in the case of Google). Publics such as the media affect the People variable of the marketing mix in that marketing programmes need to address more publics than solely customers. 