The original form of the liar paradox comes from Eubulides, the sixth century, Greek philosopher. In this form of the paradox, Epimenides, a Cretan, says: <quote>'All Cretans are liars.'</quote>If Epimenides is telling the truth then he is lying, and if he is lying then he is telling the truth. Although this is seen as the original form of the liar paradox, or an insoluble, as termed by medieval philosophers, it is not actually a paradox. If we take the meaning of 'paradox' to be that x is a paradox if it is self-contradictory, whatever its truth-value may be then Eubulides version of the liar is not a paradox. Epimenides cannot be telling the truth but he may be lying. The truth of the matter may be that some, but not all, Cretans are liars, including Epimenides. In its simplest form the liar paradox can be constructed as the following: (a) 'This proposition is false' Or (b) 'I always lie' In (a) if the truth-value of the proposition is true then it asserts that the proposition must be false, whereas if the truth-value of the proposition is false then it follows that the proposition must be true. Similarly in (b), if 'I always lie' is true then what I say is false, and if 'I always lie' is false then, consequently, I am telling the truth. It is claimed that self-reference is to blame for the paradoxical nature of these propositions. It cannot just be that self-reference is to blame, however. Consider the following proposition: <quote>'This sentence contains five words'</quote>Here it is evident that there is self-referencing within the proposition, but it obviously does not create a paradox; it is a perfectly coherent proposition. Therefore, a proposition being self-referent is not a sufficient condition for it to be a paradox. The conditional; if a proposition is self-referent then it is a paradox, is false, by merit of the above example, i.e. we can have self-referent propositions that are not paradoxical. We have seen that a proposition can be self-referent and not be a paradox, but can we have a paradox that is not self-referent? We have established that being self-referent is not a sufficient condition for a proposition to be a paradox but perhaps it can be established that if a proposition is a paradox then it must be self-referent. Let us turn our attention to a form of the liar paradox that does not appear self-referent with the following two propositions: <quote> Proposition X = 'Y is true' Proposition Y = 'X is false'</quote>Neither of these two independent propositions are self-referential, yet together they produce the same problem as the form of the liar in (a) and (b) above. The reason that the paradox arises is because self-reference is introduced with proposition Y. At first it may appear that although referencing is introduced it is not self-referential; X refers to Y cataphorically and Y to X anaphorically. Just as I can say: <quote>'The next sentence will contain six words'</quote>And <quote>'The last sentence contained seven words'</quote>Although these sentences refer to each other cataphorically and anaphorically respectively, it is not the same as in the case of propositions X and Y above. Y creates self-reference because it creates a loop, or circularity, between X and Y. X's truth-value is unknown until Y is known. It is the content of Y that creates the paradox. If Y had been the proposition 'all bachelors are unmarried' we would have known that the truth-value of X = true. In contrast, if Y had been the proposition ' all swans are white' we would have also known the value of X: false. However, because the content of Y was 'X is false' it creates a circularity that refers to its own (Y's) truth-value, thus we are in a similar situation as with the simpler version of the liar paradox. It seems strange though, that the actual truth of a sentence can depend on time. Consider the situation where person A says 'the next thing person B says will be true' and this is followed by person B saying 'what person A said was false'. If we imagine an amount of time to exist between the two utterances, be it minutes, months or years, it seems odd that person A's utterance is perfectly coherent and sensible until B's utterance occurs. It is as if the truth-value of A's utterance hangs in time waiting to be confirmed, which is, admittedly, the same for any proposition regarding the future. For example, to say that it will rain tomorrow will be proved true or false come tomorrow, but it shall not become paradoxical in the way that the previous example does. It must be the content of the self-referencing that creates a paradox, rather than just the mere presence of self-referencing. It must be that the problem arises when a proposition makes reference to its own truth-value. Buridan claims that 'every proposition by its form signifies or asserts itself to be true' and the trouble with variations of the liar paradox is that as well as asserting its own truth, it asserts its own falsity as well. The concept of time also appears to be important in these paradoxes, as a perfectly intelligible proposition can become nonsensical just by the introduction of another proposition applied to the former at a later point in time. There is little room in this essay to discuss concepts of time in any great depth and so we shall move onto look at two possible solutions to the liar paradox; dialetheism and fuzzy logic. Dialetheism is the view that contradictions can be true, which is in clear opposition to the widely accepted Law of Non-Contradiction (LNC), an idea originating from Aristotle's Metaphysics. Dialetheism is largely rejected because it seems to go against the grain of formal logic. Many philosophers would hold that the LNC is the very basis of rationality and that as dialetheism opposes it, dialetheism is wrong. However, the existence of the liar paradox and the difficulties it presents for western logic may well be all the evidence needed to indicate that dialetheism is correct and the LNC is ill founded. Variations of the liar paradox show that, through perfectly sound, logical arguing we come to a conclusion that is both true and not true. As it is difficult to abandon assumptions we may have in respect to the liar paradox (are we to abandon the concept of self-referencing in order for consistency to prevail?), then perhaps it is system of logic that we are using that needs to be amended. Eastern philosophy has long promoted dialetheism instead of the LNC, Jainism and Buddhism, in particular, have held contradictory propositions as the basis of beliefs. Another approach to solving the liar paradox (again fudging the orthodoxies of western logic) is the concept of Fuzzy Logic. In Fuzzy Logic propositions are not necessarily absolutely true or false but can be degrees of truth. Typically, absolute truth is given a value of 1 and absolute falsity a value of 0. Each statement has a truth-value and a value for falsity, where the two numbers add up to 1. In the case of the liar paradox the conclusion is that it has a truth-value of 0.5 and a falsity-value of 0.5. Instead of claiming that the liar paradox results in a true contradiction, as dialetheism might, Fuzzy Logic is claiming that the liar paradox is equally as true as false. Self-referencing is definitely linked to the cause of the liar paradox, but it is in virtue of the self-referencing regarding the truth-value of the proposition, rather than just merely being self-referential in a wider sense. It is difficult to see how to overcome this problem though, it remains to be seen whether the results of the liar paradox show that our traditional systems of logic are flawed and that we should find alternative systems that can cope with these paradoxes, or perhaps the liar paradox shows us a weakness in language; namely, that self-referencing in regard to truth-values results in contradiction and so should be abandoned. It could be argued that, by and large, elements of language exist for a reason and merely ignoring the problems presented is just missing the point. Perhaps the point of self-referencing in regard to truth is to show weaknesses in rationality, or perhaps to merely entertain logicians. 