In Naming and Necessity, Kripke argues that necessary, a posteriori statements such as 'heat is molecular motion' have an illusion of contingency that is supposed to occur because we can imagine a possible world where empirical investigation had produced different conclusions. In actual fact the statement is expressing a necessary truth and could not have been otherwise. Kripke goes on to argue that the statement 'pain is c-fibre stimulation' can only be a necessary, a posteriori statement but we cannot explain the illusion of contingency. If it is true then we must conclude that it is false just because this illusion cannot be explained. This essay will work through Kripke's argument in some depth and raise questions and doubts in the process. Two distinctions must be made to start with; a priori statements as opposed to a posteriori statements and necessary as opposed to contingent statements. An a priori statement is one that is true regardless of empirical research. An example would be any mathematical proposition or definition, such as '3 x 3 = 9' or 'all bachelors are unmarried men'. In short, an a priori statement is a statement concerning the relation of ideas in the Humean sense. A priori statements can be said to be tautological because they contain the same information twice, to be a bachelor is, simply, to be an unmarried man. This is not uncontroversial, a priori statements are clearly tautological in terms of their reference, or denotation, but if a notion of sense is taken a la Frege we can see that different mathematical propositions, for example, do express a different way of thinking about a number. '3 x 3' and '√81' have the same denotation, namely '9', but they have a different sense. A posteriori statements are only known through empirical research. Scientific knowledge falls into this category, statements such as 'heat is the movement of molecules' or 'the boiling point of water is 100ºC'. Of the second distinction, contingent statements are statements that are true but that could have been otherwise. An example of this would be 'you are reading this essay now', although clearly true it is perfectly conceivable that you could indeed have been reading someone else's essay right now, or having dinner instead. Necessary statements are, simply, statements that just have to be the case. A typical example of a necessary statement is a mathematical one such as '9 x 9 = 81'. It cannot be the case that 9 x 9 does not equal 9. Even if we imagine a world (X) where the inhabitants claim that '3 x 3 = 81' we would claim that that this is not the case as clearly the inhabitants of X clearly mean 9 when they say '3'. Note here we can introduce the notion of Proposition Expressed (PE) and Proposition Meant (PM) as found in Neale's Descriptions (1990; 75). Although the propositions expressed by inhabitants of our world and the inhabitants of X world are completely different; '3 x 3 = 81' and '9 x 9 = 81', the proposition meant, namely that 9 x 9 = 81, is the same. The two languages are just using different signs picking out the same mathematical relations. The truths of maths are necessarily so, regardless of which world we are in. Examples of necessary, a priori statements are any true mathematical propositions, an example of a contingent, a posteriori statement is something like 'this is a happy cat', as time and place (in other words, external factors) can change the truth or falsity of the statement. An example of a contingent, a priori statement is found in Kripke's own example of the Parisian metre stick. If we consider a metal rod in Paris (S) that is exactly one metre and thus consider the proposition 'S is one metre long' then we can know this a priori, as it is true by definition alone. It is not a necessary truth, however, as S could have been identified with any other length in any other possible world. S may have picked out a length that was identified as one metre in that world, call it world X again, but this is similar to the '3 x 3 = 81' example above; the word 'metre' is not really picking out the abstract concept of metre, just as '3' was not really picking out the concept of 3. The word 'metre' in X would be picking out perhaps 90cm just as '3' is picking out 9. Kant argues that the set of a posteriori propositions must be contingent as they all depend on external conditions that could change in time, or across possible worlds and, thus, render the proposition false. Kripke, however, contends that the set of necessary a posteriori statements contains identity statements of the form a=b. For example, Slash = Saul Hudson, Father Christmas = Saint Nicholas etc. They are necessary because each expression is a rigid designator that picks out the same reference point. They are a posteriori because to know that Slash is Saul Hudson one must do some empirical legwork in order to establish the identity. We do not know that Slash is Saul Hudson in the same way that we know 3 multiplied by 3 is 9, or indeed that Slash is Slash (a=a). Kripke claims that the necessity of identity statements arises when both 'a' and 'b' are rigid designators. Proper names such as 'Slash' and 'Saul Hudson' are rigid designators and so the identity statement Slash = Saul Hudson is necessarily true. Similarly the natural numbers rigidly designate their concepts and so the true relations between them are necessarily true. Kripke also claims that identity statements involving descriptions express contingent truths. 'The first US postmaster general' = 'the inventor of bifocals' expresses a contingent truth because neither 'the first US postmaster general' nor 'the inventor of bifocals' rigidly designates. They are both descriptions that, according to a Russellian analysis, have the logical form of a quantifier, as a result their truth conditions are met by anyone who fulfils the role of being either 'the first US postmaster general' or 'the inventor of bifocals' or both. There is no necessary connection between the two to say that if X is the first postmaster general then he/she will also be the inventor of bifocals. Note here that a Russellian analysis also treats proper names as descriptions and thus quantifiers; it is not a given that proper names are rigid designators. The identity statement 'heat is molecular motion' given in the essay title is, according to Kripke, an a posteriori necessary truth. Both 'heat' and 'molecular motion' are rigid designators but their identity is only established through empirical research. 'Heat' = 'molecular motion' is an identity statement of the form a=b, both terms are rigid designators that pick out the same abstract concept of heat across all possible worlds. The informative nature of this identity statement, as opposed to the uninformative nature of identity statements of the form a=a, such as 'heat' = 'heat', is explained precisely in the fact that its identity only becomes known through empirical donkeywork, it is not immediately knowable a priori. The so-called 'illusion of contingency' arises because we think we can imagine possible worlds where the identity does not exist, i.e. we can imagine a world where something else is heat, perhaps streams of light are heat and molecular motion actively cools things down. Similarly we can imagine a situation where there is molecular movement but it is not heat, perhaps it is coldness instead. This imagined contingency is precisely that; imagined. In this actual world 'heat' and 'molecular movement' pick out the same abstract concept, call it 'A'. In a world in which streams of light are heat it is not picking out this concept 'A'. Kripke distinguishes between heat qua heat and heat qua sensation. The sensation of heat could be produced by streams of light on some other creature but heat qua heat is not produced by streams of light. This is because, simply, heat is the motion of molecules. Similarly when molecular motion is equated with coldness it is being equated with the sensation of coldness not with cold qua cold. Kripke thinks that all identity statements are necessary. Identity statements of the form  a=b are a posteriori necessary as their connection is only established through empirical research, whereas statements of the form a=a are a priori necessary statements. 'Pain is c-fibres stimulation' is a statement of the form a=b and so must be an a posteriori necessary statement; similar to heat is molecular motion. Kripke thus thinks that the mind-brain identity theorist must account for the illusion of contingency of 'pain is c-fibres stimulation' in the same way that he provides an account of the illusion in 'heat is molecular motion'. Kripke thinks that an account of the illusion is impossible, as he believes that a distinction can be made between heat qua heat and heat qua sensation but a similar distinction does not exist for pain. The referent for heat affects us in a certain way, contrarily the referent for pain is the affectation, there is no pain that produces pain sensation in the same way that heat produces heat sensation; pain is the sensation. The illusion of contingency was explained in the 'heat is molecular' example precisely because of the distinction between the referent of heat and the sensation of heat. This distinction cannot be made with pain and so, Kripke argues, the illusion of contingency cannot be explained away. Kripke thinks that if we assume 'pain is c-fibre stimulation' is a true identity then the illusion of contingency should be explained, as it cannot be explained Kripke concludes that 'pain is c-fibre stimulation' is not an identity statement that is true. The necessity of identity statements comes through the notion of rigid designators. Kripke says that to hold that identity statements are contingent 'cannot be interpreted as...scientific identification of the usual sort' (1980 [2002]; 331). However, ever since a Humean attack on inductive reasoning, it has been far from clear what 'scientific reasoning of the usual sort' might be. A Popper-esque approach to science would be to say that it produces predictive testable hypotheses and that it does not rigidly designate relations as Kripke believes. This approach would undermine Kripke's claim that 'heat' and 'molecular movement' rigidly designate the same heat concept. Not only is there the possibility that the heat and molecular motion identity may be contingent, there is also the possibility that we may have it wrong in this world as well and they are not in fact in an identity relationship with one another. Consider the true identity claim Saul Hudson = Slash. Let us now consider another person 'Duff'. Imagine a situation in which Saul Hudson is always accompanied by Duff and an observer, who knows that Saul Hudson has a second identity, always sees the two together and always hears the two referred to as 'Slash' and 'Duff'. The observer makes the false identity claim that Saul Hudson = Duff and is always accompanied by a second person Slash. Though a highly contrived conversation, we can imagine our observer consistently discussing Saul Hudson, Slash and Duff and all the definite descriptions associated with each term, and their mistaken identity is never revealed. Here we have a situation in which a false identity claim is being made, Saul Hudson = Duff, yet it is used in a consistent manner such that its falsity is never discovered. Could not 'heat = molecular motion' be precisely the same? One day we realise that the identity claim is false and that there are, perhaps, magic fairies that actually are identifiable with heat but they are constantly conjoined in our past experience with molecular motion. <quote>'The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contradiction.' Hume (1777[2005]; IV.I 21)</quote>Although Hume's division of ideas and impressions oft leads to a distinction between a priori, necessary and analytic on one the hand and a posteriori, contingent and synthetic on the other, and their polarity means that we cannot make sense of contingent a priori statements nor of necessary a posteriori statements, this is unimportant for the current discussion. The current claim is that science produces predictive testable hypotheses as opposed to rigidly designating relationships. This account of science is in accordance with the Humean attack on inductive reasoning. Even if the concept of rigid designation is correct there is still the possibility that the identity claim is false; it can be the result of mis-identification. At the moment the current hypothesis is that heat = molecular motion, and we can predict fairly successfully the behaviour of molecules and subsequent temperatures. There is the distinct possibility, however, that there is a far more plausible hypothesis waiting to be discovered, perhaps involving magic fairies, perhaps not. This is not to say that heat = molecular motion is a contingent identity claim, more to say that heat = molecular motion is a contingent hypothesis involving a necessary identity claim. Within any theory the identity claims must be necessary, but the theory can be contingent as a whole. Using the distinction between causal networks and causal structures Maxwell says that: <quote>'In some possible worlds, mental events are brain events, and, in other possible worlds, no mental events are brain events...we may take the [mind-brain] identity thesis to be the thesis that all mental events are brain events. Such a thesis is contingent... But this...does not by any means entail that there are contingent identities.' Maxwell (1978 [2002]; 348)</quote>This preserves the necessity of identity statements yet also shows, perhaps, where the illusion of contingency in 'pain is c-fibre stimulation' lies; in the thesis as a whole. Just as 'heat is molecular movement' is contingent as a thesis. Within the thesis of 'heat is molecular motion' there is a further illusion of contingency, which is the illusion that Kripke attempts to explain away. The illusion of contingency of the thesis 'pain is c fibre stimulation' can be explained, as Maxwell does, whether this is the illusion that needs explaining remains to be seen. Kripke's argument rests on the illusion of contingency and here we have an explanation. If the mind-brain identity theorist just has to offer an explanation in order to hold back Kripke's argument then she is home and dry, if she has to explain the illusion of contingency within the thesis specifically then Kripke's argument still stands. 'Heat is the movement of molecules' and 'pain is c-fibre stimulation' are logically equivalent in that they are both identity statements of the form a=b. Both have an illusion of contingency that Kripke claims must be explained. The contingency of both theses on the macroscopic level can be explained but the illusion of contingency that lies within each thesis can only be explained away within the former identity statement and not the latter. This is, arguably, the difference between the two claims. 