The Private Language Argument, as put forward by Wittgenstein in his Philosophical Investigations, simply argues that an individual cannot have a language with himself or herself. This is because there is no way of ostensibly defining a sensation in an internal way because there is no way of assuring that the word ascribed to a certain sensation is being used correctly at any particular point in time - there is nothing to guarantee the user of the language that they are in fact using it properly. The Private Language Argument poses some difficult questions for the Cartesian Subject and they are hard pushed to answer convincingly. If a private language is not possible then it destroys the concept of the soul in the Cartesian sense and as a result it undermines the whole of Cartesian philosophy; if there can be no private language there can be no Cartesian Subject. In the Meditations Descartes sets out to find something he can be sure of by first doubting everything. He first shows his own existence through the cogito then goes on to prove the existence of God and then the existence of the world. In building up a view of the world Descartes must be using a private language because after doubting everything there is no one to have a language with, and in the early stages of finding certainty there isn't even God to guarantee correct use of language. The cogito provides Descartes the grounding for all other knowledge, but as a private language isn't possible then Descartes cannot even express his existence with any certainty. If there is no language then it may not even be possible to think at all. If, for Descartes, to think is to be, and no language means no thought, then how can Descartes be? Even if he is, he cannot express his existence, even to himself. The problems for the cogito are now apparent and as this is his foundation for knowledge then they are serious problems. Although the private language argument undermines his whole philosophy it also poses problems for individual concepts within the Meditations. The ontological argument in particular has issues. Again it is a similar argument to the one that undermines the cogito; if Descartes has no private language then how can he express the ontological argument? This is a grave problem as the ontological argument is a linguistic one - using the meaning of the term 'perfect' in order to prove God's existence. If we allow the cogito, regardless of it's faults, Descartes still has nothing to guarantee the accuracy of his language other than himself, which even the Cartesian will admit is a fallible and flimsy guarantee. The Cartesian will often point to God as their guarantee of the accuracy of their private language, however at this stage in rebuilding the world Descartes has not yet proved the existence of God. In the ontological argument a degree of circularity is being introduced; words are used to prove the existence of God, and in turn God proves the validity of language that is used to prove His existence. This circularity is mirrored within the Meditations when God presents Descartes with certain clear and distinct ideas that he can be certain of, and one of these clear and distinct ideas is that of God. A circular argument is perhaps the best kind of argument as the critic is troubled to see exactly where to attack it from, as being a circle leaves no weak points that may be found. The start and end of the argument are impossible to find as each necessarily leads to the other. However, it appears that Descartes here is putting forward a causal argument by essentially showing that language in a sense causes the existence of God and God causes the existence of language. This is impossible because without God there would be no language and without language there would be no God; either language or God must exist independently of the other else neither can exist. Perhaps here the Cartesian would respond, quite rightly, by saying that language does not cause God it just shows the subject that God exists. As an all-perfect being, God cannot be caused by anything because it would subtract from His perfection. The problem remains though; the idea of God is caused by the use of a language that is caused by God. This seems to show that language is leading the subject to the existence of God. If there is an underlying concept of God in language then perhaps this is illustrative of Descartes' trademark argument. However, this shows the shortcomings of Descartes scepticism and so undermines his philosophy. He has not doubted everything, in fact depending on how powerful we see language to be; he has not doubted anything at all. Descartes did not remove the bias of language from his worldview and so in rebuilding it he is rebuilding it in the only way possible because his use of language of leads him to. Even if the Cartesian Subject is granted the existence of God to guarantee the validity of their private language it's not really a private language as the individual is sharing it with God. Although God may well assure the individual of the validity of their language, it is a public language that is being guaranteed and not a private one. It is as if Descartes destroys his worldview but then rebuilds it using the same materials and consequently has the same worldview with which he started. The Cartesian may argue that this shows that we can be sure of the world we see, however, as Descartes did not doubt his use of language then he did not doubt absolutely everything as he set out to do. This seems to illustrate the loaded bias present in language and perhaps shows that our perspectives and worldviews are in fact determined by our language rather than language being reflective of it. Even if we doubt everything our language leads us to construct it all back again in the same way, perhaps then 'the limits of my language are the limits of my world'. It seems that as the Private Language Argument undermines the very foundations of Descartes Philosophy there is little to be achieved in analysing separate concepts within his philosophy as they all fall foul in a similar way. Instead this essay will now go on to look at ideas implied or associated with Cartesian Dualism, principally the concept of a soul. The Cartesian Subject will subscribe to a belief that they have a body and an immaterial soul. The soul is seen to be the essence of the person and is known only to that individual. How, though, can the soul be known? A private language is the only option for discovering the soul, however a private language is not an option as Wittgenstein shows. The only way a language works is if it is public and so the contents or properties of a soul must also be public. Nothing can be ostensibly defined by just one person, but if the soul is known only to the individual then all talk of the soul is meaningless, as words cannot reliably match up to anything. All talk about the inner workings of the self are likewise meaningless. It is all well and good to say 'I am in pain' and someone else saying that they too are in pain but as neither subject has access to each others feelings there is no guarantee that the meaning of the word pain is captured in both sensations or even either of them. This is developing into a behaviourist's criticism of Cartesian dualism; however, this is an implication of the Private Language Argument. Although there is something romantic in the idea of a soul and indeed there may even be one, all talk of it is meaningless. There is something not captured by a behaviourist explanation of the self, namely qualia, but the Private Language Argument does not necessarily lead to behaviourism. We can reject the idea of talking about the soul without rejecting the soul itself. Religious discourse is seen to be meaningless and just a matter of faith rather than reason, but people still believe in God, likewise, talk of the soul can be seen to be meaningless but we can still have faith that it exists. The Private Language is devastating for the Cartesian Subject in the sense that it undermines all of the Meditations and Descartes method of doubt. However it is possible to hold a vague Cartesian viewpoint without taking it all too seriously. The Private Language Argument does not destroy the concept of the soul it just suggests that talk of it is a pointless. The only Cartesian is a quiet one as half their philosophy is undermined and the other half is meaningless. It would appear then that when applied to Cartesian Dualism, the Private Language Argument is fairly successful in subduing its supporters. 