<abstract>This essay will explore the rule against bias; nemo judex in causa sua in the context of the given scenario. Therefore an analysis of this rule of natural justice that 'no man may be a judge in his own cause' will be conducted in light of the main facts in this problem. A brief definition and explanation of the rule against bias will be formulated; in order to lay out a foundation in which this rule can be applied to the different facts of this case. These facts will be scrutinised from every aspect to provide a balanced analysis. Furthermore relevant cases and statutes such as Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) will be referred to in this essay. This particular case is concerned with advising Gareth on the law of bias as a ground for judicial review and as such only procedural impropriety will be analysed and not the merits of the case. </abstract><heading>The Rule of Bias Tested Against :</heading><heading>a) George</heading>The rule against bias is an aspect of natural justice that is ultimately concerned with fairness. De Smith, Woolf and Jowell described the rule against bias as "not only to prevent the distorting influence of actual bias, but also to protect the integrity of the decision-making process by ensuring that ... the circumstances should not give rise to the appearance or risk of bias." This highlights the importance of not only preventing real bias but also any appearance of bias. The Employment Tribunal in this instance consists of George and Geoffrey; both lay members and Fiona, the chairperson of the tribunal. It emerges that George is married to Gareth's second cousin, but has never met Gareth and did not know of this relationship. The question is whether this leads to bias or an appearance of bias. Prior to the Pinochet (1999) case bias was predicated on the basis of pecuniary or proprietary interest which leads to automatic disqualification. George does not seem to have any pecuniary or proprietary interest in this case according to the facts laid out. There is no indication of pecuniary or proprietary interests. However the landmark decision in Pinochet (1999) implies that "a similar, automatic disqualification would arise wherever a judge has a strong personal interest in the case before him." It seems that George does not have a strong personal interest in Gareth's case as he had no knowledge of such a relationship as between him and Gareth. But it has been held that "justice should not only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done." The fact that George did not know about such a relationship does not negate the possibility of bias. Therefore according to this pronouncement George would be a bias party as justice should be seen to be done. The correct test to be used was pronounced by Lord Hope in Porter v Magill (2002) that states, "The question is whether the fair-minded and informed observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real possibility that the tribunal was biased." According to this test a fair-minded and informed observer would most likely conclude that George was not bias even though there is a family connection. This is because the family relationship was not known by George and so it cannot be said that he made a judgment based on such knowledge. There was not even a chance for George to have been unconsciously affected by bias as there had not been any explicit nor implicit information. It also emerges that George is a member of the same golf club as George and Gareth. It is safe to infer that George and Gareth have never met at the golf club since George never knew of his family connection with Gareth and had never previously met. So the legal analysis regarding the risk of bias by George remains intact. <fnote>See De Smith, Woolf & Jowell, Judicial Review of Administrative Action, (5th ed.), Sweet & Maxwell Ltd. London, 1995, p.521 </fnote><fnote>R. v Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrates ex p. Pinochet [2002] 1 AC 119 </fnote><fnote>The Late Phillips, O.Hood & Jackson, Paul & Leopold, Patricia, O. Hood Phillips & Jackson: Constitutional and Administrative Law, (8th ed.), Sweet & Maxwell Ltd. London, 2001, p.707 </fnote><fnote>R v. Sussex Justices, ex p. McCarthy [1924] 1 K.B. 256, per Lord Hewart C.J. </fnote><fnote>See R v. Gough [1993] A.C. 646, per Lord Goff, "... bias is an insidious thing that even though a person may in good faith believe that he was acting impartially, his mind may unconsciously be affected by bias,' </fnote><heading>b) Fiona</heading>Fiona is both the chairperson of the tribunal and a lawyer in a firm of consultants that advises construction companies on health and safety issues. One of these companies is The Construction Company Ltd. that was a party to the proceedings in the tribunal. It is not certain whether Fiona personally and actively participated in consulting the latter company; whether it was on this particular issue regarding Gareth's negligence in health and safety issues. Assuming that Fiona did personally consult the company in the proceedings and subsequently sat as the tribunal's chair without disclosing her close involvement with one of the party to the proceedings; it would be fair to say that the decision of the tribunal would be bias. This is due to the important fact that Fiona's dual and intermingling functions could give rise to bias or the appearance of it. This is highlighted in the Pinochet case where Lord Hoffman was automatically disqualified after disclosure that he was closely linked to Amnesty International, a party to the proceedings. Such is the importance of maintaining public confidence that there should not even be the appearance of bias. The formulation of bias in Porter v. Magill (2002) was subsequently adopted in Lawal v. Northern Spirit (2003) where it was held that "there was a real possibility that a lay member might be sub-consciously biased due to the fairly close relationship of trust and confidence which would have been developed with the judge who was now appearing before them rather than sitting with them." Thus Fiona is likely to be sub-consciously biased against Gareth and favouring The Construction Company Ltd. as she had been previously involved in consulting the latter on health and safety issues concerning Gareth's negligence. This is concerned with 'forming a concluding view in advance.'  <fnote>Lawal v. Northern Spirit Ltd. [2003] UKHL 35 </fnote><fnote>Parpworth, Neil, Constitutional and Administrative Law, (3rd ed.), Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 335. </fnote><fnote>See Leyland, Peter & Anthony, Gordon, Textbook on Administrative Law, (5th ed.), Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 400, "If it is evident that the decision-making body has made up its mind in advance of the hearing, this will naturally give rise to serious doubts about the validity of the hearing process since any such procedure would be considered to be unfair." </fnote>But what if Fiona was not actively involved in consultation concerning the current issue and had no knowledge regarding Gareth's case? Then according to the test first pronounced in Re Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods (No.2) (2001) and then adopted in both Porter v. Magill (2002) and Lawal v. Northern Spirit Ltd. (2003), bias will have to be considered through the viewpoint of the fair-minded and informed observer. Then it would seem that there was no real possibility that the tribunal was biased because Fiona had neither knowledge nor prior association with the current case. However the rule against bias as explained is also to protect the integrity of the decision-making process and to prevent any appearance of bias. There is a slight appearance of bias in this instance because of Fiona's relationship with The Construction Company Ltd. through the firm of consultants she works at. Therefore this may be sufficient to justify an appearance of bias. <fnote>Re Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods (No.2) [2001] 1 W.L.R. 700 </fnote><heading>c) Geoffrey</heading>Geoffrey is a lay member of the Employment Tribunal and a member of a trade union and employed in the construction industry. Presumably the trade union that Geoffrey is involved with is linked to construction such as GMB (Britain's General Union) and Amicus or Prospect that deals with health and safety. Therefore there is a real likelihood that Gareth and Geoffrey are members of the same trade union. This is not unusual because employment tribunals are normally made up of a legally qualified chairperson, a representative from a panel representing employers and another representing the employees. So it cannot be said that Geoffrey is bias towards Gareth simply because of their association with the same body. This was expounded in Locabail (U.K) Ltd. v. Bayfield Properties Ltd. (2000) where it was held that in general, membership of professional, political or other organisations would not give grounds for an allegation of bias. This also applies to George's, Geoffrey's and Gareth's association with the same golf club. It is stated that Geoffrey has not met Gareth at the golf club and as such it would be highly unlikely that there would be any sub-conscious bias since the latter would have no knowledge of Gareth's existence. <fnote>Refer to  URL  for further information about the different trade unions in the United Kingdom. </fnote><fnote>Locabail (U.K.) Ltd. V. Bayfield Properties Ltd. [2000] 1 All E.R. 65. </fnote>However another complication arises regarding Geoffrey's wife (B), a close friend of Gareth's aunt (C); who she meets regularly at a health club owned by Gareth's trade union. Is this an instance concerning personal friendship? The facts do not highlight any friendship between B and Gareth. If we were to assume that B knew about Gareth's unfair dismissal case through C, would this make a difference? The answer would be yes. B may be persuaded by C to influence Geoffrey's judgment in the case, whether overtly or covertly. This is reinforced by the fact that B and C are close friends who organise social events for all their neighbours. It would certainly be a disadvantage for B to have an altercation with C regarding Gareth's case; especially since an argument would lead to a possible fall in popularity for B. But what if C has a personal animosity towards Gareth? This is also a case of bias although this is bias against rather than towards Gareth. From case law it does not seem to be crucial in ascertaining whether a decision-maker was biased against or towards an individual. It is sufficient that there is some sort of bias or appearance of it. Furthermore using the test of bias formulated in Porter v. Magill (2001); "the fair-minded and informed observer, having considered the facts would [certainly] conclude that there was a real possibility that the tribunal was biased." It does of course matter as to whether B really did influence Geoffrey but it is also of importance to prevent the appearance of bias. This is in line with Lord Hewart C.J.'s pronouncement in R v. Sussex Justices, ex p. McCarthy (1924). The fact that B is a member of a health club owned by Gareth's trade union must also be considered in the light of the rule against bias. It seems rather strained to say that B's membership at the health club owned by Gareth's trade union would lead to a possibility of bias with regards to Geoffrey; especially since Geoffrey himself does not seem to be a member of the health club. Furthermore according to Locabail (U.K) Ltd. v. Bayfield Properties Ltd. (2000) membership of such a club would not give rise to allegations of bias. <fnote>Op.cit. Note 4. </fnote><heading>In the Context of Article 6(1) ECHR :</heading>The rule against bias has to be analysed in light of Article 6(1) of the ECHR as it concerns an 'independent and impartial tribunal'. This means that a tribunal has to follow the rules of natural justice; 'nemo judex in causa sua' and also 'audi alteram partem' in order to provide a fair trial. Gareth can potentially invoke Article 6(1) in the European Court of Human Rights where the "concept of impartiality is tested both subjectively-was there in fact bias?-and objectively-were there guarantees in place to exclude any legitimate doubt as to the impartiality of the tribunal?" The test seems to be similar to that of the common law rule against bias especially since Lord Hope stated in Porter v. Magill (2001) that the newly modified test of bias now "represents in clear and simple language a test which is in harmony with the objective test which the Strasbourg court applies when it is considering whether the circumstance give rise to reasonable apprehension of bias." So it seems unlikely that Gareth will succeed considering that the test of bias is now in line with the Strasbourg interpretation of Article 6(1). <fnote>Article 6(1) ECHR- "In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law..." </fnote><fnote>Sir Wade, William & Forsyth, Christopher, Administrative Law, (9th ed.), Oxford University Press, 2004, p.453. </fnote>Furthermore the requirement of "guarantees in place" implies recourse to a higher court or tribunal. It is clearly highlighted in the case that Gareth unsuccessfully appealed to the Employment Appeal Tribunal (EAT), which is in this case a higher tribunal. Therefore even if there was bias in the first instance; the fact that Gareth had a right of recourse to the Employment Appeal Tribunal would imply that he is not likely to succeed in judicial review. There has been no apparent evidence that the EAT also consisted of tribunal members that were bias or appeared to be. It is not known whether the EAT were made up of the same tribunal members as in the Employment Tribunal (ET). However it is unlikely that the EAT was of the same composition as the ET since the EAT is normally presided over by a High Court Judge and either two or four different lay persons. But if indeed the EAT consisted of the same three individuals from the ET then there would "normally be a breach of natural justice where an adjudicator takes part in the determination of an appeal against one of his own decision, unless he is expressly authorised to do so by statute." This is not a case in which the decision-maker has been expressly authorised by statute to further adjudicate in an appeal. Therefore there is a real possibility of bias when applying the test expounded in Porter v Magill (2001). If however the EAT were to conduct a full and fair trial; then it would be irrelevant if there had been a failure of natural justice in the first instance. This was held to be the case in Calvin v. Carr (1980). Thus Gareth would fail to establish the law on bias as a ground for judicial review as he had a full and fair hearing in the appeal stage. <fnote>De Smith, Woolf & Jowell, Judicial Review of Administrative Action, (5th ed.), Sweet & Maxwell Ltd. London, 1995, p.530 </fnote><fnote>Calvin v. Carr [1980] A.C. 574. </fnote><heading>Right of Waiver :</heading>Another important aspect of the rule against bias is the right of waiver; "the act of abandoning or refraining from asserting a legal right." If Gareth had known of the facts that entitled him to object but continued to allow the proceedings to continue without any protest, then he would be held to have waived his legal right to object. As such he would not be allowed to protest later based on the decision-maker being bias. It does not seem apparent that Gareth had known the essential facts and so "there is no presumption of waiver if the disqualified adjudicator failed to make a complete disclosure of his interest." Therefore Gareth does not seem to have waived his right to object in this case and can thus apply for judicial review. <fnote>Editor: A. Martin, Elizabeth, A Dictionary of Law, (5th ed.), Oxford University Press, 2002, p.532. </fnote><fnote>De Smith, Woolf & Jowell, Judicial Review of Administrative Action, (5th ed.), Sweet & Maxwell Ltd. London, 1995, p.542. </fnote>Gareth's case for judicial review based on the rule against bias seems rather bleak considering that he has already appealed to the EAT; satisfying Article 6(1) that "guarantees [were] in place". This would of course be a different matter if it could be shown that the EAT were themselves bias. Furthermore there is no conclusive evidence that Fiona was actively involved in consulting The Construction Company Ltd and so unlikely be biased. George's family connection with Gareth seems tenuous at best especially since George has never met Gareth and thus would not be sub-consciously or consciously biased. The facts show that George and Geoffrey have never met Gareth although all three of them are members of the same golf club. Thus there is no real possibility of bias notwithstanding membership of the same association. This equally applies to Geoffrey's and Gareth's possible membership of the same trade union. Lastly the close friendship between B and C may give rise to a possibility of bias as the former could influence her husband, Geoffrey. All these facts however will not assist Gareth since he had a full and fair appeal trial. Hence it is very likely that Gareth will be unsuccessful in judicial review. 