Ken Pryce's investigation into West Indian society in Bristol highlights some key issues within the study of ethnography. Pryce aims to create a study with no ethnographic background, taking on a  tabala rasa approach to his work. His sole approach of participant observation attempts to call upon his identity as a Jamaican to gain him an insight into their society that could not have been gained through traditional interviews. The use of this approach and his lack of background in the field resulting in the investigation calling upon a range of ethnographic methods, highlight both the effectiveness and limitations of participant observation. Issues of ethics, access, stereotyping and the emersion into society are all raised. The issue of access to the West Indian community and the methods of access Pryce uses is an initial and ongoing problem that he has to accommodate. The article thus illustrates access as an inherent problem of ethnographic work. Initially, his first access to the area is through Segie and a coincidental meeting. However, his ability to become part of the community is already hindered as his conversation begins with Segie identifying him as an outsider, noting that he overheard Pryce ask if 'the bus would take (him) to the section of the city where black people lived." Therefore, his first entrance to the community arguably was ill-calculated as his attempt to gain total emersion has already been compromised. For example, Goffman notes that 'you've got to find out about the internal cleavages within the class, and then decide which internal cleavage you're going to accept as you own', however, Pryce's lack of focus and his intention to simply study 'fellow West Indians in Bristol', therefore seems to indicate how his insights and the construction of his study were done through a process of coincidental meetings. <fnote>K. Pryce , Endless Pressure: a study of West Indian lifestyles in Bristol. (Bristol 1986), P280 </fnote><fnote>Erving Goffman, 'On Fieldwork'in Lyn H. Lofland (ed.), Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, Vol 18. No. 2 (UK 1989), p.123-132 Goffman, 'On Fieldwork', p.126 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P279 </fnote>Pryce's method of explicitly starting his purpose is important because it has some serious implications to the findings of his report, as he does not hide his identity with 'telling practices' or prepare for the reaction of his presence. The structuring of his study into different sections of the community allows the reader to clearly identity the different responses his wealthy, middle class and educated background has. This method of access must be carefully calculated as it had some adverse effects. For example he noted that his closeness with senior members of the clergy 'taught (him) a lot about the top layer of the sect'5 but, resultantly, 'worked against (him) getting to know ordinary members of the congregation on a personal level'. He may have considered the way it which he established himself more closely in retrospect of his study, because the 'in-betweeners' group dubbed him 'from the university' and he notes the apparent avoidance and caution shown towards him by this group. The caution that must be taken in the use of identity, is noted by Goffman, in that 'if you get seen in any formal or informal conversation with members of a superordinate group, you're dead as far as the subordinate group is concerned'. In the calculation of the use of identity the problem is especially shown through the 'absorption in the life style of the in betweeners (resulting in) the end of my friendship with Sergie." Moreover, Becker notes the importance of the analysis of the credibility of the informants and the consideration of 'individual's perspective on the point involved'. However, Pryce's dependence on Sonny, Sergie and the senior clergy members is arguably problematic. He cannot analyse the impact of their perspectives in more than a superficial manner because he does not have the experience with other individuals in other groups to make to comparison. <fnote>Goffman, 'On Fieldwork', p.126 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P287 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P292 </fnote><fnote>Goffman, 'On Fieldwork', p.129 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P289 </fnote><fnote>H.S. Becker, 'Problems of Interference and Proof in Participant Observation', in W.J. Filstead (ed.), Qualitative Methodology: firsthand involvement with the social world (Chicago 1970), p.189-201 </fnote>Goffman argues that 'you should be in a position to cut yourself to the bone' resulting in the removal of your inhibitions allow for a more insightful study. Pryce places a considerable amount on his identity as a West Indian but, arguably, this is problematic as he is inhibited by his middle class and educated background and thus his approach ignores the method set forth by Goffman. However, his success in the use of his identity, especially in the Saints group, challenges Goffman's approach on completely losing your own identity. Pryce's use of stereotyping within the community, structures his report. He categorises the Bristol West Indian society into mainliners, hustlers, saints and teenyboppers, dealing with each group separately he, arguably, creates an artificial segregation of the community. Therefore, the stereotyping of the community into such specific categories raises the issue of his ability to comment on the possible larger observations of the community, as noted by Becker in that the ethnographer 'may become aware of some specific phenomenon at first and later see that it may be used as an indication of some larger class of phenomenon.'. The article is further inhibited by Pryce's expectation of the community, he notes that Sergie and him 'ate and drunk together and of course smoked'. Thus the direction of his study towards the 'in betweeners' group may be indicative of what he targeted as wanting to find characteristic of the community. Becker notes that the use of participant observation should aim to create meaningful research in that the researcher does 'not know enough about the (community) a priori to identify relevant problems and hypothesis', but Pryce's methods and inhibitions although he does not know the community, indicates that he has already highlighted potential problems, such as crime and deprivation and thus are not unsurprisingly dominant in his study. <fnote>Goffman, 'On Fieldwork', p.127 </fnote><fnote>Becker, 'Problems of Interference', p.191 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P280 </fnote><fnote>Becker, 'Problems of Interference', p.191 </fnote>Total immersion is an important aspect in considering the methods used by Pryce. His attempt to become a member of more than one congregation was substantial as his comparisons aim to bring a greater insight to his study. However, the process in itself raised an important phenomenon about the social structure. Pryce notes, he 'found the precariousness of being a floating member of more than one congregation at the same time too worrying to sustain' and yet this finding inadvertently illustrates the divisiveness of the church within their society. The issue of depth in his study through his methods of comparison is raised. He notes the wearisome process of attempting to maintain attendance at two churches and yet we can argue that although comparisons can be made, they are only superficial because Pryce's does not allow enough time to investigate the activities of just one church. His concentration on one church is illustrated as he notes the six months it took him before he felt 'accepted into the fold'. A clear conflict between the depth of reporting the importance of comparison is therefore raised. <fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P282 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P286 </fnote>Total immersion raises important issues of status and the affect that changes in his status can have on the groups he is functioning within. Becker notes that participant observation should allow him to 'interpret his own experience as that of a "typical" group member'. However, Pryce's article provides an indication of the difficulty in establishing this integral position with the community. His status is convoluted and continually changing throughout his period in Bristol. Goffman's indicates 'the same body rhythm, rate of movement, tapping of the feet...(are) the real tests of penetrating a group'. However, for Pryce there are some very clear contradictions in his findings which should indicate is position. Such as he would be asked at one moment 'what are you drinking, Ken?', whilst at the next asked to 'hand over anything I could afford as they were broke and needed to go into the club'. Thus the distinction between being a real participant and a research participant is clearly illustrated as problematic. Other problems with attempted total immersion can be shown by Pryce's main attempt to emerge himself within the society is his attempt to move to 'Shanty Town'. This is challenged with him being accused 'some sort of detective of something'. Pryce's primary reliance on participant observation raises the issue of over absorption, such as his resulting attachment to the Black power image, results in him noting his need to be vigilant of it because 'it would alienate (him) from those sections of the community hostile to such manifestations.'. <fnote>Becker, 'Problems of Interference', p.194 </fnote><fnote>Goffman, 'On Fieldwork', p.129 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P284 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P284 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P290 </fnote><fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P293 </fnote>Ethical issues such as to the limitations of an ethnographer within the field to collect research are introduced. Pryce defends his baptism into the church as being important to his movement from being an 'outsider' to an 'insider' within the congregation and that it allowed him to 'achieve a fuller understanding of the sectarianism and ideology of saints'. However, this methodology is artificial. He spent around a year focussing on the church out of the two years in which the study was conducted, but arguably the data he collected was not unprecedented and significant enough to justify the undertaking.. Clear ethical difficulties are illustrated through the incident raising questions on the extent of data needed to justify the ethical principal. <fnote>Pryce, Endless Pressure, P285 </fnote>The breadth of the study may have been affected by the categorisation of groups as a method of structuring the article.. Pryce's indication of the size and dominance of these groups of the community seemingly presents that they are an important aspect on the community, however this is debatable. Pryce through his focus on each group individually makes no reference to the interrelationships between these different factions of the Bristol society. Pryce argues that he was 'able to meet a much wider cross section' of society through the 'in betweeners' group and yet it is an unqualified comment as he has limiting his report to only a few groups and can only make the assumption that this group had a wide impact. His limitation to these groups may have resulted in him not gaining an insight into an important aspect of the society. The focus on masculine roles is an aspect that narrows the breadth of his report and yet the role of women is a considerable factor that could have had shaped his outcomes very differently. In conclusion, Pryce's article highlights may of the issues and problems through ethnographic study, such as access, emersion, status and ethics. However, the systematic approach outlined by Goffman and Becker to construct an ethnographic report are moreover worth analysing, as Pryce gained some substantial results and insights through his lack of background in the area and through the coincidences and the spontaneity that led to the formation of some of the data he collected. Therefore, although he may criticised for the lack of structure, specific focuses he constructed or the ethical boundaries that he came upon during his study his finding cannot be disregarded as unsubstantial. A carefully structured ethnographic study based upon theorists, may have produced some surprisingly different results on the Bristol society. 