The Mexican Revolution of 1911 and the proceeding revolutionary decade was an important political period in the history of Mexico absorbing a multiplicity of ideological stances. Relations with the United States of America and the Soviet Union are amongst the factors that built the leftist strand of the revolution as one of its distinct features. Diplomacy with the Unites States was important in the altering of the character of the revolutionary period and shows the attitude the U.S.A had toward Mexico. The dynamics of this relationship, and apparent need to cooperate with the United States would be instrumental in the behaviour of the key players in Mexico, causing both the strengthening of leftist sentiment and the later compromise of these leftist principles. The U.S.A.'s strong leftist bohemian community and their relations with the Mexican people were paramount in the shaping of the Revolution's leftist character. Key figures helped rectify the perception of Mexico in the U.S and worked actively in Mexico in the encouragement of leftist ideology. The strained and unclear relationship between the Soviet Union and Mexico illustrates the competing ideologies present in the Mexican Revolution. The leftist strand resulted in the Soviet Union being considered an exemplar to Mexico whilst other views would result in a tenuous diplomatic relationship between Russia and Mexico. These relations would also affect relations with the U.S, as Spenser summarises in the title of her latest book, The Impossible Triangle. Whilst relations with these two countries were important, key figures within Mexico and structural considerations are important in our understanding of how this leftist character formed as well. On the eve of the revolution in 1911 other factors were important to the distinctive leftist character which shaped the revolution's initial stages. Zapista, Villa, Carrillo Puerto and other individuals where especially significant in this process. The impact of these characters is illustrated on the affect they had on each other. Joseph remarks that 'Carrillo was influenced by the anti capitalist doctrine that pervaded Zapatismo in 1914-1915'. Roy remarks on the presence of Zapata in that 'even beyond the frontiers of Mexico (he) was hailed as the revolutionary champion of the freedom of the Mexican people' and that within Mexico there was 'a godly number of idealist intellectuals, not only of advanced liberal views, some of them were professional socialist, and a few anarchists'. Yucatán under Felipe Carrillo Puerto provides another good instance of the leftist ideology forming from within the country. Joseph describes his shrewd activity noting that he was a 'socialist committed to profound structural change, he remained adept at working through the maze of formal and informal political networks'. Economic structural problems and political problems especially, Diaz's ruthlessness fuelled the grievances the intelligentsia, peasants and workers had against the Diaz regime resulting in left wing ideas, especially around meeting the demand of peasants and working class. The demand for agrarian reform was a pressing structural complaint of the people and the resulting demands immediately lend to the leftist shape of the revolution. The Constitution of 1917 can be seen as the culmination of these demands and representing the leftist success of the revolution as it 'legalized principles of social justice, such as common ownership'. The culmination can be seen in that on the establishment of the 1917 Constitution Britton remarks that the Unites States feared the state would remake the economy to favour the disadvantaged.  <fnote>Joseph, G.M., Revolution from without: Yucatén, Mexico and the United States 1880-1924 (Cambridge 1982), p.192 </fnote><fnote>Roy, M.N., Memoirs (London 1964), p.4 </fnote><fnote>Joseph, Revolution from without, p.195 </fnote><fnote>Knight remarks on the severity of Diaz's regime, noting 'a situation which [brought] honour, wealth and distinction to those who make the sorrow and slavery of humanity the foundation of their pleasures'. In Knight, Alan, The Mexican Revolution (Cambridge 1986), p.335 </fnote><fnote>Cabera in the 1930s was to reiterate this fundamental aspect of the revolution as he 'did not view the distribution of the ejidos as an urgent expedient of war but as an end in itself' in Knight, Alan, The Mexican Revolution (Cambridge 1986), p.344. Ejido -a concept of involving state ownership of the land and communal usufruct by the villages. </fnote><fnote>Carr, Barry, Marxism and Communism in Twentieth-Century Mexico (London 1992), p.47 </fnote><fnote>Britton, John A., Revolution and Ideology (Lexington, Kentucky, USA 1995), p.8 </fnote>Diplomatic relations with the United States was a distinct factor in the development of the character of the Mexican Revolution. The conservative right wing political stance was to be problematic in relations in the initial days of the revolution. They for instance, did not recognise Mexico as a country until 1924. Britton comments on Woodrow Wilson's 'hope of projecting a liberal capitalist ideology into the Mexican polity'. This staunch political stance was important in the leftist shape the revolution was to take in the early days as the United States attitude was used to contrast with that of Mexico strengthening the resolve of the left in Mexico and their drive to shape the country in this manner. Historically, the Mexican's can, in the nineteenth century, been seen to have become tired of U.S. commercialism, dominance and influence which had started to grow rapidly in Mexico. Hart accredits 'the revolution as the product of reaction by peasants, urban and industrial workers, the petite bourgeois and provincial elites against forging economic intrusion during the Porfiriato'. Britton records this contrast explicitly 'in Mexico the leaders of the movement came to see him [,Wilson,] as their enemy'. The 1917 Constitution arguably was a culmination of resentment to the U.S. expressing Nationalist and leftist feeling. For instance, 'Article 123 provided the legal basis for an advanced labour code that would eventually pose problems for U.S. corporations operating in Mexico'. However, in the latter part of the decade Obregon prioritised his diplomatic relationship with the United States and in order to maintain good relations, compromised on the leftist ideology that the country had been following. Obregon wanted to 'ensure the flow of foreign capital to Mexico with the objective of being able to carry out a domestic and foreign policy without U.S. interference'. The inextricable economic relationship between the United States and Mexico can therefore be seen to have shaped the later character of the revolutionary period and to have pacified the extreme leftist sentiment that was attempting to prevail. <fnote>Ibid, p.30 </fnote><fnote>Delphar, Helen, The Enormous Vogue of Things Mexican: Cultural Relations between the United States and Mexico 1920 - 1935 (Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA, 1992) p.2 </fnote><fnote>Britton, Revolution and Ideology, p.33 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p33 </fnote><fnote>Spenser, Daniela, The Impossible Triangle: Mexico, Soviet Russia and the United States in the 1920s (London 1999), p.65 </fnote>The growing leftist communities in both the United States and Mexico, especially Mexico City were to use the contrast of U.S and Mexican culture. These political pilgrims were a fundamental aspect of the relationship between the United States and Mexico. For example, 'Baels joined other leftists from the United States in the denunciation of business values, middle class materialism and the myopia sense of well being'. Their publications in the United States were instrumental in the way Mexico was perceived by the United States public, and important in the promotion of the left cause in Mexico to the United States audience. Borodin, Roy, Baels, Gales, Reed and Turner are some instances of the vibrant leftist community that was academically and actively involved in the discussion and shaping of the Mexican Revolution. A contrast between Reed and Turned illustrates the complex character of the revolution and the presence of different ideologies. Yet whilst illustrative of this, both instances show the presence of leftist sentiment in the Mexican Revolution. Turner believed that 'Carranza's partially revolutionary, partially bourgeois platform was the best that Mexico could expect under the pressures of internal disorder and external intervention' whilst 'Reed's combination of journalism and mythmaking in Ten Days that Shook the World convinced many radicals and some liberals that the Communist millennium was near'. Bael's provides an excellent example of how the revolution was academically promoted in the U.S. by this community. Bael's continued objective reporting, loyalty to the leftist ideology and needs of Mexican workers and enthusiasm for what the revolution could bring to Mexico, provides an outstanding illustration of how these writers were instrumental in the promotion of the leftist shape of the revolution. Bael's reporting was one amongst many pieces that helped bridge the relationship between Mexico and the United States, and the perception the United States public had of Mexico. Britton remarks that Bael 'established the basis for a new framework for understanding and explaining the complex process of change that was underway'. <fnote>Britton, John A., Carleton Beals: A Radical Journalist in Latin America (Albuquerque 1987), p.63 </fnote><fnote>Britton remarks that 'commenting on Mexico was a kind of pioneering venture for U.S. observers, their first experience with a revolutionary movement outside the more familiar territory of North America and Europe' in Britton, Revolution and Ideology, p.13 </fnote><fnote>First quote Reed, John, Insurgent Mexico (Berlin 1974), p.218 cited in Britton, Revolution and Ideology, p.40 </fnote><fnote>Britton, Carleton Beals, p.67. Delphar notes the more traditional U.S. view of Mexicans and Mexico in this period remarking that a New York Editorial in 1920 explained 'to the average American the Mexican of today is an insurgent or a bandit or, at any rate a conspirator against his own government', in Delphar, The Enormous Vogue of Things Mexican, p.5 </fnote>Not only were such U.S. writers and journalists' intellectually active but some Americans took a more active role in the shaping of the revolution's character. Robert Haberman, an American labour organiser had close ties with Carrillo Puerto and Delphar records his active role in heading 'a system of cooperative stores in Yucatán'. Haberman's was also a 'considerable influence in the Mexican government in the early 1920s, acting as a liaison between the CROM and the American Federation of Labour and the Socialist party of America' Bael's supported Rivera's murals, which were an explicit and cultural representation of the ideas prevalent in the Revolution. Writers and journalists from the U.S. left therefore were important in the creation of the intellectual ferment that surrounded the Mexican revolution and contributing to the United State's public's greater understanding of the changes in their neighbouring country. <fnote>Ibid, p.21 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p.22 </fnote><fnote>Britton remarks that 'Rivera's murals and leftist ideology symbolised Mexico's struggle to build a new society free of the injustices of the past' in Britton, Carleton Beals, p.61 </fnote>The relationship between Mexico and the Soviet Union was and unclear and complex one but different elements of this relationship are important in showing the differing shape of the Mexican Revolution. The absence of a clear relationship with the Soviet Union shows the complex nature of the Revolutionary process. The existence of a clear leftist stance as part of the character of the Revolution is shown in that some figures in Mexico strongly felt that relations with the Soviet Union should be established and that the Soviet Union provided an important exemplar to Mexico. For example, De Negri argued 'that it is of great importance for our government to study the tendencies of Soviet Russia's administrators because of the sympathy it had displayed in our government'. However, in the initial phases it was the Soviet Union that was to approach Mexico in the establishment of a relationship showing the inexistence of a clear socialist stance. It is recorded that 'Borodin 'did not suspect that before him stood a Bolshevik leader [,Villardo,] whom Lenin had sent to the New World to radicalize the continent'. The competing ideology in the Mexican Revolution is reflected in the following contrasting instances. After the Bolshevik revolution in 1918 the Mexican Government closed its Petrograd embassy, whereas 'Obregon did not stop exploring the benefits a discreet relation with the Russians could bring to Mexico." Obregon's government provides an interesting example as the stance he seemingly was taken was flexible, and he would vary it depending on the current political context, relations with the Soviet Union arguably can be seen as a possible short term rather than a long term consideration, with the U.S. investment being his key priority. <fnote>Spenser, The Impossible Triangle, p.61. Another instance is that the radical press in Mexico provides another instance of this, as they 'placed particular emphasis upon the soviet, or workers council, as the most characteristic and significant institution created by the revolutionary upsurge' in Carr, Marxism and Communism in Twentieth-Century Mexico, p.18 </fnote><fnote>Gomez, Manuel, 'From Mexico to Moscow', Survey, No. 53 (October 1964) cited in Spenser, The Impossible Triangle, p.59 </fnote><fnote>Spenser, The Impossible Triangle, p.67 </fnote>The relationship with the Soviet Union was used by the United States government to support their stance against any leftist mentality in Mexico that could damage their economic interests there. The Red Scare in the United States was strongly driven by the U.S. press and the propaganda campaign of the U.S. government resulted in the Mexican Revolution being given a strong Bolshevik character. For instance, Britton remarks that 'Mexico's recognition of the Soviet Union in 1924, fanned fears that the Calles government was bent on establishing Bolshevism in Mexico'. Britton notes that 'Fall joined Buckley and Doheny in the claim that Bolshevism was spreading into the United States through the work of Mexican consular and diplomatic officials'. Whilst some of the key characters in Mexico may have pushed a strong Bolshevik line the Revolution cannot be characterised in this way. The complexity of the relationship with Soviet Russia demonstrates that the character of the revolution cannot be placed under one ideological term. The Red Scare in the U.S. therefore was unwarranted and can be seen as a result of their historical relationship and attempt to justify their continued influence and protection of their economic interests in Mexico. <fnote>Delphar, The Enormous Vogue of Things Mexican, p.17 </fnote><fnote>U.S. Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Investigation of Mexican Affairs (Washington D.C., 1920), p.829 cited in Britton, Revolution and Ideology, p.41 </fnote>In conclusion, it is extremely difficult to characterise the Mexican Revolution under one political ideology. Yet Spenser summarised the fundamental character of the revolution well noting, 'one of the most important results of the Mexican Revolution was the eruption of workers and peasants into the political arena and the subsequent broadening [...] of political participation'. However, the relationship between Mexico, the Soviet Union and the United States has illustrated of the leftist strand that ran throughout the revolutionary period. The Unites States staunch right wing position clearly affected the relationship between the Mexico and the Soviet Union, and arguably if Mexico had not been so dependent on the United States for investment a stronger relationship with the Soviet Union may have formed. Officially, as a result of the relationship with the United States it seemed to curb the prevalence of leftist sentiment and this relationship prevailed over that with the Soviet Union. The positive relationship Mexico had to the United State's leftist community was clearly fuelled by this tension and contrast between the U.S right wing government and the ascending leftist sentiments of Mexico. The leftist community was a vital factor in the creation of the leftist character in the Mexican Revolution through the support they offered both academically and actively. However, other factors that fuelled this character in Mexico were also important. Key figures were essential in the demands for change in Mexico, and it was these individuals who looked to the Soviet Union as an exemplar to the country. The presence of dynamic individuals, such as Zapista, the fuelling of leftist sentiment created by Mexico's structuralist problems and the ruthlessness of the Diaz regime must not be overlooked as considerable factors as well. <fnote>Spenser, The Impossible Triangle, p.55 </fnote>