<heading>Introduction</heading>There has been much discussion on whether Hobbes is the first man of modern political philosophy or not, but it is sure that Hobbes stands across the dividing line between the old and the burgeoning new world. The influence of both is intertwined in Hobbes's works and especially, shown in Hobbes's self-contradictory way of writing, which leads to different interpretations of Hobbes: he is liberal or authoritative, anti-social or humanistic, a scientist or a moralist, an individualist or a collectivist. Hobbes is just Hobbes, who defies any attempt to categorize him into one small label. The tension in Hobbes's system of theory also gains him much attention both from his contemporaries and from our own time. We might say that 'the state of nature' and its antithesis to the civil society is the most original invention of Hobbes. His description of state of nature, humanity's condition in predicament, which unavoidably calls for an omnipotent authority of government, invites the criticism both out of the emotional and of the intellectual. (Oakeshott, 1975: 55) This essay sets out with the criticism of Locke and Rousseau on Hobbes's explanation of transition from state of nature to civil society. The distinction and consistency between the three is discussed in the first section. In the second section, the following questions are examined: Is Hobbes's state of nature a historical account, some anthropological study or what else? What's the implied meaning of it? What's the role played by it in Hobbes's theory? By answering these questions, Hobbes's break with the tradition and opening-up of a new epoch is clearly seen. We will talk about it in the third section. Through the essay, the author wants to point out Hobbes's state of nature is neither a historical account of the origin of political society, nor a pure thinking game of a philosopher. His state of nature is the very portrait of human situation of the Civil War and the design of Leviathan is for the restoration of laws and returning to an ordered civil society. <heading>Three version of State of Nature </heading>On the books of the history of political philosophy, the name of Locke and Rousseau usually appears right after Hobbes. This arrangement surely follows a chronological order, while it also implies a close intellectual relation between the three. Locke and Rousseau, they both criticized strictly Hobbes's assumption on the state of nature. Both of them, in fact, tacitly agreed with Hobbes's methodology and main themes, but presented a new story in a modified but similar way. They both developed their own theory based on the criticism of Hobbes and in fact inherited a lot from him. Let's compare them separately and take a close look. <heading>A. State of Nature: between Hobbes and Locke</heading>Locke's The Second Treatise of Government could be seen as a response to Hobbes's political views. Though he didn't mention the name of Hobbes, he borrowed a lot from Hobbes. His central theme is also the transition from state of nature to the civil society, but Locke's version is less dramatic. The state of nature, in Locke's eyes, is 'a State of perfect Freedom', 'Equality' and 'Liberty'. People are free 'to order their Actions, and dispose of their Possessions, and Persons as they think fit, within the bounds of the Law of Nature'. 'All the Power and Jurisdiction is reciprocal'. There is no other superior authority other than the 'a Law of Nature', teaching all Mankind, 'who will but consult it, that being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his Life, Health, Liberty, or Possessions'. （Locke, 1988: 269-271) In such a state of nature, 'Every Man hath a Right to punish the Offender, and be Executioner of the Law of Nature'. (Locke, 1988: 272) This has caused some 'Confusion and Disorder', as firstly 'It is unreasonable for Men to be Judges in their own Cases, that Self-love will make Men to be Judges in their own Cases, that Self-love will make Men Partial to themselves and their Friends' ; secondly, 'Ill Nature, Passion and Revenge will carry them too far in punishing others.' To overcome these inconveniences of the state of nature, civil society is established. (Locke, 1988: 275) Locke continues to argue there is 'plain difference between the State of Nature, and the State of War, which however some Men have confounded.' 'Men living together according to reason, without a common Superior on Earth, with Authority to judge between them is properly the State of Nature. But force, or a declared design of force upon the Person of another, where there is no common Superior on Earth to appeal to for relief, is the State of War.' The former is 'a State of Peace, Good Will, Mutual Assistance, and Preservation'; by comparison, the latter is 'a state of Enmity, Malice, Violence, and Mutual Destruction.' (Locke, 1988: 280) To conclude, in Locke's state of nature, mankind is harmonious with each other. They have their own reason, property. Actually, this is already a civilized state; there is neither dominion nor subordination. Locke tries to distinguish the state of nature from the state of war, in that the state of war is a state of exception. It only comes into existence when the law of nature is violated without common law to appeal to. When the unwarranted force ceases, the state of war disappeared and people return to the state of nature. The civil society or government is a remedy to avoid the state of war, to play the role of a common judge: 'the continuance of the State of War is excluded, and the Controversie is decided by Power.' (Locke, 1988: p282) The need of a government arises, whenever the law of nature is violated and once the transgression ceases, the government could remain silent. Locke's version of state of nature is more temperate. He refused to accept Hobbesian view of human character as being pride, ferocious, easy to come into war with each other. His model of man is civilized, ordered and rational, who possesses appropriate judgment and moral standards. Locke never attempted to provide a historical account of human society; his state of nature is just an abstraction of civilized society. The only difference is there is no government, no positive laws to guarantee the peace, security and property of individuals, as Locke admits that man has 'defects and imperfections' and the transgression of the law of nature is unavoidable in the state of nature. (Locke, 1988: 278) In a word, the transition from the state of nature to the civil society is natural. We could find many similar aspects between Locke's state of nature and that of Hobbes: they both fabricate a pre-political state before the establishment of a government or an authority. In such a state, mankind enjoys a wide range of liberty, freedom and equality. Locke believes that man will follow up the dictate of reason without much resistance, while for Hobbes, the reason or the natural law itself is far from enough. The necessity of a government, for Locke, is to overcome the inconveniences of the state of nature; but for Hobbes, the government is to keep mankind in awe in order to make mankind observe the laws. In one word, Locke's government is a passive one, Hobbes's active. Another point is yet to make that, for Hobbes, self-preservation is the first and foremost concern for mankind. He develops his theory of the origin of civil society out of the avoidance of violent death. At first glance, it may appear unreasonable that security would be the essential reason for the need of an authoritative government. Hobbes has mentioned, 'for the preservation of his own Nature; that is to say, of his own Life; and consequently, of doing any thing, which in his own Judgement, and Reason'. (Hobbes, 1991: 91) The 'Nature' here not only incorporates one's physical life, but also implies the practical activity of human beings. Hobbes has maintained that life is an unalienable right for human beings, but he has not given a clear description of practical activity. Locke complemented Hobbes's unfinished work for he made clear that the property is also an inalienable right as well as the right of life: <quote>every Man has a Property in his own Person. This no Body has any Right to but himself. The Labour of his Body, and the Work of his Hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the State that Nature hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed his Labour with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his Property... For this Labour being the unquestionable Property of the Labourer. (Locke, 1988: 287-288)</quote>For Locke, both the right of life and of property are found in natural law, which are beyond the intervention of the civil state. Government serves to be a juridical institution, a night watchman, whose main work is just to preserve these rights from unjust violation. Therefore, Locke is often regarded as the first man of the liberal tradition. <heading>B. State of Nature: between Hobbes and Rousseau </heading>Rousseau's narrative about human nature, state of nature and transition to the civil society could be found in Second Discourse (A discourse upon the origin and foundation of the inequality among mankind), Julie, the Social Contract, Emile. In this essay, the attention will be focused on Second Discourse and  the Social Contract, for the former provides a vivid description of human condition in the state of nature, and Rousseau's political views are most systematically expressed in the latter. Rousseau's version of state of nature appears to be opposite to that of Hobbes. Hobbes's account of human nature is intrepid, competitive, selfish and ferocious. In Rousseau's views, these characters only derive from the civil society, which Hobbes imposed on the state of nature. The natural man should be 'Alone, idle, and always near danger, Savage man must like to sleep and be a light sleeper like the animals which, since they think little, sleep, so to speak, all the time they do not think: Self-preservation being almost his only care.' (Rousseau, 1997: 139) In the state of nature, man is timid. They live in solitude, being isolated and dispersed, without much contact with each other. Pity is natural sentiment Rousseau finds in the heart of natural man, which is again ignored by Hobbes. 'pity is a natural sentiment which, by moderating in every individual the activity of self-love, contributes to the mutual preservation of entire species...pity that, in the state of Nature, takes the place of Laws, morals, and virtue, with the advantage that on one is tempted to disobey.' (Rousseau, 1997: 154) Being timid, isolated and compassionate, Rousseau's man in the state of nature is unlike Hobbes's wolf-like one. Human beings are not naturally anti-social as Hobbes described, 'men have no pleasure, (but on the contrary a great deale of griefe) in keeping company.' (Hobbes, 1991: 88) They are neither social animal, since 'it is impossible to imagine why, in that primitive state, a man would need another man any more than a monkey or a Wolf would need his kind.' Man in Rousseau's version is pre-social, yet to socialize. The exploration of the human nature has manifested that mankind in the state of nature are not prone to harm each other or enter into the state of war. What's more, Rousseau pointed out more convincing evidence to show the existence of state of war is an anachronism. The three principle causes of quarrel which Hobbes finds in the nature of man, competition, diffidence and glory, (Hobbes, 1991: 88) according to Rousseau, could only be found in the social group and human society. Rousseau's mankind should be 'wandering in the forests without industry, without speech, without settled abode, without war, and without tie, without any need of others of his kind and without any desire to harm them, perhaps even without ever recognizing any one of them individually...he did not recognize even his Children.' (Rousseau, 1997: 157) They have not entered into family, community or society, and therefore they have no genuine idea of property, as the concept of property only emerges with the development of civilization to a certain degree, which is still unknown to men in the state of nature. Hobbes and Rousseau both agree that quarrels, conflicts, wars begin with the discovery of property. Thus in Rousseau's version, in the state of nature, 'Men were not prone to very dangerous quarrels: since they had no dealings of any kind with one another; since they therefore knew neither vanity, nor consideration, nor esteem, nor contempt; since they had not the slightest notion of thine and mind, or any genuine idea of justice' (Rousseau, 1997: 154) Rousseau's state of nature is a peaceful Eden. Men live in solitude and enjoy their natural freedom. Their faculties have not fully developed. They have no reason but instincts. The whole civilization is still in its infancy. Life is simple. While the civil society is the origin of inequality, misery and evilness, 'which gave the weak new fetters and the rich new forces, irreversibly destroyed natural freedom, forever fixed the Laws of property and inequality, transformed a skillful usurpation into an irrevocable right, and for the profit of a few ambitious men henceforth subjugated the whole of Mankind to labor, servitude and misery.' (Rousseau, 1997: 173) Hobbes's civil society attempts to salvage mankind from war of 'one against one', a remedy to all the evilness of the state of nature, and a panacea to the predicament of human beings. Rousseau's point of view, however, is quite the reverse. 'Inequality, being almost nonexistent in the state of Nature, owes its force and growth to the development of our faculties and the progress of the human Mind, and finally becomes stable and legitimate by the establishment of property and Laws.'(Rousseau, 1997: 188) <heading>C. A hidden Dialogue</heading>If we put three 'state of nature' on the same time line, Rousseau should be on the left of other two, as his version is a pre-social one, while Hobbes is in the middle and Locke on the right, as Locke's is just an abstraction of civil society without a political authority. <figure/>However, in addition to such a chronological order, a hidden dialogue between Hobbes, Locke Rousseau could be detected from Locke and Rousseau's critique of Hobbes's state of nature. At first glance, it is obvious that both Locke and Rousseau found it hard to accept Hobbes's narrative of the state of nature being continuance of war of one against one. Locke, on the one hand, took a moderated view of human nature and distinguished cleanly the state of nature from the state of war. On the other hand, he tacitly follows Hobbes, arguing the preservation of life and right of property is the legitimate origin of government, though Locke's version of government differs from Hobbes in being a passive, limited judge instead of an active, all-inclusive, absolute Leviathan By comparison, Rousseau's critique seems to be more fundamental in that he revealed the anachronism of Hobbes's description of the state of nature, which imposed the modern symptoms upon the natural men. However, after a second consideration, we could find more similar points shared by Hobbes and Rousseau than by Rousseau and Locke. Rousseau did not confine his critique within a humanistic accusation of Hobbes's model of man, he acutely noticed that 'Hobbes very clearly saw the defect of all modern definitions of Natural right: but the conclusions he draws from his own definition show that he understands it in a sense that is no less false. ' (Rousseau, 1997: 151) As Dr. Strauss's concluded the genesis of Hobbes's political philosophy, one of them is 'the movement away from the recognition of natural obligation as the basis of morality, law, and the State from a natural claim (and thus to the denial of every natural obligation).' (Strauss, 1952: 129) Hobbes and Rousseau both have noticed the changes brought by the coming new world: natural right is substituted for natural law, right for obligation, morality for virtue. They provided two different prescriptions: one is to force upon an omnipotent authority, a moral god; the other is to return to the primitive state of ignorance. Despite the differences, they all adopted a similar methodology: the starting point is the same, mankind in the state of nature. Society is composed of individuals, but derives its legitimacy and power form the transferring of rights of the individuals during the pre-political or pre-social period. Marx commented, 'They saw this individual not as an historical result, but as the starting point of history; not as something evolving in the course of history, but posited by nature, because for them this individual was in conformity with nature, in keeping with their idea of human nature. ' (Marx, 1971: 188) But it should be bear in mind that their attempt could not be reduced to an exploration of the human beings in the history. This project of archeology is never for its own sake, but for the explanation of the political society of their own time. <heading>State of Nature and Civil Society</heading>In the previous section, three versions of 'state of nature' have been compared and contrasted. Locke and Rousseau, despite their openly-declared opposition, observed the tradition, opened up by Hobbes, of tracing back the human condition in the state of nature. As is discussed above, this is not a historical exploration of the origin of human society. Then if the state of nature does not concern the history, which role it plays in Hobbes's system of theory? Then in this section, the following questions will be discussed: Does the state of war of one against one literally mean that everyone kills everyone? What's the relation between state of nature and civil state? What's the implied meaning of state of war? Rousseau discussed in the Second Discourse man's disinclination to harm each other from his anthropological analysis of human nature. Here, in the Social Contract, he reiterated that the state of war could not be generated from the relation between man and man, but between state and state. <quote>Men are not naturally enemies, if only for the reason that, living in their primitive independence, they have no mutual relations sufficiently durable to constitute a state of peace or a state of war. It is the relation of things and not of men which constitutes war; and the state of war cannot arise from simple personal relations, but only from real relations; private war - war between man and man - cannot exist either in the state of nature, where there is no settled ownership, or in the social state, where everything is under the authority of the laws... War, then, is not a relation between man and man, but a relation between State and State. (Rousseau, 1997: 46)</quote>Rousseau's analysis reminds us that Hobbes's state of war could not be literally understood as a real and physical war. It might only be a metaphor. We should remember that Hobbes studied Greek and Latin in his early years and 'his facility at languages remained with him all his life.' (Tuck, 1991: 7) Then, Bobbio's interpretation of Hobbes's state of nature might provide some hints. According to Bobbio, Hobbes's state of nature comprises three specific situations. The first is 'primitive societies', like some American natives and the barbarian populations of antiquity, 'which precedes the passage from the state of nature to civil society, and is therefore prepolitical'; the second is 'in case of civil war. This occurs when the state already exist, but dissolves for various reasons. Here there occurs the passage from civil society to anarchy. We might call this situation antipolitical'; the third is 'in international society. Relations among states are not regulated by a shared power. This is a situation which occurs among-political entities.' (Bobbio, 1993: 41-42) Among the three situations, civil war is the most fitted theme, as Leviathan is published in 1651, nine years after the breakout of England's Civil War. Hobbes was pride of being the first one to flee from England at that time. Civil War's influence upon Hobbes's writing could not be ignored when we analyze the state of nature. Civil War is not a pre-political state, but an interlude in a civil society. It disrupts the order of the previous state and turns it into anarchy, where there is no common power, no authority, no order, no law. It is like 'the state of nature', in Hobbes's term. And Hobbes's design of Leviathan is to bring back order and reestablish laws in order to return to the civil stage. In order to see clearly the relation between the state of nature and civil society, we might compare them in one form as is shown below: <table/>To conclude, the state of nature can be characterized as (1) everyone decides everything; (2) driven by passion; (3) continual war without civilization; (4) natural rights but no morality; (5) no contracts at all. By comparison, the civil society, or the Leviathan, is (1) sovereign power by a person or an assembly of people; (2) guided by reason; (3) everything in order; (4) morality according to the observance of law of nature; (5) contract under a mutual power. It is shown Hobbes's 'state of war' is quite the portrait of Civil War, where there is no common power, no effective law. Everything is allowed. Society dissolves into a multitude of individuals. Therefore, the establishment of Leviathan is to put an end to the anarchy of society, to restore laws and morality, for the preservation and continuance of civilization. Therefore, the antithesis of state of nature and civil society is not necessarily a chronological one: one being physically earlier than the other, but actually, the former is the interlude or an abnormal situation of the latter. There has been much argument about Hobbes's state of nature, it is 'purely hypothetical, a kind of thought-experiment, or whether he supposed that it could be or had been a practical possibility.' (Tuck, 1991: 29) Oakeshott argued in his Hobbes on Civil Association that the 'state of nature' is an 'inherited myth, rather than the private dream of an eccentric or the malicious invention of an outcast.' (Oakeshott, 1975: 153) By 'myth', he means that 'We apt to think of a civilization as something solid and external, but at bottom it is a collective dream... And the substance of this dream is a myth, an imaginative interpretation of human existence, the perception (not the solution) of the mystery of human life'. (Oakeshott, 1975: 150) But after the discussion above, we could see that the description of state of nature is not merely a dream of a philosopher, a game of brain, a thought-experiment. It could be physically found in the history, though it is never an archeological project of the origin of political society. It derives its existence from Hobbes's life experience during the Civil War. <heading>Individual and State: A New Perspective</heading>It might be oversimplifying to say that the job of political philosophers is to arrange the position of individual, state and maybe some intermediate organizations. In this light, the subject matter of Hobbes's whole story, including the antithesis of state of nature to civil society, and transition from state of nature into the civil society, is also about: how is a state made up of individuals? How do individuals gather to become a state? What's the relation between individual and state? Hobbes is an original and revolutionary thinker in the history of political philosophy. His antithesis of state of nature to civil society could be interpreted as that of individual to state, as the former is made up of individuals without a common power, and the latter with a political authority. He rearranges this above-mentioned relation to that state of nature becomes logically prior to the civil state. The legitimacy of the latter is derived from the transferring rights of the former. Individuals are both the starting point and the final aim of the state. This, however, is not the same case with classical philosophers, for example, when discussing the nature of justice and injustice, Socrates would propose studying first in the State, and secondly in the individual, 'proceeding from the greater to the lesser and comparing them, ' as 'in the larger the quantity of justice is likely to be larger and more easily discernible.' (Plato, 1977: 339-340) In their perspective, state is naturally and logically prior to individuals. By comparison, it is clearly seen that Hobbes's dramatic division of state of nature and civil society is a work of emancipation individuals from state. His state of nature provides a secure place for the existence of pre-political individuals. As Dr. Strauss commented on Hobbes's break with the tradition, <quote>The tradition which Hobbes opposes had assumed that man cannot reach the perfection of his nature except in and through civil society and, therefore, that civil society is prior to the individual. It was this assumption which led to the view that the primary moral fact is duty and not right. One could not assert the primacy of natural rights without asserting that the individual is in every respect prior to civil society: all right of civil society or of the sovereign are derivative from rights which originally belonged to the individual. (Strauss, 1965: 14-15)</quote>Here again, we need take into account the historical background of the wring of Leviathan and other political works of him, otherwise Hobbes's break with history would seem to come from nowhere but an inspiration of mind. The Civil War destroyed the previous state, which assumed to possess a natural root, and left behind a multitude of individuals. Thus, Hobbes had to begin with another direction, not from state, but from individuals. And he was obliged to offer a different explanation of the origin of state: the derivation of the state is from the transferring right of individuals in the state of nature, before the establishment of the state. The state ceased to be natural, but an artificial institution designed by human beings. However, as is discussed above that Hobbes is a complicated and sometimes self-contradictory thinker. His theory of origin of the state by contract is not complete. The right once transferred is for ever and irrevocable. The sovereign returns to be an omnipotent power, but at least Hobbes paved the way for later philosophers, such as Locke and Rousseau, who further developed Hobbes's view of contract-made state out of the state of nature. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This essay offers an alternative interpretation of Hobbes's 'state of nature', pointing out that it is a vivid portrait of Civil War, not merely a hypothetical myth or an intellectual game, and never an intention of exploring the historical origin of political state. The design of the Leviathan is a remedy to this disordered situation. Hobbes's invention of the division of state of nature/civil state and individual/state does not come from nowhere, but is a product of his time. Locke and Rousseau's criticism of Hobbes is also studied in this essay and it is shown both of them are strongly influenced by Hobbes's methodology and main themes despite their apparent oppositions. 