Empiricists would have us believe that facts speak for themselves (May 2001). That being so, the research process would be a simple and straightforward one and the results would be consistent and easy to extract. However, in practice this is not the case. Different theories will affect the research as well as the practice, even to the extent of deciding what questions will be asked or how they will be asked. In addition, the findings will be tinged with bias depending not only on the researcher's history, but also taking into account the ever changing social settings and the diversity of human nature (May 2001). It is argued that natural science methods are not applicable for use in the field of social science (Giddens 2001) as humans have the capacity of fee will and thought which is not applicable to many natural science subjects. As a result society is constantly changing and so does need to research methods. This essay reviews some of the relevant key theories and considers their impact on the research process and the outcomes. Using working examples it will outline the relationship between theory (perspectives), research (chosen methods) and practice (what happens as a result of the research), drawing together the various theoretical and practical influences and showing how multi-faceted and unending the process of research can be. In particular it will argue that the research process is far from simple and that a relationship between theory, research and practice is essential and desirable. <heading>What the theorists say</heading>Some of the theories are investigated below which show not only the diverse range of thoughts but also the impact different perspectives will have not only on the chosen method of research, but the resultant findings too. <heading>Grand versus Empirical </heading>Both May (2001) and Bryman (2001) describe two major categories of theory - grand (or critical) and empirical (or middle range (Merton 1967 cited in Bryman 2001). Grand theorists focus very much on wide (or abstract) theoretical ideas - post colonialism or multicultural. Empirical studies are much more related to collecting data via observation and reaching conclusions. Both have their drawbacks, in that grand theories can float so far about 'reality' that they become unstable or disconnected from basic needs. On the other hand, research based on too much data collection, without theorising, can reduce the opportunity for development. In which case, working at either end of these extreme poles would not be effective - the only way would is to have theory and research working together. Two ways in which this link can be seen to be operating is in deductive and inductive methods of research. Deductive theory aims to prove or disprove a particular hypothesis, which in turn tests the strength of the theory. The inductive theory examines a particular aspect and identifies the theories from the resultant data. Both have a place and use although very different. For example, the inductive theory would be useful to understand why more working class people vote labour - there is no initial hypothesis and the result of the research will influence the resultant theories (Bryman 2002). Gidddens (1984) has attempted to bridge the gap between these two categories with his structuration theory - this considers structural and individual aspects (incorporating methods of collecting general as well as more specific data), but results show just how complicated the research process can be. <heading>Feminism</heading>Since the 1970s women have been questioning whether the theories affecting research are too biased in favour of the male perspective (Bryman 2001). Prior to this time most research was conducted by men, was considered by women to be based on male values and women were silent and invisible. Oakley in 1981 (cited in Bryman 2001) supported this view and since then others have raised their voices to show how male generated theories are not always appropriate or practical in research involving women (Harding 1991, Abbott and Wallace 1990 (cited in May 1993)). Feminist theory states that women have been marginalised by the research process and misrepresented in social policies (May 1993). In her research on interviewing women MPs Puwar (1997) describes how both the method and the process are affected by considering feminist perspectives. Firstly, qualitative methods were used, this enables more depth to the interviews, provides a less formal structure and micro, more personal, issues can be researched, not generalities made. Qualitative methods can provide explanations, reasons why and meanings and are suitable for situations where micro level research is desired. Secondly, an open style of interview was used, where equal power was allotted to each party, so that a comfortable environment was created. One key difference between feminist and most male based theory is that subjectivity is essential to feminist research - without an ability for the researcher to stand in the shoes of the researched, there can be no useful conclusions. Positivism, one of the traditional theories supported by men, on the other hand favours objectivity - holding out that no true picture can be obtained unless the researcher stands outside the experiences of the subject; thereby providing value free results - those not influenced by aspects of the researcher themselves (Bryman 2001). However, even within the feminist perspective there is not total agreement. How can the view of white middle class women be comparable to those of working class or ethnic minority women? (May 1993) Although this has been one of the major critiques of this perspective, it can be equally true of other theories. With Puwar's research, it can be seen how the feminist theory influenced the chosen method of research (qualitative) and the practicalities of how the research was carried out (in depth individual interviews). <heading>How research is related to practice</heading>Looking at some topical research in the education sector the link between research and the practice, or policy created as a result of the research, can be seen. In 1999 the government report "A Fresh Start" identified that 7 million (or 1 in 5 adults) had poor literacy or numeracy skills, including half a million with a poor grasp of the English language (Niace 2003). The start of this research was the hypothesis (deduction) that people with low basic skills levels or poor English were on lower incomes or unemployed and tended to be more likely to suffer from ill health and social exclusion. Research proved the hypothesis correct. The method used to generate the research would have been a quantitative method. That is one which looks at the macro (bigger) picture, involves a lot of large scale research and can only look at generalities. Despite these generalities, it is the way, rightly or wrongly, that government policy is created. In this case the result was to introduce the "Skills for Life" programme which aims to improve the literacy and numeracy levels of 1.5 million adults by 2007 (Niace 2003). Therefore it can be seen that by using the deductive theory the choice of quantitative data collection follows and the decisions based on the results put into practice via new policy initiatives. <heading>Differences of opinion</heading>On a similar vein, looking at one of the many government statistics from the Social Trends 33 survey it states that "there were just 6,000 adoptions in England and Wales in 2001, an increase of 39 per cent since 1999. Despite this rise, the number of adoptions is still substantially below the peak in the 1970s". Upon these statistics policy will be made, but quantitative data does not answer broader questions such as what are the experiences of mothers who give up their children and those who chose to bring them up themselves - for this the qualitative method would be required. From this it can be seen the value of feminist theories to promote qualitative methods whilst empiricists would argue that data collection provides all the answers. But despite the choice of theory or chosen method of research, it can be seen how the theory, method and practice are very much inter-linked. <heading>Marxism</heading>One other theory worthy of investigation is that of Marxism. Marx argued that inequalities existed in society whereby the lower classes of society (proletariat) could be exploited by those who owned the assets (capitalists) to the extent that different rules applied to the two groups (Giddens 2001). An example of this can be seen by comparing the recent case involving Major Charles Ingram and that of the growing number of women in prison for first or petty crimes. Major Ingram was only charged with an 18 month suspended sentence after being found guilty of conspiring to cheat the show "Who Wants to be a Millionaire" (BBC News 2003) out of the top prize. Whilst The Guardian (2003) reports a doubling of the number of women in prison for small crimes since 1999. The most common crimes committed by women are those of theft and handling stolen goods, crimes that are of low risk to the public and women are likely to be driven to crime due to personal circumstances. Women are twice as likely to be imprisoned for their first offence than men (Carlen 2003). In this example, theory and practice are interrelated, be they Marxist or feminists in that the outcomes have been influenced by the theory and the legal system which is predominately male based and elitist (Griffith 1997). <heading>Paradigm shifts</heading>Kuhn (1970 cited in May 2001) explains research as a process of paradigm shift, although he does not acknowledge that it could be more than one. He explains a world which is constantly changing as should theories and methods, as old theories become obsolete they are replaced by new ones and so a paradigm shift is made. Not all agree with this idea, Bourdieu (1993 cited in May 2001) considers it 'heresy'. This shows just another was of doing research, another theory and another aspect to add to the complications of conducting research, but supports the argument of the relationship between the three. <heading>Post Modernists</heading>Whilst there can be much discussion about which theory should be used, consideration also needs to be given to the post modernism - this stands apart from traditional theory as it rejects theory altogether. Instead, it questions what reality is, believing there are multiple realities rather than none (positivism, empiricism). This might be seen to be useful in that the argument over what is 'right or wrong' would be removed. However, it does present a rather fragmented picture which will in turn make extracting useful data on which to make decisions a somewhat more difficult process than it is already. Again, this has its place in areas where opinions are solicited, but where no further action would result, but why go to the trouble and expense of research if the results cannot be used to make subsequent changes? Despite this difference again the relationship between the research and the practice can be seen. <heading>Bringing it all together</heading>The question of facts speaking for themselves or the alternative that theory or perspectives affect research has been discussed. Various theories have been reviewed - grand (far reaching) and empirical (data focussed) theories, as well as feminism (hearing women speak), Marxism (considering inequalities in society), paradigm shifts (research methods need to keep up to date with changing society) and post modernism (multiple realities). The opportunities of using inductive (open ended) and deductive (hypothesis) methods have been considered. How different theories, or perspectives, can influence the method chosen to conduct the research has been investigated - quantitative to see the macro picture, used to form government policy and qualitative via in-depth interviews to give a micro picture has also been discussed. Drawing all these aspects together it can be seen that the research process is far from a simple one and that it is impossible to conduct research without a relationship of some sort between theory, method and practice (May 2001, Bryman 2002, Giddens 2002). Furthermore, research is never finished, but only ever part of a process that can be repeated again, built on or extended, as elements change. (Kuhn cited in May 2001). 