Adding micro-nutrients (fortification) to food has been a practice since 1920 (Dowler 2005), but the benefits to health are not always clear. Adding vitamins or minerals to foods is promoted as a way of 'enriching' foods, but the need to fortify is also questionable. Arguments for fortification come from many quarters. Relief agencies aiming to provide food aid to areas where people are undernourished, dying from starvation or suffering from diseases caused by lack of essential nutrients see fortification of staple foods as a way to return people health and healthy nutritional levels (Toole 1992). People living on low incomes are prone to consume less healthy foods and therefore suffer poorer health and more affluent people (Nestle 2004). Some medical research has shown definite improvements in health or prevention of disease from fortification or supplementation for example iodine in salt to prevent the onset of goitre and fluoride in water to reduce teeth decay (Nestle 2004). Food manufacturers and processors use the adding of nutrients to foods as a way of providing a more extensive range of healthier foods, but adversely it could be argued that these foods also provide more profit or increase market share (British Nutrition Foundation 2005). Others argue that the addition of nutrients is a way of disguising unhealthy foods, those high in saturated fat or sugars (Spurlock 2005, Schlosser 2005) or replacing nutrients that would naturally be present in food, if the foods system was not one that reduced the nutritional value of foods (Humphrys 2001). This essay will critically examine the adding of micro-nutrients (vitamins and minerals) to food by firstly looking at what is meant by fortification. Consideration will be given to why food fortification does or should happen; focussing on three areas - addressing deficiencies, ensuring the expected nutritional value of food and increasing profit/market share for the food industry. examples will be included to support the arguments both for and against fortification. Firstly there needs to be an understanding of fortification. A useful explanation of fortification is provided by Richardson (1997 :808) <list>- Nutrient additions = adding micronutrients - vitamins and minerals. - Restoration/enrichment (Nestle 2004) = adding naturally occurring nutrients to the original level to replace those lost in manufacture- Fortification = additions whether or not to originally present to make 'richer' source (British Nutrition Foundation 2005)</list>Generally fortification is used to cover all of these incidences of adding nutrients to food. With modern technologies in food production and the lack of definitive guidelines from governments world wide, fortification is widespread. "The UK has one of the most liberal fortification policies in Europe" (The Food Commission 2005). This gives rise for concern considering the lack of scientific proof that fortification in many cases will provide health benefits or not provide adverse ones. Whereas there are strict regulations in respect of drug development, there is much less control over the addition of nutrients to food, nor over the health claims that can be made or suggested. This creates difficulties in several areas - it creates a blurring of distinction between foods, supplements and drugs, it erodes the ability for authorities to protect the public from harmful substances and it increases confusion among the public about how to achieve the recommended diet (Nestle 2002 :297). However, there are distinct areas where fortification is useful or essential to maintain health, reduction in disease or lengthening of life. Toole (1992) discusses the necessity to include fortified foods in food aid provided to refugees to address dificiencies. 32 million people, either refugees or displaced people, mainly in Africa are dependent on international food aid (Toole 1992:1214) and Toole sees fortification as the only way to combat deficiencies and improve the health and life expectancy of such groups of people. Without providing foods fortified with essential nutrients such as 'vitamin A, thiamine, niacin, vitamin C, iron and folic acid' (Toole 1992 :1214) refugees will continue to suffer debilitating or life threatening diseases such as xerophthalmia, pellagra, scurvy, anaemia or neural tube defects on a wide scale. Whilst he recommends an extensive fortification programme he also suggests close supervision. The adding of iodine to salt and fluoride to water are two examples of success; where adding a nutrient to a commonly used vehicle resulted in health benefits. The iodization of salt dates back to the 19 th century when it was discovered that goitre could be prevented by adding iodine to salt. Levels of goitre in Detroit, USA in 1990 fell from 47% to 2% amongst children and 1% in adults (Nestle 2003 :302). Fluoridation of water in the USA resulted in a 40-60% reduction in tooth decay (Nestle 2004 :311). Following these successful outcomes, both iodisation of salt and fluoridation of water became legal requirements in many countries. Robertson et al (1999 :181) advocate that "Good nutrition is essential to good health". A balanced diet that provides sufficient and appropriate nutrition to maintain optimum health can only be achieved from a diet that incorporates a wide range of foods that thereby provide a multitude of micro-nutrients. Fortifying foods with micro-nutrients may appear to be the ideal solution to ensuring the intake of vital micro-nutrients and maintaining good health. The groups of people with the worst health are those on low incomes (Lawrence 2004), in the words of Nestle "poverty is the most single dangerous contributor to nutritional deficiencies in USA children" (Nestle 2004 :173). That being the case, with so many fortified products on the market, why are micro-nutrient deficiency diseases still prevalent? In some respects it will be due to a lack of knowledge about how to eat a healthy diet. Despite the introduction of the 'Food Guide Pyramid' in the US in 1999, people are much more likely to take notice of the heavily funded adverts from the food industry promoting their products, than from drastically under-funded government campaigns providing advice on how best to eat a healthily. Another key factor is that fortified products tend to be more expensive and are therefore not within the grasp of the families on low incomes, they are more likely to buy cheap range processed foods that contain high proportions of saturated fats, salt and sugars (Lawrence 2004) and much lower levels of micro-nutrients . Fortified products would only therefore be within the grasp of higher earners, who probably don't need them (Nestle 2004). Whilst there are some positive situations were fortification can be an appropriate response to solving nutritional problems, others are questionable. The second reason for fortifying foods is to ensure the expected (optimum level) nutritional value of food. Nutrients in foods can be lost for a variety of reasons - because the current food system promotes intensive farming methods that damage the soil in which foods are grown (Humprys 2001), from processing eg frying, or storage/transportation eg irradiating, intensive chilling (Lawrence 2004) or just because of the make up of the food - by including more processed components, such as fat and sugar, and less 'natural' ones such as meat or cereals (Spurlock 2005, Schlosser 2005). Humphrys (2001) is concerned that modern farming methods whereby the soil is continually ploughed, harrowed and rolled results in the formation of clay that is lacking in nutrients. Thereafter plants grown in such soil will also be lacking in nutritional value. He also questions the need to use chemical fungicides and pesticides so extensively and is convinced that there use is not only reducing the nutrients in the soil (Lawrence 2004) and foods, but also reducing the population's health; in particular is contributory to the rising incidence of cancer. People might be living longer, but they are also living longer in ill health (Humphrys :45). Processing and storage can also have a detrimental effect on the nutritional value of food. Processing methods are varied and whilst it is perhaps necessary for there to be a range of processed foods available on the market, it is questionable whether the nation's diet should be made up of such a high proportion of processed rather than 'fresh' foods. In processes such as milling of wheat for flour, many micro-nutrients are lost and are later replaced eg the addition of iron, thiamine and niacin to white and brown flour, but not wholemeal flour, is a legal requirement in the UK (British Nutrition Foundation 2005). However, if the milling processes retained the bran, as it does in wholemeal, there would no loss of the naturally occurring nutrients and no need for them to be replaced with synthetic ones. It could be argued that it is necessary in some cases to fortify foods as there can be variations in nutrient levels between foods grown in different parts of the world or using different methods; this ensures the goodness of the food. However, many processing methods not only involve the reduction of nutrients, but also the addition of other components than nutrients eg sugar, salt, gums, colours, stabilisers and preservatives, to name but a few. A concoction of chemicals that may (in some manufacturers opinion) improve the taste or durability of the food, but which could be causing unknown problems to people's health. The adverse effects of eating a diet high in processed and convenience foods is, unfortunately, known - foods high in saturated fats and sugars and low in nutrients. Obesity and early age diabetes is extensive in western countries - according to a 2002 health survey of England "around 16% of children aged two to 15 are obese and almost 30% are either overweight or obese" (Coyne 2003), a rise of 50% since 1990 (Lawrence 2004) and 1 in 3 children in USA will develop diabetes (Schlosser 2005). These foods could be intensively fortified and would still not promote good health. Whilst fortification of foods might temporarily be an appropriate solution to some nutritional problems, it is unlikely that the added nutrients would be of a sufficient level or widespread enough to resolve all problems. Finally, the deregulated of food standards by the Thatcher government in the UK in the 1970s (Lawrence 2004) and the relaxation of food regulations post 1994 in the USA (Nestle 2004) opened the doors for the food industry to diversify its product range, enabling them to increase their profit or market share. There was more opportunity to create foods about which health improvement claims could be made (Germov and Williams 2004). The practice of adding nutrients to food had become the norm and the range of additions increased to include other ingredients that eased production, increased profit or market share (British Nutrition Foundation 2005, The Food Commission 2005), but that not necessarily increased the nutritional value of the foods A good example of how heavily fortified foods promoted as healthy may not be so can be seen in the case of Frosties. Cereals are one of the most extensively fortified products and Frosties are fortified with calcium carbonate, niacin, iron, B6, Riboflavin B2, Thiamin B1, folic acid and B12 (Kelloggs 2005), yet the Food Commission has ruled that Frosties are unhealthy, and cannot be advertised as such, because their sugar content equates to 40% (Food Magazine 2004). It can be argued that some fortified foods are not only unhealthy, but that they are also more expensive than 'ordinary' foods. Nestle provides the following example of the higher cost of fortified foods - in 1979 the cost of ordinary Wheaties was $0.93, the cost of the fortified Wheaties was $1.29, that represents an increased profit of 36 cents for a 7 cent increase to cover the cost of fortification. Research by Boden (1998) clearly reveals that people are influenced to buy certain foods as a result of advertising campaigns or magazine articles. The food industry spends over £450 million per year in the UK (Lawrence 2004 :220) on advertising and what is more frightening is the influence of extensive advertising during children's programmes that result in parents buying the advertised products at the request of the children. 99% of products advertised during children's' viewing time are processed products with high sugar and fat contents that may or may not be fortified (Lawrence 2004 :220). The results of such extensive advertising campaigns and the affect on the products bought means that the food industry has a considerable influence on the food we eat, and subsequently the health of the nation. In some respects, fortification of food definitely does not resolve the problem. Of particular concern are two controversial examples of fortifying food - that of iron and folic acid. Too high a level of iron can be toxic to male adults and post menopause women. Whilst, since the fortification of foods with iron there has been a reduction in the incidence of iron deficiency, there has also been an increased in deaths from hemeochromatosics - caused by too high levels of iron - by 60% in the USA between 1979 and 1992 (Nestle 2004 :313). Against some resistance, it was decided by the US government that from 1998 grain would be fortified with folic acid in order to reduce the cases of neural tube defects in babies whilst in their foetal stage. Adverse effects of the presence of too much folic acid can make it difficult to diagnose vitamin B12 deficiencies, which can lead to neurological damage to the elderly if it goes unidentified (Nestle 2004, Food Standards Agency 2005). The UK did not follow the American lead, but the debate goes on. In these instances there is disagreement about whether fortification is more or less beneficial overall in the long term. In concluding whether or not the adding of micro-nutrients is an appropriate response to nutritional problems a whole range of different 'problems' has been examined, and for each area there have been various opinions. When considering the insufficiently nutritious diets of refugees and displaced people, fortifying the food they receive seems an appropriate course of action to take to reduced disease and lengthen lifespan (Toole 1992). Where large numbers of people are at risk for example iodine deficiency, and fortification is a simple way to redress this, it appears to be appropriate (Nestle 2004) to do so. However, in some instances where one deficiency has been resolved by fortification at the risk of creating a different health hazard, there should be more, independent, research to ensure that only those in need of fortification receive it, whilst others are not put at risk (Nestle 2004), despite support for it from some researchers (Richardson 1997). Fortification of foods will not improve the diets of those on low income as not only are fortified foods more expensive, but there is also a lack of appropriate education - many people base their food industry choices on advertisements generated by the food industry (Boden 1998) rather than less biased advice. It is not appropriate to make cheap foods that are over-processed and lacking in nutritional value in order that those on low income can feed their families - low cost food is expensive in the long term in respect of poor health and associated medical costs (Humprys 2001). It is also not appropriate to fortify foods that are high in sugar, fat and salt and promote them as healthy - fortification will not make unhealthy foods healthy (Food Magazine 2004, Spurlock 2005, Schlosser 2005, de Winter and Rodriguez 1997). Neither will fortification replace the essential micro-nutrients lost from food as a result of the way they are grown, stored or processed. Chemical fungicides and fertilisers and modern farming methods are creating an environment where not only know micro-nutrients become deficient, but also those about which very little is known are being lost (Humphreys 2001, Lawrence 2004). Despite extensive fortification of foods, and ever increasing processing of foods, fortification cannot replace all the nutritional value, especially when some of the ingredients being added have no nutritional value at all (Daily Mail 2005, Lawrence 2004). It is also clear that food manufactures use the absence of strict regulations to use fortification, and subsequent health benefit claims, merely as a way to increase profit or ease the production process (Germov and Williams 2004, Nestle 2004). There is no one answer about whether or not it is appropriate to fortify food to resolve notational problems - there are many answers, depending on the specific problem. What is clear is that fortification of food must be used cautiously. 