This essay wishes to comprehend why the historian Carl Becker is such a significant figure in American historical writing. To achieve these ends, the study will be split into sections, each focusing on a different facet of the argument, which in combination will hopefully explain why a professional historian, so under-published, as Becker was, could be held in such high regard within the discussions and debates on historical writing, decades after his opinions were first stated. The first of these sections explains the method of historical writing that dominated the profession during the last twenty years of the nineteenth century, and the first twenty of the twentieth. This section is designed to allow for a more complete understanding of the work of Becker, which will then be discussed in the second section, a study of two of his works, with the aim of comprehending why they are so important through close inspection of his discussions and understandings. The final section looks at what other historians have said about Becker, or how they have been affected by his work, because only by looking at the effect he had on others can we fully comprehend why he was so significant a figure. Essential to any study of Carl Becker, is an understanding of the theoretical practices of the writing of history that existed during his years in education. Becker, as we shall note in the following sections, was a sceptic, and one not afraid to confront theory head-on. It is important that we discuss, if even just briefly, the very methods of historical writing with which he found fault if we are to paint a more complete picture of why Becker is such a significant figure. These theories, these historical practices that Becker challenged, concerned what has been termed by one of its principle academics Peter Novick, the "Objectivity Question." In a later section, we will record Novick's, among others', theories on the importance of Becker in relation to the objectivity question, but to begin, it is pertinent to record, at a basic level (for the objectivity question becomes a much more complex subject encompassing philosophical, sociological as well as historical fields of scrutiny) the very facets and proponents of this 'question' according to Novick, so that Becker's critique of it becomes all the more clearer. In terms of American historical practices, we can interpret two facts stated by Novick as being essential in the foundation of 'objectivity,' as we will understand it. Firstly, American historians took it upon themselves to accept, and implement what they believed to be the almost 'divine' words of German historian Leopold von Ranke. Those words called for a history "as it really was" or "as it actually was." The irony of it all was that the German to American translation of Von Ranke's theories never really matched, and Von Ranke actually meant "as it essentially was." The ambiguities in translation do not end there. This Von Ranke fascination was built upon a theoretical bedrock also lost in translation,' that of 'Wissenschaft,' which despite the ambiguities it carried in its native Germany, demanded what amounted to an incorrect direct translation for American scholars in the 1880's, who believed it to mean 'scientific." One can come to the conclusion that an 'objectivity' theory of historical writing was adopted by professional American historians who had forged there own brand of Von Ranke history. <fnote>Peter Novick, That Noble Dream: The "Objectivity Question" and the American Historical Profession (Cambridge University Press, NY, 1998) p28 </fnote><fnote>ibid </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p24-25 </fnote>Novick names prominent American historians whose fondness for this empirical concept of history underpinned their work in the field. For William E. Dodd, the principles were "no generalization, no interpretation, and little exercise of native intuition - only the one question, 'what really happened?'" George B. Adams of Yale said "can methods of investigation which are strictly scientific be applied to the past action of the race....the school of Ranke's...answer to it has been a clear and, I believe an undisputable affirmative." ( It must be noted, for accuracy purposes, that Ranke retired before this great American interest in his theories began to intensify, and any discussion of Becker will refer to the Von Ranke school of American historians, and not Von Ranke himself for reasons that have been stated above.) <fnote>Ibid, p29 (both quotes) </fnote>Finally, before we move on, we must note the second important point brought to our attention by Novick. That science, and most importantly as it relates to a concept of objectivity, the scientific fact, was held in extremely high regard in the United States during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Frederick Jackson Turner commented on the relevance of Von Ranke growing up in an 'age of science' and so, as we look toward Becker, we are provided a very clear picture of the nature of historical writing in America at the turn of the century that should help emphasise his significance in the decades ahead. <fnote>Ibid, p28 </fnote>In this section, the aim is to look at two of Becker's most prominent articles and comment on the most important points he makes concerning the type of history writing mentioned in section one. The first of these articles is 'Detachment and the Writing of History' written in 1910, an early work that introduced Becker to a larger group than previous in his life as a professor. The article, while explaining how the objective historian thinks and acts, is most certainly a critique of this form of historical writing, and while he does not offer a plethora of alternative methods in this early piece, his opinion is both cynical and assured. Opening the essay, Becker wastes no time in introducing the main critical point he wishes to make. Quoting a Professor Minot (adding value to his argument using a fellow critic) he talks of the "futility of present historical methods" and that while advances are being made in other fields, historians are engaged in "an aimless endeavour." Summing up this endeavour, Becker writes, "if it is not science, it is nothing," and so his opening comments inform us of the feelings he has toward this objective 'scientific' method of history writing. According to Becker, it is the business of the modern historian to find out and record exactly what happened. The main body of the essay is then concerned with detailing how and why history is written this way at the individual level, eluding to the 'detachment' theory, which at a basic level describes the historian who places no values of the present on his work, but remains detached from influences that could affect the way he writes about something - to the detached, history is just facts that must be ordered and recorded. The recorder is exemplified by a "reason, cut lose from purpose, passion and desire, capable of writing automatically when brought into contact with objective phenomena." <fnote>Carl Becker, Detachment and the Writing of History (Atlantic Monthly, 1910) p524 (all 3 quotes) </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p527 </fnote>Focussing in on Becker's critique of this detached form of writing, we begin to form an understanding of why he is such a significant figure. If historical writing were to be left in its current form, truth would remain a fixed quality, purely objective and unchangeable, "formulated in a law of history." Becker challenges the existing notion, (a notion embedded in the practices of the history he questions) that fact is completely separate from theory. Becker believes firmly, and this is an important belief, that the two are "almost impossible to distinguish from each other." This understanding is crucial because it opens up the possibility for a history based on the conjecture of the historian, his environment at time of writing, his own thought and comprehension of the fact as opposed to a simple recording of it. Becker's improved form of writing understands that, of the historian, "into every fact that he creates, some part of his individual experience must enter." The best example Becker gives concerns the recording of miracle. He questions the historian who reads an account of a miracle, and his ability to remain detached when he knows, in his present world, miracles cannot happen. <fnote>Ibid, p526 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p527 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p529 </fnote>Becker's final stages of argument take into account the methods by which scientific history selects the content of its records. The facts are picked by importance, a detached method that fails to account for approval or disapproval of fact. The historians do not take sides when selecting facts and this is harmful to the practice of historical writing. Becker insists, the historian must become 'attached' because concepts change with time. He concludes on this point, questioning objectivity by claiming it does not care greatly about what happens, and that the time must come when a greater care and attachment is the only way for history to survive. The second article was written by Carl Becker in 1932, some 22 years after the one mentioned above, and as will be noted, it is a clear evolution of the main principles of the first. Becker offers a way that history should be written, feeding from the concepts he writes in the 'Detachment' essay, the negative aspects of objective, scientific history to produce 'Everyman his own historian.' Becker begins by reinforcing this need to care, this need to be interested in history, and he introduces Mr Everyman, which represents exactly who it claims to. We must all be interested, according to Becker, because we are all part of, and in the present time, we all need, history. By developing his Everyman argument, Becker is fusing his theories on the importance of caring and the important fusion between present and past events. Becker claims that it is impossible to divorce history from life, because man can not do what he desires without recalling the past, nor does he have need to recall the past without present desire. The past therefore becomes part of our present and expands our special present as a result. This point therefore is crucial - "living history - the ideal series of events that we affirm and hold in memory, since it is so intimately associated with what we are doing and hope to do, can not be precisely the same for all at any given time, or the same for one generation as for another." Becker is criticizing scientific forms of history precisely because they do not fit these inherent truths. History is an "imaginative creation of personal possession," where man takes facts that he experiences, and where there are no absolute truths, the very essence of relativism. <fnote>Carl Becker, Everyman his own Historian (The American Historical Review, 1932) p7-8 </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p8 </fnote>These theories are not just for Mr Everyman (as in non-professional historians) they are relatable and are written to be relatable to the practice of professional historical writing. True, historians must be concerned with truth and detail as often as they can, but as history rejects myth, is written afresh and itself later become myth, because present conditions demand it, so history is a story, and needs literary art, not just scientific methodology, to be maintained. Like Mr Everyman, historical writing must remember events, and have a present desire for them. The historian must affirm these events not just record them, for un-affirmed records are just facts that don't really exist. Affirmation of the facts, present interest in them, is what, according to Becker, makes history, and this is vital. Within these two articles, Becker has established why this relativist history is important, and as a result, he is an important figure for historical writing, because although not alone in this endeavour, he has contributed greatly to the way in which history is presented and studied. We can also apply what he says to film, and in that, establish how a filmic writing of history is possible. Historical films are often dismissed by historians as inaccurate and therefore, fairly useless as historical resources. However, if the film-maker were to apply Becker's theories on what history is, then a particular history depicted in a film that may not factually depict what happened as far as a scientific history is concerned, is the film maker's affirmation of known facts, presented the way they see them, and this is history. In addition, films themselves are history, especially to Mr Everyman, whose past and special present may include the viewing of a film. This film may not be 'accurate' to scientific historians, but it becomes part of the special present of those who watch it. If we combine these two factors, that historical film is the affirmation of the maker in his present, and that a viewed film becomes part of the history of those who viewed it, then the conclusion is, that the historical text of the film may instruct and become the accepted historical understanding of those who watched it. The film text acts as the literary story that Becker discusses and, as far as Becker is concerned, is a completely valid history. This final section offers a retrospective view of Becker, a look at secondary source accounts which detail Becker's work and complete the final piece in our quest to find out 'why' he is so significant in American historical writing. Milton M. Klein wrote specifically in 1985 about the impact of 'Everyman his own historian' which was given as a Presidential address at the Minneapolis meeting of the American Historical Association in 1932. Klein emphasized the impact that Becker's work had within the historical profession and names those in the profession who remarked favourably upon his theories, namely Charles Beard, Frederick Jackson Turner and J. Franklin Jameson. With the benefit of hindsight, Klein says that this address has been called "the fullest expression of the philosophy of historical relativism." Klein understands that the reason for the great response he received by fellow historians was because it rejected the scientific forms we have discussed that had been in place by the 1880's. Klein concludes his positive evaluation of Becker by saying "Becker's resounding repudiation of objective history ushered in an era of relativist historiography that has not yet run its course. If he himself was not the founder of the school, he nevertheless provided it with its fullest theoretical expression." <fnote>Milton M. Klein, Everyman his own Historian: Carl Becker as Historiographer (The History Teacher, 1985) p101 </fnote><fnote>ibid, 103 </fnote><fnote>ibid, p106 </fnote>Peter Novick's is not as kind to Becker, most likely because his book is a history of the 'objectivity question,' and not a critique of it, and he questions the impact that Becker had on post-war historians, despite Becker's 1910 'detachment' essay. At best, Becker is described as having "momentum." He does however, label Becker, along with Beard as the most "influential interwar relativist," and also admits that Becker was attractive to many graduate students who would, adopting Becker's theories, would become "leaders of the profession." <fnote>Novick, p106 </fnote><fnote>ibid, p107 </fnote><fnote>ibid, p104 </fnote><fnote>ibid, p107 </fnote>Both Klein and Novick admit that Becker was crucially important for the development of a new kind of history, primarily because of the positive effect his work had on others, and there are examples of this effect. A disgruntled secondary school teacher wrote 'Carl Becker's Modern History: New Roads Barely Trodden,' demanding that the "flat formulaic prose" of secondary school texts books ignored the broader meanings that Becker called for. This teacher, Mildred Alpern, believed that the classroom was exactly where the skills Becker espoused should be taught, those concepts such as interpretation, which were valuable for high school students.  <fnote>Mildred Alpern, Carl Becker's Modern History: New Roads Barely Trodden (The History Teacher, 1985) p111 </fnote><fnote>ibid, p112 </fnote>Becker's concepts also affect the work of his contemporaries. Allan Nevins for example, writes about the best form of history being one that fuses "facts, ideas and literary grace in a single whole," in his 1939 article 'What's the Matter with History.' <fnote>Allan Nevins, What's the Matter with History (The Saturday Review of Literature, 1939) p123 </fnote>Historian Cushing Strout writes of Becker's theories as controversial, but this is in no way a negative facet. He was controversial because he espoused a form of historical writing far removed from the existing rigid format, and anything that challenges a rigid format can only be controversial, but it is also vitally important. In response to 'Everyman his own Historian,' W. Stull Holt wrote Becker: "It was a sacrilege against the deity, Scientific History, who has been enthroned for so long. It was treason against the profession. It was glorious. It was grand." Strout agrees that "his contribution was of immense value." It is this legacy, this value, the very content of the Becker works we have studied in this essay that explain why he was such a significant figure in American historical writing. Becker desired a form of historical writing that affirmed fact, which recognized the importance of the present, and in doing so, criticized the very nature of his profession, both expecting and influencing its change. This is his legacy, a legacy that, in concord with the words of Milton M. Klein, has not yet run its course. <fnote>Cushing Strout, The Pragmatic Revolt: Carl Becker and Charles Beard (Yale University Press, New Haven, 1958) p38 </fnote><fnote>ibid, p49 </fnote><fnote>ibid, p49 </fnote>