'Charisma knows only inner determination and inner restraint .... The leader's charismatic claim breaks down if his mission is not recognized by those to whom he feels he has been sent." In order to form any discussion comparing two such outstanding personalities as Martin Luther King, Jr. and Fidel Castro Ruz, the subject of charisma is always liable to play an important role. However, these two characters, whose careers catapulted them to the forefront of public observation at almost the same time but in entirely different contexts, offer more than just an intriguing public persona. This discussion aims at highlighting outstanding comparable themes, themes based on the characters more so than the careers of these two men. Due to the untimely death of Martin Luther King, Jr. in 1968, a fair comparison restricts the majority of the discussion to focus upon an acute time period between about 1953 and 1970. <fnote>Edward Gonzalez, Cuba under Castro, (US, 1974) p96 (footnote) </fnote>The discussion will begin by giving a brief summary of the social and political environments in which King and Castro's careers would take part, followed by a short summary of the careers themselves. This serves simply to set the tone for the thematic study, to give the reader a context allowing for an understanding of the situation that King and Castro must work within and should not be taken as a strict comparison. The main body of the discussion focuses on select themes that allow for either a similar or contrasting comparison. Such themes include young lives, oratory and the use of propaganda medium, relationship with US political institutions and Communism, attitude toward the use of violence, and the level of control exercised by the two men over their respective following and organisations. One obvious but nonetheless major point to address regarding social change, in this comparison, is that Fidel Castro became the ruling body in Cuba following his revolution, taking political power after rising from below to affect social change from above. Martin Luther King had no political agenda for himself instead aiming to affect social change from below, with among others, lobbying tactics and direct action campaigns. Following Cuban independence from Spain in 1898, the country had been run by various administrative bodies who shared one common objective; to maintain the economy through reliance on the United States. 'Except for its younger generation and peasantry, moreover, Cuba's pre-revolutionary society is viewed as having had few redeeming qualities." President Machado ruled Cuba 1924-33, proving a favourite of the Americans. Revolutionary activists had emerged in Cuba in the 1920s and following their struggle with Machado, took power in 1933. Under Dr. Grau San Martin, the revolutionaries could only hold power for one hundred days due to US pressure, and Felguncio Batista, who had assisted the 1933 take over, defected, forcing Grau to resign. For the next eighteen years, Batista puppets, Batista himself, Grau San Martin and Carlos Prio served as Presidents, the latter two gaining office without their old revolutionary intent. Batista then seized power in 1952, ruling as dictator until 1959 when Fidel Castro's revolutionary guerrillas took power. Politically, all administrations had proved corrupt. Under Batista, Cuba saw an increased injection of US capital, fuelling nationalist resentment. In truth however, the non-Batista governing bodies before 1952 had proved corrupt and ineffective. After 1952 Batista was able to bring political stability to the island, but over reliance on US capital and poor organisation eroded the economy. <fnote>Edward Gonzalez, Cuba under Castro, (US, 1974) p147 </fnote>Fidel Castro stressed the need for lucha; the national struggle against 'institutionalized corruption and institutionalized gangsterism' that had evolved by 1958. Following his failed attack on the Moncada army barracks of 1953, Castro was sent to jail. Upon early release, he fled to Mexico, forming a revolutionary grouped who then travelled back to Cuba in 1956 aboard their purchased yacht, Granma. His eighty-two man landing party were all but crushed by the Batista regime, but Castro survived and eventually regrouped, gaining support from local peasantry, and others fighting a nationalist cause. Guerrilla warfare ensued in the mountains of the Sierra Maestra for two years until Batista's forces were defeated. Under differing guises, Castro proceeded to rule as dictator of Cuba until the modern day, announcing his was a socialist revolution in 1961 and that he was a confirmed Marxist-Leninist. His Communist Party of Cuba was established as the main ruling body of the island in 1965 and despite promises of a return to democratic institutionalisation during his time in the mountains; Fidel proclaimed that the old style bourgeois democracy would only corrupt the country. Fidel has control over all political organs and apparatus and oversees all decision making 'combining personal rule by a charismatic caudillo with a socialist reordering of Cuba's economy, society and polity." Cutting all ties with the US, Castro sought to align socialist Cuba with the Soviet Bloc and effect massive social mobilization to enforce economic growth and development. Many of Castro's personal styles of dictatorship remain today, although the Soviet Bloc has disintegrated, presenting new hardships to Cuban's. This era though, exists outside of this discussions period of interest. <fnote>Nationalism in Cuban Politics, W Raymond Duncan, Eds. Jamie Suchlicki, Cuba, Castro and Revolution (US, 1972) p29 </fnote><fnote>Edward Gonzalez, Cuba under Castro, (US, 1974) p168 </fnote>As previously noted, Martin Luther King had no desire for political power. During his career as a civil rights campaigner, King's intention was to force the issue of social justice upon the current political administration, primarily through the use of direct action. An abundance of social injustice existed in the United States throughout the first half of the twentieth century, injustice resulting from an ever expanding gulf in class relations and social acceptance. One particular group would find social acceptance particularly hard to attain; the black population of America, who made up approximately ten-percent of the nation. Race relations, especially in the deeper Southern states of the US, had suffered greatly since the turn of the century, as white supremacists maintained a hard-line racist stance, a stance that dated back generations to a time when southern whites owned blacks as slaves. The Emancipation Proclamation and resultant 14 th and 15 th amendments to the constitution that followed by 1870, had designated that all persons born in the United States would receive equal protection of the laws and voting rights. Despite the attempts made to reconstruct the South following the civil war, no political institution had been able to bring full freedom to the Negro, 'for "the pharaohs of the South," supported by the U.S. Supreme Court, shackled him with racial segregation, "a new form of slavery disguised by certain niceties'" The Jim Crow, white supremacist South had enforced unconstitutional laws upon the black communities, communities throughout the first half of the twentieth century that were all to readily prepared to accept their place. <fnote>Stephen B. Oates, Let the Trumpet Sound : A Life of Martin Luther King (Edinburgh, 1998) p100 </fnote>King's careers as a Baptist Preacher began in earnest when he became pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in 1954. However, Montgomery would catapult King into the public eye only a year later. He declared that the Negro was realising at last that he was somebody, and in 1955-56, the black community of Montgomery proved his proclamation right. Rosa Parks, a soft-spoken black woman refused to vacate her seat on a bus as was customary, so that a white man could sit in her place. Following her arrest, black leaders in the city, including King, decided to set up a permanent organisation to run a bus boycott and handle other racial difficulties. espite his initial reluctance, elected President of the MIA, a post guaranteeing him personal responsibility for mobilising support for the boycott itself and thus beginning his career as a prominent civil rights campaigner. His first years as a civil rights campaigner would prove difficult as President Eisenhower won a second term in office, owing to increased Southern support following his reluctance to enforce desegregation. On many occasions throughout King's career, concessions were not made in their entirety by white supremacists and Southern state representatives despite boycott and direct action campaigns. Despite this, King was able to bring the civil rights campaign under the scrutiny of the public, using the media to his advantage in such respects. Accepting the Presidency of the newly formed SCLC in 1957, King embarked upon ten years of non-violent action campaigns, generally focussed on the South. Following his successful Birmingham campaign he led a march to Washington, delivering his most memorable speech to an enormous live and television audience. Subsequent President's John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson showed greater promise in the civil rights field, both conversing with King during his career regarding such matters as voting rights, and under Johnson a voting rights bill passed was signed in 1965. In the eyes of black militants however, King's non-violent action never really achieved enough. King decided to personally condemn Johnson and the war in Vietnam, a war that he believed kept vital resources from the President's supposed 'War on Poverty.' Unfortunately for King, his outspoken comments alienated many followers, and his movement began to stutter, at a time when 'black power' was emerging as a more desirable alternative. King's movement was undoubtedly faltering by the time of his death on 4 th April 1968, but his commitment to the cause and substantial effort toward the achievement of the gains of the civil rights movement cannot be questioned. In order to develop a more comprehensive understanding of the personalities of King and Castro, it is of great importance to establish brief accounts of events and personalities that played a role during the younger years of the two men's lives. A personality itself can begin to form through the teachings and inspirations received at developing stages of younger life. Experiences can have both positive and detrimental affects on the developing mind-set of an individual, the two most important experiences at a younger age being parentage and education. In the case of Fidel Castro, perhaps we must look no further, in determining the evolution of his personality, than the relationship he shared with his father, which according to historian Lowry Nelson, was not close. He resented the fact that 'his father exploited the peasants on his plantation and paid no taxes on his land or income." Incidentally, part of his main support base as a revolutionary would come from the peasantry. The very nature of his family's well-to-do status would never sit well with Fidel, a man who, as líder máximo, would harbour resentful ideological feelings about such a class. Fidel's resentment toward his father, regarding the mistreatment of sugarcane workers, boiled over to such an extent that, at the age of just thirteen, he staged an insurrection aimed at organising the workers into a strike. This episode serves as a great indicator for the progression of Fidel's revolutionary mentality. <fnote>Lowry Nelson, Cuba, The Measure of a Revolution, (GB, 1972) p6 </fnote>In depth reading on Fidel Castro allows for an understanding of many of his talents and virtues, none more so than his ability as an ambitious determined revolutionary with an established intellect. Indeed his developing academic interests became apparent as early as elementary school when he refused to be taken home following a misdemeanour. "I remember going to my mother and explaining that I wanted to go on studying .... I told her....that if I wasn't sent back, I'd set fire to the house." His brother Raul recalled that Fidel was always fighting. "He had a very explosive character. He challenged the biggest and the strongest ones, and when he was beaten, he started it all over again the next day. He would never quit." <fnote>Volker Skierka, Fidel Castro: A Biography, (Germany, 2004) p11 </fnote><fnote>Volker Skierka, Fidel Castro: A Biography, (Germany, 2004) p14 </fnote>Fidel's revolutionary and intellectual facets would further develop while he studied law at university. Ultimately, the progress of his law degree would stumble as university life began to, in miniature form, resemble current Cuban political life. Castro would actively participate in off-campus revolutionary activities as university life developed a revolutionary environment of its own, complete with violent incursions and coercive riots. In a similar way to Martin Luther King, Fidel's oratory skills would develop at university as he took the role as vice-president of the student organisation of the law school. In his earlier days, as a college student, Fidel even gained experience as a hiker in the Sierra Maestra range, the very mountains that nearly twenty years later would play such an important role in his life as the emergent leader of 'The Revolution'. In a similar fashion to that of Castro, we can form a brief evaluation of Martin Luther King's younger life by looking at his upbringing and education. King was born into a well-off family, not to unlike Fidel Castro in that respect, but in a completely different context, as race played as much, if not greater a role, than class in twentieth century America. Born to a Baptist preacher in Atlanta, Georgia, King did not resent his well-to-do upbringing like Castro, rebelling far less than Fidel and receiving painful punishment on the rare occasions he did. Kings father, who named both himself and his son Martin Luther King following a name change, desired that Martin would become a Baptist preacher and so Martin was encouraged from an early age to speak confidently, a skill that would mature at an alarming rate and develop into an outstanding virtue. King matched, and perhaps even surpassed the Castro intellect and desire to learn. Predominantly enjoying and following a theologically based line of teaching, King studied under many a professor and read and developed understanding of the writings of many theologians and philosophers. Beginning his educational career at Morehouse College, King then graduated to Crozer Theological Seminary near Philadelphia before embarking upon a doctoral study at Boston University. During his short civil rights career, one talent stands out above all others, the ability to orate to an exited, expectant and anticipant crowd. King's ability to speak confidently increased rapidly as he took part in oration contests on more than one occasion during his education. As a confident speaker he was able to make friends easily, impressing many lady friends as well, especially in the north where a racist attitude did not predominate. Ordained as his father's assistant at Ebenezer Baptist church in 1948, three years before he attended Boston, King had proven his ability as a very promising preacher at just seventeen. His trial sermon was a 'resounding success' as his father said "crowds kept coming, and we had to move to the main auditorium." An outstanding talent for public speaking though would be used by King for more than his sermons as a preacher. <fnote>Stephen B. Oates, Let the Trumpet Sound : A Life of Martin Luther King (Edinburgh, 1998) p20 </fnote>A more detailed social representation of the United States during King's unbringing has been noted above, but by far the more outstanding feature of society to receive King's focus and devotion was that of social and especially racial injustice. During summer breaks from Morehouse, King became all the more aware of the abundant existence of racism. However, an important stage in his young life came when he served on an interracial group and, with a more apologetic, understanding, and cooperative attitude than was normal for a black man, decided to blame racism on the system. King believed that white supremacist attitudes were a product of environment and history, and this attitude helped to shape King's developing non-violent attitude. Another factor regarding his non-violent approach stemmed from the readings and role-model status King gave to men whom he understood and believed answered many of his questions as an academic. To a certain extent, Fidel Castro similarly reserved a certain amount of adoration for revolutionary role-model José Martí. Martí may well have affected the course of Fidel's life, as their political outlook and resultant action mirror each others to a great extent. Biographical writers tend to be positively biased in there outlook, especially toward their subject. Peter J. Ling even elates to this fact in the introductory section to his biography "Martin Luther King, Jr," as he attempts to write a more critical view than contemporaries such as Stephen Oates. However, these two agree categorically along one theme; oratory. Oates' biography itself is much more explicit than Lings' as it attempts to paint a far more positive portrait of King, but examples of King's oratorical abilities can not escape the attentions of either of these authors or indeed anyone formulating a serious discussion regarding the civil rights campaigner. Similarly, Tad Szulc dedicates a section of the opening paragraph of his book "Fidel: A Critical Portrait" to the oratorical talents of the Cuban Revolutionary leader. Despite King and Castro's vastly different racial, ideological and social environments, perhaps the greatest, and most similar trait they possess, is the ability to speak to and captivate and audience. Given the nature of their respective careers, this fact is hardly surprising. Marxist writer C.L.R. James was quoted as saying "Fidel Castro is [as] a speaker.....one in a hundred years." A chosen career as a revolutionary leader meant that the ability to address a nation confidently and convincingly was always a necessity. Once Fidel had assumed power, revolutionary change would sweep the country. The socialist ideology adopted in 1961 would necessitate vast social and economic change. In order to convince urban workers to move to rural regions when the economy elicited a need for social mobilization, and yet convince them on moral and not material grounds, would require outstanding levels of charisma, a charisma obtained by fully captivating an audience through inspiring and engaging oratory. The very same levels of charisma would be required when informing a depleted, tired workforce that they would have to ration to an even greater extent, because a revolutionary economy, such as this, was bound to experience a time lag before the increased investments and use of labour began to reap belated rewards. Szulc writes that 'Castro is fascinated by the art of public speech......creating his own fiery yet chatty style. It is unlikely that there is another communist ruler in the world....who delights in dissecting classical oratory, or is capable of it.'  <fnote>Leonard Tim Hector, CLR James and the 21st Century, (1999)  URL  </fnote><fnote>Tad Szulc, Fidel Castro: A Critical Portrait, (US & GB, 1989) p27 </fnote>Martin Luther King's close friend throughout his civil rights career, Bayard Rustin, helped tutor King in Gandhian non-violence from the outset of 1956, and this valued teaching, in combination with Kings' own learned knowledge, served to further King's belief that only non-violent action could benefit the civil rights cause. Attaining the support of not just wiling blacks, but moderate whites, during direct-action campaigns in the South, would prove difficult enough, but King would have to convince every single man and woman taking part that they must remain non-violent. Attitudes towards violence will be discussed below, but needless to say, it would take a skilled orator to persuade those passionate men and women that such action would prove beneficial. By the end of 1961, King's arrival in Albany to preach a sermon to a black congregation in Albany was so well anticipated, that every one of the 1500 men and women that had crammed into two churches to see him sung in unison, 'Martin King says FREE-DOM.' King began by first calming his audience, before explaining how 'non-violence applied Christian ethics to global politics...... King [then] quickened his pace to ready them for battle. "They can put you in a dungeon", he enthused, "and transform you to glory."' In one speech, received by 1500 willing but inexperienced demonstrators, King had made the congregation understand non-violence and had even convinced them that going to jail would prove their ability to endure. One of black Albany's leaders, William Anderson then pledged, 'with tears in his eyes' that the movement would keep moving and that King should lead them on a march. <fnote>Peter J. Ling, Martin Luther King Jr. (GB, 2002) p90 </fnote><fnote>Peter J. Ling, Martin Luther King Jr. (GB, 2002) p91 </fnote>The capacity to convince, through balanced, emotive oration marked Martin Luther King as a leader of the people. King and Castro both show, through their oratorical talents, an ability to appeal to people's moral judgement, or as this was known by the fidelistas; conciencia. Audiences almost want to go to jail for King, or work as trabajo voluntario for Castro. As the medium of television became increasingly popular, especially within the affluent society of America, both men were able to use it to their advantage. King had no trouble addressing large audiences through television any more than he had when simply speaking to a large crowd, it served as a useful ally to him, allowing him to make the entire country aware of social and racial injustices. For Castro, television was vital. Szulc states that 'the selling of the revolution to Cubans might not have succeeded without the medium of television. From the first day, in fact, Castro has governed through television..... [It] was vital in carrying the face, the voice and the message ...to Cubans in their homes." Castro, as líder máximo, was able to control television to suit his own needs. In trying to effect social change from below, King had to create tension by ensuring television cameras caught acts of white brutality and in this respect, he prevailed, to the detriment of white sheriffs and mayors alike. King also wrote books and his famous 'Letter from Birmingham Jail,' sold many copies, using the media in this respect to inform the public about his civil rights aims in relation to racial injustices within the country. <fnote>Tad Szulc, Fidel Castro: A Critical Portrait, (US & GB, 1989) p26 </fnote>This discussion is not designed as a comparative account of the careers of the two personalities. However, brief mention of the relationships they shared with United States political organisations and administrations may aid a character based discussion. Castro never planned in any strict detail the ideological direction with which he would direct his revolution once it had obtained power. Following the Martí mentality however, Castro was determined to destroy the United States economic stronghold over Cuba, although his actions were unclear at first, as he travelled to America and met with Vice-President Richard Nixon in 1959. Ultimately, Castro would claim two years later that his revolution was a socialist one and that he was a Marxist-Leninist, although many historians argue that he was never a strict Communist. Castro's ideological belief would in turn shape his character, an anti-imperialist character, a character destined to wreak havoc on US business interests. Anti-communist hysteria reached its height in the 1950s as Senator Joe McCarthy, 'stirred suspicions and internal controversy to a point seldom if ever experienced before." The CIA would formulate plots to kill Castro, all of which failed and would only serve to strengthen his own personal determination to eliminate all political and economic ties with 'the colossus of the North.' <fnote>Lowry Nelson, Cuba, The Measure of a Revolution, (GB, 1972) p20 </fnote>Martin Luther King would find his very integrity under threat by America's internal investigative agency, the FBI. FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover had stated that King was "the most notorious liar in America" as he personally embarked on a smear campaign to tarnish King's reputation. King was used to handling the pressures of opposition, regularly facing southern supremacists who threatened him and his movements throughout his career, but accepting such action from Hoover was a different matter. Hoover even sent a tape to King which included recorded noises of sexual activity, apparently involving Martin and another woman who was not his wife. King found this personal attack deeply depressing, and yet his own character flaws may have made Hoover's job easier. More than one of King's close friends had been associated with Communism, although King defended that both he had his friends were not linked in any way to the American Communist Party. King's friends were also aware that Martin had close lady friends. Nevertheless, Hoover's action failed to end King's public career. Both Castro and King's lives would be affected because of American communist paranoia, but Castro had the power to turn his back on such action, seeking allegiance elsewhere. King did not have the kind of power required to repudiate attacks to his character, but his ability to fight on alludes to what a strong personality he was. 'Promoting armed revolution elsewhere in the hemisphere,' Fidel Castro most certainly did not shy away from violence. Part of his revolutionary ideology after 1959 included the promotion of guerrilla warfare by other Latin American Communist revolutionary groups. Martin Luther King, on the other hand, believed that his movement would only gain serious political recognition and popular support, if he advocated a non-violent stance at all times during his career. <fnote>Edward Gonzalez, Cuba under Castro, (US, 1974) p13 </fnote>Directly following his revolutionary victory in 1959, Fidel Castro 'set forth the ideas which were to form the ideology of his revolution, such as the necessity of guerrilla warfare." Whilst Historians have pointed out that the Guerrilla victory may owe more to the low level professionalism of the Batista army than the Rebel Army's victories in the mountains of the Sierra Maestra, Castro believed that his Guerrilla force had delivered the Cuban people from the tyranny of the Batista dictatorship. Throughout our period of discussion, and even beyond, Castro would use such Guerrilla warfare as official revolutionary doctrine, using such political theory when attempting to reform the island's economy. <fnote>M. Michael Kline, Castro's challenge to Latin American Communism, Eds. Jamie Suchlicki, Cuba, Castro and Revolution (US, 1972) p192 </fnote>Martin Luther King's career as charismatic leader would begin in Montgomery in 1956. Advocating an antithesis to the violent nature of Castro's political theory, King preached non-violent, passive resistance using 'the weapon of love,' 'taking the Christian principle of turning the other cheek out of the pulpit, and onto the street." Vast interpretations concerning the complexity of King's non-violent ideological perspectives have been formulated which go far beyond the scope of this discussion. However, it is possible to pick out recurring themes from one recent example, Greg Moses' 1997 publication, 'Revolution of Conscience,' in which the importance of King's theological studies and the structural and historical make-up of racism play a prevalent role. Moses indicates that the concept of racism 'indicates a collection of habits,' habits that apply to relationships within groups, and historically between generations, 'without blaming any particular white person...'  <fnote>BBC Series "Reputations," Martin Luther King: Days of Hope (1997) </fnote><fnote>Greg Moses, Revolution of Conscience: Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Philosophy of Non-Violence, (New York, 1997) p46 </fnote>As with all previous themes discussed comparatively, the contextual differences account for many of the contrasting points of viewed previously noted in the comparison of Castro and King, the latest topic 'level of control' proving no exception. Yet this topic, more than any other, aims at highlighting the Castro and King personalities. Discussing the role they played within their relative organisations would only strengthen a contextual comparison. The aim here therefore is to review Castro and King's own desire toward the maintenance of their individual personal control. Edward Gonzalez, in the introduction to his book, 'Cuba under Castro' proposes that despite Castro's apparent determination to ensure Cuba's break from the past, his style of leadership proves to be one of the great ironies of the revolution. Gonzalez writes that Castro is 'the dominating caudillo, the commanding personality, the national patrón in a society that has seen the likes of Machado and Batista..... [And that] Cuba has thus not entirely escaped her past in the fidelista quest for radical change." This idea of dominating personal rule is expanded in Paul C. Sondrol's thesis 'Totalitarian and Authoritarian Dictators: A Comparison of Fidel Castro and Alfredo Stroessner.' Sondrol states that 'Castro is quintessentially totalitarian in his charismatic appeal, utopian functional role and, public transformative utilisation of power....as the subject analysis of Castro illustrates the totalitarian functions to unify and personify the movement. The leaders indispensibility emanates from his uni-personal command and assuption of blanket responsibilty." By reading various sources dedicated to the understanding of Fidel's personal control, it is possible to formulate theories which look at why he took upon great personal responsibility and control. Condemning bourgeois democracy after taking power because of its corrupt, damaging effect upon the island over the last sixty years, Fidel believed that only by eliminating challenge to his authority, would it be possible to transform Cuba along a path of Socialist-Communist development. Castro became well aware of his popular appeal after 1959, indeed he knew it was essential in order to mobilize popular support behind the revolution. Intent on maintaining revolutionary power, Castro knew that his dominance over the revolutionary family was necessary. The failed 1933 revolutionaries had lacked a charismatic personal leader and had subsequently failed to hold any power. Castro proudly took on responsibility as líder máximo, in contrast to Martin Luther King, a somewhat more reluctant but no less charismatic leader. <fnote>Edward Gonzalez, Cuba under Castro, (US, 1974) p11 </fnote><fnote>Totalitarian and Authoritarian Dictators: A Comparison of Fidel Castro and Alfredo Stroessner, by Paul C. Sondrol, Journal of Latin Amrican Studies, 1991 </fnote>Whether or not Martin Luther King was 'the' leader of the civil rights movement is a matter of opinion, an unanswerable question in all respects. King himself maintained that he had no aspirations for power, no desire to tell every black man and woman in the country that they must follow his course. Unlike Castro, King had planned on a quiet life with his wife, as a Baptist preacher with no intention of becoming involved in movements and campaigns. However, King had his religion and his God, and once involved in the movement, he strove to fight on because God had told him to do so. An air of reluctance first became apparent on King's part when he initially refused to Chair the MIA and organise the Montgomery Bus Boycott. His friend Harry Belafonte recalled to the BBC's "Reputations" that King, "was trapped from the very beginning and it was just never to ever let him go." After his initial Montgomery reluctance, King knew that he was in this movement for the long run and took on a more positive approach. <fnote>BBC Series "Reputations," Martin Luther King: Days of Hope (1997) </fnote>As a generator of mass loyalty, King shared common ground with Castro. Just as Castro made constant inspection tours and listened to the criticisms of the rank and file of the public, King flew thousands of miles during his career, listening to black community leader's stress their desire for King to stage a movement in their town. He also spent selfless amounts of time attaining funds for direct-action campaigns and prison bonds, proving his dedication time and again, as he was sent to jail to aid and publicise the movement. However, 'there was another King unknown to the public, a King uncomfortable with accolades and glory, torn by an inner struggle between his public image and private life, a man who felt himself unworthy of the role of which history had cast him." King fought to avoid the emergence of black power movements, especially within his own campaigns, just as Castro's personal approach 'helped to dissipate mass-elite tensions.' King would evidently die believing he has not achieved enough, but his apparent dedication, despite FBI surveillance, death threats, unlimited racial abuse and his own 'inner struggle' guaranteed he would die a martyr. <fnote>BBC Series "Reputations," Martin Luther King: Days of Hope (1997) </fnote>Given the different geographical, political and social contexts present within the comparison, themes for a comparative study were difficult to come by. Constructing the section which details the younger lives of Castro and King, made it possible to view comparatively similar and yet diverging paths of characterisation, as King used his developing oratorical gifts practically in competitions and sermons, whereas Castro developed his through rebellious action. These diverging paths would move further apart throughout the addressed period of discussion, Castro's developing revolutionary attitude helping him resist United States pressures perhaps more successfully than King was able to. The most explicit contrast between Castro and King, concerning their attitude toward violence, can be linked more with this early divergence in characterisation than any other theme. Emerging Black Power movements in America, emphasising a militant attitude that had more in common with Castro than King, prove that non-violence was not strictly a product of King's environment, but more, a product of his own ideology, an ideology that had developed through King's theological background and shared no common ground with Castro. In essence, there exists a modicum of similarity between Castro and King; they are both extraordinarily charismatic personalities. A small section of Sociologist Max Weber's classic 'Charisma' formulation begins this discussion and perhaps it allows for an appropriate ending as well, for despite their differences in ideology, both show a great inner-determination, and both have a great charismatic claim. Castro felt it was his place to free the Cuban people from former corruption, just as King aimed to bring social justice to a long suffering people. However, perhaps, almost equally, their charismatic claim falls just short. Ling assesses that, by 1968, 'King himself could not meet the unrealistic and contradictory expectations of race leadership." In 1970, Castro's efforts to achieve a ten million ton sugar harvest had failed, and Fidel 'no longer had sufficient power and leverage to limit soviet penetration in Cuba." 'The Limits of Charisma' provide a fitting final analysis, as they allude to what perhaps existed as the greatest similarity between Fidel Castro and Martin Luther King, Jr. <fnote>Peter J. Ling, Martin Luther King Jr. (GB, 2002) p301 </fnote><fnote>Edward Gonzalez, Cuba under Castro, (US, 1974) p215 </fnote>