Rumour of gold on the far western frontier may not have aroused great interest along the North-Eastern seaboard of the United States during 1848, following James Wilson Marshall's discovery of the precious metal in January of that year. As rumour became fact by September of 1848 however, Northern interest swelled; the hope of a fresh start and a guaranteed fortune caught the imagination of many Easterners, sparking a trans-continental migration over the next ten years that we know as 'The California Gold Rush.' Travel to the far west was anything but trans-continental however, and this essay focuses on the travels of those who took to the sea, sailing around Cape Horn or crossing the Isthmus of Panama, years before the building of the Panama Canal. Focus is also placed on the journey undertaken by those choosing to make the trip by land, from the mid-western St. Louis region, toward California. This discussion also notes Brian Roberts' theories on the yearnings of a rising middle class culture which historians can understand through analysis of the diaries of sea-faring Argonauts who were faced with relentlessly repetitive days out in the open sea. The journey, no matter what the route taken, was hazardous, the terrain and at times climate unforgiving, but as Andrew Rolle declares, the typical American gold seeker, ambitious and curious, was not however, easily swayed from his purpose. Such a desire and determination would certainly prove necessary. <fnote>Andrew Rolle, California, A History, (US 4th ed. 1987) p167 </fnote>With the exception of those living in the Western territory of Oregon and the Hawaiian islands, no Americans reached California during 1848. The President confirmed Gold rumours as fact on 5 th December of that year, catalysing the greatest migration the young Republic had seen by that date. Those first to arrive had travelled via this Isthmus of Panama, reaching San Francisco on 28 th February 1849. Such was the volume of travellers toward California in 1849 that historians now refer to those making the trip as 49ers. Such was the tirade of migrants from the Eastern states that Rodman W. Paul terms it 'the stampede of 1849 and the subsequent years." As Malcolm Rohrbough terms it, 'Marshall's Gold discoveries launched a thousand ships and hitched a thousand prairie schooners." By 1850, census administrators at San Francisco Bay estimated that 40,000 emigrants had travelled to the region, most of them being North easterners. Traveller variety showed great diversity, as the working class mixed with the wealthy, those from Northern states mixing with those from the South. The relationships between this latter group will be assessed shortly, highlighting just how polarised the two regions had become in the years just before the civil war. Before any talk of travel, it is important to briefly note why exactly people chose to leave the Northern states of America. Many were tired with the growth in urban life since the revolution; the demand for labour, strict timekeeping, intemperance and other such facets of an ever-growing city centralised society. Those in rural regions, who failed to maintain their farms, may have seen a new life in the West as a better alternative to urban society. Since independence, the building of a new nation rested on the idea of wealth for all. Gold represented just that for many. The mid-century responsibilities that had been woven into Northern society concerning family obligations were also largely ignored as the chance to make a quick fortune was seen as favourable. <fnote>Rodman W. Paul, California Gold, (US, 1947) p23 </fnote><fnote>Malcolm Rohrbough essay No Boy's Play in Kevin Starr and Richard J. Orsi eds. Rooted in Barbarous Soil, (US, 2000) p25 </fnote>For those who chose to travel via the Isthmus of Panama, a journey which would take between 30 to 90 days, the wonders of the region gave them new experiences, showed them things the likes of which they had never seen before. Even though this route was seen as quicker than the alternative venture around Cape Horn, if there were a shortage of vessels on the Pacific coast, as there often were in 1849, then a stay in Panama would be prolonged. Most of the ships that left for San Francisco in that year were worm-rotten with awful living spaces and food supplies. Whilst crossing the Isthmus, disease dogged many travellers, as cholera, dysentery and yellow fever struck within the immensely unsanitary conditions. The region both intrigued and appalled the American migrants. Many viewed the natives as lazy, but also disrespectful toward the Sabbath. The recent evangelical revivals during the first half of the nineteenth century can partly assist explanation of such opinion, as the natives gambled exuberantly on Sunday's. Viewing the Fandango, 49er J. E .Clayton commented, 'they...have no sense of shame about them." Such views indicate the conservative nature of the Americans during this period, most of whom would not have come into any contact with diverse cultures before. Many journeymen also saw the natives of the region as heathens having had no prior knowledge of Catholicism, although many viewed the Catholic buildings with awe. The journey across the isthmus involved canoe trips and mule rides through rich forests diverse in animal and plant life. Despite the beautiful nature on show, arrival in San Francisco Bay often brought great relief to the migrants. This highlights both the tedium of the journey, and their discomfort in the presence of foreign cultures. <fnote>Malcolm J. Rohrbough, Days of Gold, ( US, 1997) p59 </fnote>The journey around Cape Horn, for those who chose to undertake it, (approximately two thirds of sea-going emigrants) was far longer and more laborious than the other sea-faring option, but that did not mean it was far safer. Passengers tried to amuse themselves with games on board, whilst cockfighting and bullfighting was common when ships anchored. The straight of Magellan proved hazardous with strong currents and dense fogs, which only served to prolong the journey. Life on board ship, whether around Cape Horn or across the Isthmus of Panama proved tense at times, as the class and regional diversity of the passengers on board most ships highlighted growing social and cultural gaps within American society. Travellers had left there families in many circumstances, and as individuals, were in a position to observe other cultures from within their own country. The aforementioned discomfort felt by many travellers toward foreign peoples can actually be compared with their feeling toward persons from their own country. With, as traveller Layette Fish wrote, 'nearly if not all states represented,' many passengers accounts of their journey are focussed on the animosity they felt toward their fellow shipmates. This is not to suggest that every ship saw segregation become the mainstay of life on board. Historians have collected accounts though of such animosity, most of it written by Northerners commenting on their Southern neighbours. <fnote>Malcolm J. Rohrbough, Days of Gold, ( US, 1997) p56 </fnote>Many northern passengers commented that Southern men often swore and gambled, in copious amounts. Many northerners felt a sense of superiority toward their Southern counterparts, which among other things may have grown from the post-independence polarisation of Northern and Southern cultures. Northerners may have modelled their opinions on Northern industrial advancement in comparison to Southern slavery and plantation economy. At this time of course, slavery was a major political issue. As ships anchored to pick up men and supplies in the Southern states, many Northern travellers got their first glimpse of slavery, witnessing among other things, slave auctions. Seeing slavery in action may well have affected how Northerners viewed Southerners onboard for the remainder of the trip. A Bostonian, Rinaldo Taylor, saw slavery for the first time and had a very negative view of it. Class also proved an issue onboard. Many people travelled in companies, yet even within these companies, certain individuals could afford greater living spaces and food. These people were happy to, as Rohrbough writes, 'maintain social and economic distinctions between themselves and others of that company." This onboard class consciousness may represent a microcosm of a growing class culture within urban American life. Brian Roberts agrees that tensions onboard ships were rife, yet not universal. Men would bond together when in sight of a potential enemy vessel, to pit ship against ship or to relax and tell jokes. In certain situations where it became necessary, men from all walks of American life found something in common to maintain a harmony. <fnote>Malcolm Rohrbough essay No Boy's Play in Kevin Starr and Richard J. Orsi eds. Rooted in Barbarous Soil, (US, 2000) p33 </fnote>The evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century had led to a re-thinking of moral values and standards within the United States. Avoiding the waters of temptation made up an essential part of how the good man should behave, yet for many, the temptation of Gold in the West represented to great a temptation to avoid. Many Ministers denounced those who wished to give in to such temptation. They did however, suggest two things: that they migrants would bring civilisation to California, and that they would keep diaries during their travels. It is in his reading of such diaries, that historian Brian Roberts has constituted a theory unlike that of other historians. Acknowledging as so many historians before him have, that most of the accounts are similar in their descriptions of repetitive events out at sea, Roberts focuses on the style of writing, the 'experiments with metaphor and identity,' claiming that within these works, it is possible to find the yearnings of a rising middle class. The migrants are in a unique position, travelling with many unknown persons, toward a place they are unsure of, toward a fortune they hope to find. Out on the open sea, the 49ers shuffled off the rigid coils of dry respectability, replacing it with yearnings for self-immersion. The passengers had so much time to themselves, that things they couldn't appreciate, or discuss in their lives back home became topics of great creativity, such as the arts. Roberts also writes of sea-sickness as 'a moment of transition...between former lives and new existences,' as men who had never experienced it before thought it represented their last days on earth. <fnote>Brian Roberts, American Alchemy, (US, 2000) p95 </fnote><fnote>Brian Roberts, American Alchemy, (US, 2000) p96 </fnote><fnote>Brian Roberts, American Alchemy, (US, 2000) p98 </fnote>Life travelling by land to California proved harder than and just as hazardous as travel by sea. The more favoured route, which was already marked out, took the Argonauts west from St. Louis through the Rocky Mountains, although some took a more southern route. 30,000 made this trip over land in 1849 alone, and all took on many responsibilities. Individuals were responsible for making sure their possessions could be carried west, and had to be able to guard against Indian attack. Men were forced to take on domestic duties usually the responsibility of women in family life. Those who undertook travel by land did so with a sense of pride, re-enacting the frontier movement west a century before across the Appalachians. Competition became an important part of life as a cross-country Argonaut, rivalries including those for water, grass and speed in reaching destination. These travellers were forced to live travel together as countrymen with the same goals, despite different regional backgrounds. Tensions were similar to those found at sea, as southerners saw northerners as reformist fanatics. Indeed, as Rorhbough notes, rivalries were not just North/South based. Men from Massachusetts for example tended to stick together, whilst other Northerners despised them. As noted, the terrain faced by these migrants would prove unforgiving at times, but in the case of Death Valley, the climate also played its part. If a travelling group ended up here, as in the case of Lewis Manly's in early 1849, there could be no escape. Lewis Manly himself had to leave his large and rather slow group in the valley to find provisions, as such a large following faced up against sweltering heats and aimless canyons. Supplies had quickly run out and oxen had had to be killed for food. For many who reached California, bitter disappointment followed. Due to the sheer volume of migrants, only those who arrived earliest made real gains. Mining was tiring and prices within California quickly soared to take advantage of the 'rush.' Many struck it rich, but quickly spent their findings. E. Gould Buffum writes of the harsh travel arrangements laid on for men such as him as well as noting the condition of men returning from the mines, 'whole launch-loads of miserable victims of fever and ague." Much of this disappointment therefore makes so much of what has been described seem pointless. Yet, it is so hard to describe it as a waste of time because of what it represented; new experiences for those Americans prepared to travel to the unknown, in the company of the unknown. Those who travelled shared something different to the rest of the nation, the chance to see other cultures and to interact with foreign surroundings. These experiences may not have always proved friendly and without dispute, but they were different from the normal daily life of, in the case of Northerners, urban culture and society, a chance for those who dared to find themselves within an unfamiliar and variable environment. <fnote>E.Gould Buffum, An account of six months in the California diggings, (GB, 1959: from original source) p33 </fnote>