Historian Michael A. Bernstein writes of the great depression that 'at no time from the moment FDR assumed office until...the outbreak of war did the depression recede from the forefront of national politics...like some chronic disease that, despite occasional remissions, would not go away. It mortally threatened not only the economy but the body politic." This chilling, devastating summary of 1930's America brutally illustrates the shear impact the great depression had on all aspects of national life, be they political, economic or social. <fnote>Michael A. Bernstein, Why the Great Depression was Great (essay), The Rise and Fall of the New Deal Order, Eds. Steve Fraser and Gary Gerstle P32-33 </fnote>This discussion aims to highlight just how hard life was during the period of the great depression. The hardships of various social groups will be assessed, and in particular those of African Americans and Farmers. To provide a more balanced discussion, this essay will look at the impact of some of the New Deal work and relief programs and how they may have helped alleviate the hardships faced by particular groups in society. Despite the devastation wrought by the great depression, a new era of American culture emerged, a culture forged by the struggles of the American people. It is necessary to ascertain to what extent a collective popular culture helped relieve some of the distresses of the 'hard times.' Many historians chose to write of the great depression in reference to events occurring following the Wall Street Crash of 1929. However, this discussion chooses to deal with the concept of social and economic hardships, and although the 1920's are often described as a period of economic prosperity, jobs were only easily available for those who worked in economically booming sectors. The impression that this was a decade of prosperity for all is far from accurate. Traditional staple industries and staple labour suffered a period of decline and before 1930; 16 million families were receiving less of an income than the minimum necessary to provide for the basics of life. Farmers overproduced due to more advanced techniques and suffered due to the falling costs, which left them with a income-production deficit ratio meaning they couldn't afford to pay back the money borrowed to purchase machinery, including tractors. Rural poverty became a characteristic of many remote areas, so much so that a separate section details the intense hardships faced by the farming community beginning in the 1920's. 'The Great Migration,' a mass movement of more than 6 million African Americans from the South to the North of The United States took place following the First World War. With a sense of cultural pride following their participation in the war, Black Americans felt optimistic about their chances of finding well-paid work in the Northern States. Many, however, experienced resentment and hostility and could only usually find low-paid unskilled work. African American hardships between this period and throughout the 1930's will also be covered separately. Other groups to suffer before the crash of 1929 included working-class women and Native Americans who found their land systematically stripped from their possession. It must be considered that for many, the period of depression began before the 1930's, and their woes were simply exacerbated by the depressed economy following the crash. For those who reeled in the delights of 1920's prosperity, the effects of the Wall Street Crash would hit them hard. Those who found life easy throughout the 1920's, would find disaster the following decade, as the reality of a less secure, affluent life without readily available sources of cash would a prove hard stone to bear. The Wall Street Crash of October 1929, a result of an over productive economy, a weak banking system, maldistribution of income and international economic problems, would prove a chaotic and ultimately devastating event, with repercussions felt all around the world. For those in American society who had yet to feel the hardships of unemployment, the decade that would follow would prove perilous. One case in point was that of the Ozment family. Robert Ozment's father, a well paid railway engineer, provided ample for his family, buying a house and investing in a family car during the 1920's. By 1933 the family was forced to live in the poorest section of town, losing all their valued possessions. This example mirrors countless others as the onset of the depression for previously prospering families was rapid and sharp. In 1995 historian Maldwyn A. Jones wrote, 'The Great Depression that began in the autumn of 1929 was the worst in American history......misery and want stalked the entire country." The hard times were especially hard for so many people psychologically, because of the contrast from what had gone before. <fnote>Maldwyn A. Jones (brief account), John Traynor, Modern US History P111 </fnote>Any account of depression era America should include basic facts and figures to highlight who exactly was forced to face the hardships of a greatly fractured economy. Unsurprisingly, such figures are not hard to come by. Due to overproduction, a decrease in demand, and the fact that thousands of industrial factories were forced out of business, urban families, who relied on a male breadwinner often found themselves with no source of income. By the autumn of 1931 unemployment had reached 8 million, and by 1933, approximately one quarter of the workforce of America was unemployed. As banks went out of business in their thousands, between 1929 and 1930, 9 million people lost their savings and a heavy decrease in the average weekly wage made this all the harder to bear, even for those who could find work. Rich owners of major industrial companies such as Henry Ford were forced to lay off huge numbers as demand for their product decreased substantially. General Electric's net income fell from $60.5m in 1930 to $14.7m in 1932 as 'No men wanted' signs swiftly appeared in shop and factory windows. Despite the one-sidedness of this account thus far however, Robert S. McElvaine contends that the 'hard times' may not have been as especially hard for certain members of society. 'Most of the rich remained quite comfortable...despite the myths of investors bodies piling knee-deep after they leaped from Wall Street windows...it was the desperate worker...who begged for a job." In 1929 the top 5% of the population had lived in extreme comfort, and while much of their 'paper money' may have vanished in the stock-market crash, their lives, in comparison to the majority of struggling Americans, can hardly be described as hard. <fnote>Robert S. McElvaine (brief account), John Traynor, Modern US History P12-113 </fnote>Hard times for rural America had begun well before the Wall Street Crash. Due to low domestic and international demand for basic crops, farm income was low, and remained low into the thirties. The farming industry failed to keep pace with urban manufacturers, especially since the growth of advertising. This great lack of rural income, far lower than the average required for farm families to live to an acceptable level, variably destroyed farmer purchasing power. Farmers and their families were forced to subsidize the living standards of everyone providing a nation's food supply at very low cost. Faced with industrial unemployment during the depression, mass mobilisation to urban centres was unadvisable, and established beliefs on the glory of the small farmer meant moving from rural regions was not an option for many. Farm families were forced to struggle, and hardships grew so bad in some regions that in the summer of 1932, militants organised the farm strike, venting anger at their continued woes. British biologist Julian Huxley witnessed first hand a powerful symbol of America's plight writing, 'much of the rural area was inhabited by peasant farmers who...had in their mountain isolation too often developed into poverty-stricken poor-whites.' <fnote>Julian Huxley, TVA Adventure in Planning P9-10 </fnote>In order to evaluate how hard life was for farmers in the thirties, it is necessary to evaluate the effects of Roosevelt's Agricultural Adjustment Act. Government payments would be made to farmers and in return farmers would reduce production in an aim to boost prices. This brought benefits to almost all commercial farmers and landowners taking part. However, poorer farmers lost out in this 'organised scarcity in action' as 'it forced sharecroppers of the land and worsened the plight of farm labourers....aided most generously the already large and prospering farmers...and too often reinforced class and racial injustice." African Americans, as a group, would find life especially hard in depression hit America. <fnote>Paul K. Conkin, The New Deal P42 </fnote>The study of African American hardships during the great depression has received great attention by historians, most notably in New Deal literature which stresses the unfortunate loss of farming land faced by rural blacks due to A.A.A. production cut- backs. William A. Sundstrom, in his article 'Last Hired, First Fired,' looks at the poor experiences of black urban workers during the era in question. Sundstrom first looks at the higher incidence of black unemployment, concluding through analysis of tabulated evidence, that indeed the white-black racial unemployment existed, in favour of whites, and that this gap increased after the start of the New Deal. Blacks were losing out, generally, due to poorer levels of education, experience, and skill. Other arguments exist that stress racist attitudes hardening during the depression. Either way, African Americans suffered greatly during the New Deal era. Sundstrum also cites New Deal policy as damaging to black America, especially the NRA 'Negro Removal Act' as 'the minimum wage codes appeared to encourage employers to replace black workers with white workers who, prior to the codes, would have been unwilling to accept the market clearing wage." Jim Powell, the author of 'FDR's Folly, How Roosevelt and His New Deal Prolonged the Great Depression' and an expert in the history of liberty, attacks New Deal legislation stating that the Wagner Act 1935, making labour union monopolies legal, discriminated against blacks as dominant unions were generally pro white. <fnote>William A. Sundstrom, Last Hired, First Fired, Journal of Economic History 1992 P422 </fnote>African Americans suffered great hardships at the hands of the great depression, but they were by no means alone. Historian F. L. Allen recalled the Hoovervilles, 'groups of makeshift shacks constructed out of packing-boxes, scrap iron, anything that could be picked up free in a diligent combing of the city dumps." These shacks were built to house families who had been evicted from their homes, families whose income had been completely cut off. Homeless people were forced to sleep in doorways and search for half-eaten food, just to stay alive, the plight of these people all the more terrible because almost nobody had been cushioned against the blow. The relief measures of the New Deal may not have helped everyone, but for some, the demoralising effects of such a hard life were abated to some extent by state intervention. <fnote>F. L. Allen (excerpt) John Major, The New Deal P35 </fnote>Public works programs from the first New Deal of 1933, providing short terms jobs for the unemployed, included the Civilian Conservation Corps and the Public Works Administration. Roosevelt himself claimed in 1934 that he now saw hopeful cheerful people as he toured the United States. Such public works programs lessened the hardships of many, but failed to reduce unemployment which stood at 11.3 million in 1934. The NRA, more treats for big business than relief for the poor, failed to address the difficulty of life faced by the millions left without jobs. Roosevelt's social security act, which included unemployment insurance, 'represented tangible, if limited benefits for the working class." Perhaps the most impressive New Deal relief system came in the form of the Works Progress Administration which gave work to 8.5 million people during its existence. Even this legislation however, could not provide jobs for millions who needed them, many facing the grim reality that even Roosevelt's abandonment of laissez-faire politics was simply not enough to relieve them of the hardships of a life without money, housing or future promise. <fnote>Paul K. Conkin, The New Deal P63 </fnote>For the masses, life during the 1930's was difficult. Many were forced to contend with unemployment and quality of life, in general, was poor. People did what they could to make their lives happy, a notion manifested in changes in American cultural behaviour during the great depression. Theatre flourished and movies became more popular, Hollywood churning out picture after picture to suit its audience's needs. Popular music, based on songs that that spoke of the hardships of the time, were extremely moral boosting and people flocked together to hear big bands. Inexpensive leisure pursuits like stamp collecting became popular, and the arts were dominated by depression era themes. Listening to the radio was by far the most popular pastime of the 1930's for most families, Roosevelt's fireside chats proving very influential as a means of forging, as were all other cultural activities, a collective American belief; a togetherness that would prove all important as Americans faced the harsh realities of a depressed economy and a devastated country. The difficulties of life during the Great Depression were both numerous, and, as previously mentioned, psychologically exhausting for those who suffered. A California report on unemployment found that loss of income through lack of jobs had ravaged the 'young, sturdy, ambitious labourers, artisans, mechanics, and professionals,' on whom the depression had 'broken the spirits of their members, undermined their health, robbed them of self-respect, [and] destroyed their efficiency." Such a report represents both the variation in the types of people facing hardship, and just how hard life was for them. Despite the impact of popular culture and the New Deal legislation, without both of which the hard times may have proved infinitely harder, those who suffered often suffered terribly. Husbands and wives separated, and children were forced to leave home as ever new methods of 'getting by' developed. Many fared well in the woodlands, or in other sites of public work relief programs, but for those who couldn't find relief, whose savings were depleted and whose food rations had to be reduced on a daily basis, who had lost faith in themselves and society, life was extraordinarily hard, as entire families fought misery and suffering they felt powerless to overcome. <fnote>Report and Recommendations of the California State Unemployment Commission 1932, P145-6 </fnote>