<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>In this report the Annual Financial Report of Renold PLC from the year 2004/2005 was analysed in order to determine if it provides a true and fair view of the company's performance. Also the reliability of the Annual Report has been considered in terms of past and future performance, in......... </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>In this report the past performance of the engineering company Renold PLC will be analysed through the use of financial techniques such as ratios and peer analysis. The Annual Financial Report will be analysed in order to determine if it provides a true and fair view of the company, taking into account the various accounting adjustments that have been made within it. At this point, using the previously explored information, it will therefore be possible to suggest to a shareholder in the company what they should do with their shares. The predicted future potential of the company will also be discussed, as suggested by the Annual Report, and other sources of information. Finally, the reliability of the report to a shareholder will be considered. <heading>Renold PLC Company Overview</heading><quote>"Renold plc is an international engineering group, producing a wide range of precision engineering products, operating in eighteen countries worldwide. The principal activities of the Group are the manufacture and sale of industrial chains and related power transmission products, automotive cam drive systems and specialist machine tools and rotors." Renold Annual Report 2005</quote><heading>Evaluation of plc's past performance from the perspective of an ordinary shareholder.</heading>In order to analyse Renold PLC's past performance, ten performance indicators have been chosen that best illustrate how the company has achieved in the past year, and have then been related to a shareholder's position. The performance indicators chosen are: <list>Profitability Ratios: ROSE (Return on Shareholder's Equity, ROCE (Return on Capital Employed)Liquidity Ratios: Current Assets Ratio, Acid Test RatioEfficiency Ratios: Fixed Asset Turnover, Trade Debtor Collection Period RatioInvestment Ratios: Dividend Yield, Dividend Cover, EPS (Earnings Per Share), Gearing</list>In the following financial ratios, either data from the Annual Financial Report or the FAME database have been used. In some of the cases these calculated values have been compared to ratios released by the FAME database. The purpose of this is to illustrate the variation that can occur in financial ratio calculation. This is due to the fact that different companies and countries use different variations of the same formulae, as a matter of preference or financial standards. <heading>ROSE</heading>ROSE, according to the Business Development Bank of Canada "measures the rate of return the shareholders receive on their investment".  URL  ROSE can be calculated by finding the ratio between Net profit (loss) after tax and Ordinary Shareholder's Funds. In the following graph there are two different lines, which is due to the fact that in 2004, Renold had to change the way it stated financial documents to include FRS17 regarding Pension Benefits. <figure/>This graph shows a fluctuation throughout the years between 2001 and 2005, with a recent dropping to - 8.56% in 2005. This negative value gives reason to the fact that no final dividends were paid in this financial year. However, it should be remembered that the Pension Deficit was added in this year due to FRS17, which would have influenced this result to a high extent. This graph would appear to be a bad sign for a shareholder due to the fact that it shows an undesirable return on an investment. <heading>ROCE</heading>According to Karen Bradbury from the module Finance and Accounting at the University of Warwick and Dyson, "Return on capital employed measures the relationship between the amount invested in the business and the returns generated for the investors." It would therefore be desirable to have a percentage ratio that is larger than that which you would get in a bank account, which has none of the risk associated with businesses. The following graph was obtained using the equation: ROCE = [Profit before interest and taxation]/[Fixed Assets + Current Assets - Current Liabilities] x 100% The first two lines represent data from FAME using end of year, and average values respectively. The third line uses ROCE values from FAME, which uses a slightly different formula. <figure/>The graph shows that values for ROCE fluctuate considerably in the period of 2001 until 2005. There is also a difference between the ratio from FAME and the calculated values, due to the different formulae that have been used. This indicates that it should be found out which formula has been used before analysing the results, before any false conclusions are made. This graph indicates to a shareholder that they are not getting as much return from their investment as they have in previous years. The value is on average just over 5% for the calculated values and negative for the FAME values. This could raise concern because this same percentage could be obtained in a savings account. <heading>Acid Test Ratio</heading>The Acid Test Ratio is calculated using the formula: [Current Assets - stocks] / Current Liabilities The purpose of the ratio is to see "what would happen to the current ratio if stocks were not included in the definition of current assets" (Dyson p 257), due to the fact that stocks cannot easily and quickly be turned into cash. Using data from the Profit and Loss Account in the Annual Report, the following graph can be obtained: <figure/>It can be seen that over the past 5 years, Renold's Acid Test Ratio has risen from 0.83 in 2001 to 1.02 in 2005. This is a good sign of improvement, due to the fact that the company will be able to fulfil any short-term commitments easily. However, it would not be desirable for this value to rise much higher, as it would indicate that the company's resources were not being used correctly. <heading>Current Assets Ratio</heading>A current asset ratio is the ratio between Current Assets and Current Liabilities. A good explanation of the values that this ratio should be is given by the Student 0306547, which is in turn referenced from  URL  <quote>"A firm needs enough assets to cover its liabilities, hence the result of the calculation should always be above 1. If the value is below 1 then the company is insolvent. A value of just over 1 means that they are struggling to meet their liabilities. A value between 1.5 and 2 is desirable. Whilst above 2 means the company is in a very safe position"</quote>Data taken form the FAME database yields the following graph; <figure/>This graph shows a fluctuating Current Assets ratio, from a minimum of 1.71 in 2001 to a maximum of 1.82 in 2004. Even though there seems to be a large drop from 2004 to 2005, it is still well within the range of data shown over the past five years, and is only a drop of around 0.1. The value for 2005 also takes into account pension liability, which would account for some of the drop. The value of 1.73 for Current Assets Ratio is within the desirable range of 1.5 to 2.0, meaning that it has "enough assets to cover its liabilities", without "too much money invested in assets." This would indicate to a shareholder that the company is in a fairly strong position at present. The current assets ratio of Renold can be compared to its major peer of Tsubakimoto Chain Group ( URL ) who produce power transmission chains, meaning that they are competing companies. Using the peer analysis option in FAME database, it can be seen that Tsubakimoto has a current assets ratio in 2005 of 1.13 compared to the value of 1.73 for Renold. This means that while Renold is able to cover its liabilities with relative ease, Tsubakimoto will be in a position where they will be struggling to meet the liabilities. Meaning that in terms of this ratio, Renold is in a stronger position than one of its competitors. <heading>Fixed Asset Turnover</heading>Fixed asset turnover is according to 'Winning Business' by Rich Gildersleeve (1999, Gulf Professional Publishing, p136) "how many times a company achieves, or turns over the book value of fixed assets in net sales". The value that is obtained does not mean much in isolation, however when compared to previous years it can be very useful. It can be seen, according to Dyson (p259) that "if the trend is upwards, then the investment in fixed assets is beginning to pay off." This is a good sign for Renold, as shown by the following graph, using data from FAME; <figure/>As can be seen, the graph shows an increasing trend, year-on-year, apart from 2001 to 2002 where there is a slight dip. This increasing trend would indicate to a shareholder that the business' fixed assets of the company are being used effectively, and are producing a good amount of turnover as a result. <heading>Trade Debtor Collection Period Ratio</heading>The Trade Debtor Collection Period Ratio is a ratio which indicates how long it is taking for debtors to pay. This is important to Renold, because if debtors are taking too long to pay, then cash flow may be affected. The following graph, using data from FAME database and the Annual Report shows the Trade Debtor Collection Period for Renold, using the formula: [[1/2*(opening trade debtors + closing trade debtors)]/Turnover] x 365 days <figure/>According to Dyson (p260), in the UK "the median debtor collection period is about 50 days". Whereas the time for Renold is fluctuating between 63 and 59 days, which is 2 weeks higher than that of an average company. This could represent that Renold is fairly weak at collecting its debts, which may mean that could run into trouble if the debts are not collected quickly enough. However, the high value could also mean that because of the industry in which Renold is operating, the time it takes to pay debts is longer. A shareholder should certainly be aware of this collection period, as an increase could be a bad sign. However, as it stands the time it takes to collect debt has decreased by 4 days in the past year, which could indicate a possible further decrease in the future. <heading>Dividend Yield</heading>According to Dyson (p261), "the dividend yield measures the rate of return that an investor gets by comparing the cost of his shares with the dividend receivable (or paid)". An investor would be interested in investing in a company that pays out a high amount of dividend per share, with a preferably increasing value. In the following graph the Dividend Yield has been calculated using the total dividends paid out during the year (taken from the Renold website), divided by the market share price (taken from FAME database.) Both the end and average values for years have been shown for comparative purposes. <figure/>The graph above shows that over the past 5 years the Dividend Yield has decreased drastically from a value of about 10 to a value of 2. This is a bad sign for a shareholder in the company, due to the fact that every year they will be getting less money from dividends. In fact, the Annual Report for Renold states that no final dividend would be paid to shareholders in the financial year 2004/2005. The reason for this would be because the company reported a loss due to increased raw material prices, and so they would want to put the money that would have been used to pay dividends back into the company, in order to strengthen it. <heading>Dividend Cover</heading>Dividend cover is described by Dyson (p261) as being "the number of times that the ordinary dividend could be paid out of current earnings." It therefore indicates how much profit will be left after the dividends have been paid. In the following graph the dividend cover has been calculated using data from both FAME and the Annual Report, in order to indicate any differences occurring due to the restating of 2004 figures that was done in order to make comparison to 2005 appropriate. The formula used to calculate dividend cover is as follows: Net profit after taxation and preference dividend / Paid and proposed ordinary dividends <figure/>It can therefore be seen that the dividend cover of Renold fluctuates to a high extent. In 2001, 2003 and 2004, the dividend cover is equal to, or higher than 1. Which is a fairly good, as the company has enough money to pay for its dividends. However, in 2002, and more recently 2005, the dividend cover has been negative, due to losses within the company. This can be considered as being a warning sign for potential shareholders, as in 2005 no final dividends were paid out. This means that shareholders would not have got a significant return on their investment. <heading>EPS</heading>In the words of Dyson (p261), "EPS enables a fair comparison to be made between one year's earnings and another by relating the earnings to something tangible, i.e. the number of shares in issue." There are three different forms of EPS: Basic, Diluted, and Adjusted. There is generally not much difference between these variations of EPS, however investopedia.com suggests that "Diluted EPS is a much more accurate reflection of a company's earnings" due to the fact that it takes "into account if all warrants, stock options, and convertible bonds were traded in for stock".  URL  The formula for Diluted EPS is as follows: [Net profit (including convertible preferred shares) after taxation and preference dividend] / [Weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period and all exercisable share options] The graph for this is as follows using data from the Five Year Summary and the FAME database. <figure/>As can be seen above, the Diluted EPS has fluctuated to a high extent between 2001 and 2005. Varying in value between 10.5 in 2001 to - 7.5 in 2005. From the point of view of a shareholder this graph can be seen as concerning. This is due to the fact that according to (pg 162, Key Management Ratios, Ciaran Walsh), shareholders should be looking to invest in a company that shows "steady, non-volatile, growth", of which Renold shows none. <heading>Gearing</heading>Gearing in this instance can be considered as being the ratio between debt and equity. Where debt is equal to long-term liabilities + short-term liabilities, and equity is equal to shareholder's funds. The data used to produce the following graph is from the FAME database. <figure/>The graph shows that the gearing for Renold has been steadily just above 100% from 2001 until 2004, but in 2005 increased dramatically to 335%. This increase is in some respect due to the introduction of FRS 17 which deducted a pension deficit of £41.3million from the shareholder's funds, thereby almost halving it. It is in some cases worthwhile to have an increased gearing because if the increased revenue produced using the increased loans is greater than the interest produced by the extra loans then it will be beneficial. However, this depends on the financial climate for the company. <heading>Assessment of reliability of the report </heading><heading>How reliable is the information in the annual report?</heading>The reliability of Annual Reports is extremely variable. As with many financial items, there are different variations of the same definition, and different ways of doing the same thing. Two things that could be taken into account in order to discuss the reliability of an Annual Report are the accounting adjustments that have been made within it, and also which financial accounting standards have been employed. Accounting adjustments and financial standards affect the reliability of the report because, according to Dyson, they "involve exercising a great deal of personal judgement. The decisions taken about how to treat them can have a significant effect on the profit or loss reported for a year."(p94) <heading>Accounting adjustments and their impacts on the reported profit</heading>Two examples of accounting adjustments that have been used in the Renold Annual Report are Goodwill and Depreciation. Goodwill, according to the Global Investor Glossary, is "The value of a business to a purchaser over and above its net asset value. It reflects the value of intangible assets like: reputation, brand name, good customer relations, high employee morale, and other factors which improve the company's business"  URL  This means that if you wanted to buy a company, then it would in many cases be bought for a lot more than its actual net asset value. Hence, this needs to be taken into account in the company accounts, because otherwise it would appear that a significant amount of money had just disappeared. Goodwill amortisation appears in the Profit and Loss Account of the Annual Report and is, like depreciation, subject to personal judgement, in the way it is applied, which therefore affects the profit of the company. In the case of Renold it is stated that goodwill is "amortised on a straight line basis over a period not exceeding 20 years", which is a principal that is employed in many companies. Depreciation is an accounting adjustment which ensures that "the cost of [a] benefit provided by fixed assets...be charged to those accounting periods that benefit from such an expenditure."(p97)Dyson Due to the fact that there are many different methods of depreciation that are commonly used, there can also be seen to be a high factor of personal judgement that goes into deciding which method to use. In the case of Renold, they have taken into account a depreciation in the Profit and Loss Account of £8.7m, which is included in the normal operating costs. This therefore has a direct effect on the profit/loss of the company. If a different type of depreciation had been used, then the profit/loss of the company could have been higher or lower, depending on what type of depreciation is chosen. It is commonplace that different companies use different types, making comparison between them misleading. It is stated in the 'Accounting Policies' section of the Annual Report that "Depreciation is calculated by reference to original cost at fixed percentages assuming effective useful lives". This is a common way of handling depreciation, but should be remembered when comparing Renold's performance to other companies. What evidence is there in the Annual Report that indicates that the financial accounting standards have been applied to produce a true and fair view? It is stated in the 'Report of the Independent Auditors' in the Annual Report that PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP believe that: <quote>"In our opinion: the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group at 31 March 2005 and of the loss and cash flows of the Group for the year ended."</quote>This provides some evidence that Renold have given a true and fair view of their company, because it shows that the auditors believe it to be reliable. However, we can also look at the financial accounting standards that have been applied in the report to support this view. In note 26 of the Annual Report it is stated that FRS17 "Retirement Benefits" has been fully adopted in this financial year. This would mean that it would be misleading to compare data from 2004/5 and 2003/4, due to that fact that different standards have been employed. However, the report does give a true and fair view in this instance, due to the fact that they have restated the data from 2003/4 to include FRS17. Thereby making comparison between the two financial years suitable. It is stated in note 25 that on 14th March 2005 Sachs Automotive France (SAS) was purchased, and set in the Annual Report as an acquisition. It is also said that "due to the proximity of the acquisition to the Group's year end, the fair value of the Group is assessed on a provisional basis."(note 25) This means that even though the figures given in the Annual Report for this acquisition may not be entirely correct, it has in fact been stated that this is the case. This can therefore, be considered as giving a true and fair view of the company in the way that this has been admitted. Although not entirely in the way that it could be possible that these figures are slightly wrong. In Dyson (p229) the main Financial Reporting Standards are stated as being FRS1, FRS3, and FRS18. FRS1, the Cash Flow Statement, has been implemented within the Annual Report, due to the fact there is a cash flow statement within it. FRS3, Reporting Financial Performance, has also been implemented. Exceptional items have been disclosed in the Profit and Loss Account, and there is a distinction "between continuing operations, acquisitions and discontinued operations." (Dyson p229) FRS18, Accounting Policies, has been implemented by issuing a section of 'Accounting Policies' within the Annual Report on pages 27 and 28. The implementation of these Financial Reporting Standards indicates that a true and fair view of the company is being given, because they are abiding by the same standards that other companies abide, and so accurate comparisons can be made. In conclusion, I therefore believe that educated adjustments and financial standards have been applied to produce a true and fair view of Renold' s current financial situation. Recommendation to an ordinary shareholder at the financial year-end With reference to the information given in the previous section regarding the position of Renold PLC, it can be advised that a shareholder should hold onto or sell their shares, rather than increasing any current investment. The reason for this is that from ten financial ratios shown there are almost an equal number of good and bad values with relation to what a shareholder and the company would desire. However, with relation to the more specific 'for shareholder' ratios, it seems that these tend to be giving negative feelings to the investment in Renold. This can be summarised as being that there have been no final dividends paid out in the financial year 2004/2005, the calculated ROCE is just over 5%, which a shareholder could obtain at a bank with less risk associated. Finally, EPS fluctuates to a high extent and thereby is not steady and does not show growth, which is what an investor should look for according to Ciaran Walsh in 'Key Management Ratios'. <heading>Assessment of the potential future performance of the Renold over the next financial year</heading>There are many statements within the Annual Report that indicate the predicted future performance of the company. They can be summarised as being on the matter of steel, the matter of currency, and the matter of the Far East. <heading>On the matter of steel</heading>It is mentioned in several places throughout the Annual Report about the company "experiencing an average year on year increase of some 40% in cost"(A) of steel and its effect on the company. It is has therefore been identified as a problem that could also affect future company prospects. However, it is a good sign that the problem of rising steel prices has been identified and discussed in the Annual Report. This is because the company will now strive to take special measures in order to reduce the effect that rising steel prices have. Already it has been stated that "prices to customers have been increased" (B), but these have "lagged behind the cost increases and did not enable the business to fully recover the raw material cost increases."(B) This means that more still has to be done in order to recover from the situation. However, on the matter of the future performance, it is also stated that there "appears to be a consensus that steel prices have plateaued"(B). This allows for good future prospects due to the fact that if the prediction is correct then material costs will not increase and so the current problem of costs will not increase to further extent. The view that steel prices have plateaued is supported by other sources such as by John Cross, AISC (The American Institute of Steel Construction) who states that he believes that a "plateau for structural steel will exist throughout 2005 with a variation of about $50 a ton" where a ton is at a current price of $600.  URL  A slightly different opinion is put across by John Anton, director of Global Insight Steel Service, who says, "Carbon Steel prices will continue to slowly drop from their peak above $700 a ton at the end of 2004. Prices will plateau in 2007-8 around $500 a ton."  URL  Obviously this is different from the view expressed in the Annual Report and by John Cross, due to the time scale that the plateau is predicted at. It also predicts that the steel price will plateau at a value which is significantly lower than its current value. The reason that these views on steel prices differ is because it is a subject of opinion. The main reason for rising steel prices is the increasing demand from China, and the problems of supply are being solved by various methods. However, it is unknown how well these methods will work out. This therefore gives the scope for variation in views. The view put across by the Operations Review in the Annual Report that steel prices will plateau seems to be an educated one, as does the opinion of John Anton. However, even though they differ as to when a steel price plateau will occur, and at which price, either case would be beneficial to Renold, indicating a better potential future performance. However, in the Renold Interim Report it is stated that there is still a significant "impact of continuing high raw material prices". Which, on the contrary shows that the costs of steel were still rising at the turn of the half-year. <heading>On the matter of currency</heading>The subject of currency is also mentioned within the Annual Report. This is related to material costs because "exchange rate movements have caused significant input cost increases"(C). This is explained quite thoroughly in the Chief Executive's Review: <quote>"The strength of the Euro has aggravated the problems faced by the chain businesses as the majority of production is European-based whereas the sales growth has come from Dollar-based economies." (C)</quote>However, in the Annual Report, the future prospects in terms of currency are seen to be good, due to the "recent weakening of the Euro against the Dollar" (A) This is backed up to a high extent by the following graph, using data from  URL . This graph shows the strengthening of the dollar that is mentioned in the Chairman's Statement. However, the significance of this undermined in the Financial Times article 'Market Insight: Will the Dollar's rally continue?' by Steve Johnson, because even though it is stated that the Dollar has enjoyed its strongest year against the Euro since 1999. It goes onto say that this is merely "a blip in the dollar's decline, with the downtrend seen during 2002-2004 likely to be resumed in 2006."  URL  The strengthening of the Dollar is also reiterated in the Renold Interim Results which state that the "recent strengthening of the US dollar against the Euro will, if maintained, provide benefit in the second half year." <heading>On the Far East</heading>It is stated within the Chief Executive's Review that it is "proposed to establish a wholly owned manufacturing facility in China...to support a number of the Company's product line"(C). Which "will not only provide cost reduction but, more importantly, will provide better access to markets and customers in the Far East." This indicates that future prospects for the company in this area of the world will be very good, due to a larger presence of the company (A)-Chairman's Statement (B)-Operations Review (C)-Chief Executive's Review <heading>Does the annual financial report provide any useful information about the</heading>future? It can be seen that the Annual Report does provide useful information about the future of the company, due to the fact that the information it gives is supported by outside sources to a high extent <heading>How will changes to International Accounting Standards affect the firm and its next annual report?</heading>In the next financial year, Renold will be required to "prepare its consolidated financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards ('IFRS')", due to changes to International Accounting Standards. This will affect the firm to a high extent in the next annual report. It is anticipated, according to the 'Update on IFRS' released by Renold, that the following will be the most significant changes, amongst others. * Under IFRS 1, there will be "a material increase in the value of property in the Group's balance sheet." Also "the basis on which freehold properties are depreciated will be revised from a reducing balance basis to a straight line basis which is considered to be a basis more in line with general practice." * Under IAS 19, there will be "classification changes in the balance sheet." * IFRS 3, standard goodwill will now be "carried at cost and subject to an annual impairment review". * Also, the group "made an acquisition that gave rise to negative goodwill" in March 2005 which has "been reassessed under IFRS but there will remain a significant level of goodwill." It can therefore be seen that some of the changes after adopting IFRS will be fairly large, but shouldn't have too much influence on the overall accounts. <heading>How reliable is this report to an ordinary shareholder as an indicator of both past and future performance?</heading>It can be concluded that the Annual Report is very reliable to an ordinary shareholder due to the fact that it applies relevant financial standards and practices in the creation of the document. Also, the report seems to be fairly truthful in its outlook for the future position of the company, although it can be seen in hindsight that some of its predictions such as the plateauing of steel prices were educated, but slightly wishful. 