<abstract><heading>Executive Summary</heading>In the financial year ending 31 st March 2005 Renold PLC suffered losses due to escalating costs and acquisitions. It is a lot of bad news in one year for the company and the short-term will be a challenging period. However the PLC's long-term future has potential due to acquisitions and growth. Share prices have risen from the start of the financial year and will continue to rise as the company retains profitability and utilises its recent developments. However prospects are very much dependant on raw material and energy cost returning to a reasonable level. For these reason shareholders have been advised to hold their shares. It has been concluded that; The 2005 Annual Report gives a 'true and fair' view. The 2005 Annual Report is a fair indicator of the past and future financial performance. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>The following report contains the following information; Detailed analysis of Renold PLC's Annual Report for the financial year ending 31 st March 2005 using ten performance indicators. An assessment of the reliability of the report, stating accounting adjustments. Evidence of how the report gives a true and fair view. Recommendations to an ordinary shareholder at the end of this financial year. Analysis of the potential financial future of the company, and evidence of how the Annual Report indicated this future performance. Data and information was obtained from the 2005 Annual Report, Fame database, financial journals and the World Wide Web. <heading>Performance of Renold PLC for the financial year ending 31 March 2005</heading>In order to evaluate the past performance of Renold PLC the following performance indicators will be used; <list>Price / earning ratio (PE ratio)Return on shareholders funds (ROSF)Current ratioGearing ratioEarnings per share (EPS)Dividends yieldTurnoverInterest coverTrade debtorFixed asset turnover</list>Factors that may influence performance; Steel price increase: The company relies heavily on steel as a raw material, and the 40% increase in cost will greatly impair the PLC's performance.1 Increasing development in china: Further contracts have been one and there is an increase in the number of local employees. Profit has doubled in comparison to 2004.1 Targeting tightly focused business with lower cost base and reduced level of borrowing: Outsourcing production to lower cost economies and the Burton Site rationalisation.1 Creation of a UK service centre.1 Acquisition of Sachs Automotive France SAS: Provides a platform for the European aftermarket business together with assets and technology.1 Weakness of the US Dollar.1 Slowing volumes in the automotive business.1 Goodwill impairment charge: Jones & Shipman acquisition.1 <heading>1. Price / earning ratio (PE ratio)</heading><figure/>The huge fall in PE ratio over the last two years will certainly worry shareholders. <quote>"The P/E is sometimes referred to as the multiple, because it shows how much investors are willing to pay per dollar of earnings. If a company were currently trading at a multiple (P/E) of 20, an investor would be paying $20 for $1 of earnings (current or forward"11. </quote>The 2005 value of ~-7.00 can be considered as 0 as the negative value is due to the negative earnings per share. The low and negative PE ratios show that the company does not have particularly good growth prospects. However this could be an undervalued stock. It is known that there is increasing development in China, and recent acquisitions, hence an increasing growth in the long term. It is hard however to be optimistic about the short-term. <heading>2. Return on shareholders fund (ROSF)</heading><figure/>This shows how profitable the entity has been as a whole2. This years profit was negative hence a negative return on shareholders funds. This however can be attributed to the rationalisation, and also the acquisitions which give a hopefully optimistic future. The increase in steel price and also the weakness in the dollar would also have a large impact. Also Companies tend to release a lot of bad news in just one year, allowing a higher profit margin the following year. This could be the case with Renold. As R. C. Higgins [1984 p.35] suggests that ROSF "...should never be used mechanistically to suggest that a higher ROE is always better than a lower one". <heading>3. Current Ratio</heading><figure/>The current ratio has remained between 1.5 and 2 for the last five years, showing that the company has remained in a 'desirable' financial position and an efficient operating cycle. The lower value for 2005 demonstrates that the companies assests are tied up in growth. For this reason the lower value is desireable to shareholders. <heading>4. Gearing Ratio</heading><figure/>In 2005 the shareholders funds were almost half the funds in the previous years. This was one of the factors causing the increase in the gearing ratio. This decrease was caused by the pension deficit deduction, however this does not account for the big increase in liabilities. Having more liabilities than shareholder equity is not favorable from a shareholders perspective; the higher liabilities show that the company is relying heavily on debt financing. <heading>Peer Comparison of Gearing</heading><figure/>From the chart it can be seen that the gearing ratio for Renold at 230.35 is in fact very close to the median value (shown far left on chart). Many of Renolds peers have large gearing ratios, with Stirling Ltd at 521.39 in the worst position. Renolds peers are likely to be in a similar position to Renold over current affairs, hence relying on debt financing. It could of course always mean the companies are in the process of expanding, or undergoing some major change. The companies with a very low gearing are likely to have low growth prospects. <heading>5. Earnings per share (EPS)</heading><figure/>The EPS indicates the profitability of the company. The negative values indicate the fact the PLC made a loss. Shares have remained stable throughout, with a slight drop between 2004 and 2005. <heading>6. Dividends Yield</heading><figure/>From a shareholders perspective prospects are not good. The dividend yield is falling each year, and the investment gaining less and less money. This decrease will reduce the number of investors; hence drive the share price down. However the dividend yield is also related to the markets perception of future growth prospect for the firm. The lower dividend yields could signify the company is looking to invest more money in growth, i.e. increased development in china. The previously large dividend yields were the company's way of declaring itself as successful to the market. <heading>7. Turnover</heading><figure/>The turnover has been rising consistently for the past few years. This shows the company is growing, and gaining more custom. This is a promising sign and will encourage shareholders. This increase for the last year is probably due to increasing prices to counteract the increasing steel price. <heading>8. Interest Cover</heading><figure/>The negative interest cover ratio in 2005 is likely to be due to heavy borrowing to fund the increased development in china, restructuring and acquisitions. In previous years the interest cover has been high, ~3.5 in 2004, showing the company to be in a sound financial position. This was probably the reason for the numerous investments that took place, however the PLC did not predict the decline in markets and currency, and increase in costs. The value in 2005 of below 1 demonstrates that interest cover is insufficient to cope with outgoing financial expenses, which will worry shareholders. <heading>9. Trade Debtor</heading><figure/>The trade debtor collection for the PLC over the past 5 years averages a high value considering the UK average is ~50 days. This shows that Renold have an insufficient debt collection procedure. However the PLC is likely to do a lot of business on credit and so this high collection period is deemed acceptable with the UK average for credit payments being ~70 days. The drop in collection time in 2005 is a good sign and will encourage shareholders as it shows the company is becoming more efficient. However this decrease could also be to do with the financial problems the company encountered this year. The PLC could have increased the urgency of their debt collection procedure in order to cope with their own debts. <heading>10. Fixed Asset Turnover</heading><figure/>Fixed asset turnover has been increasing steadily throughout the past 5 years. This is a good sign for shareholders as a higher ratio shows the company has less money tied up in fixed assets for each £ of sales revenue. It also demonstrates that the assets are being used effectively to generate optimum turnover. <heading>Reliability of Report</heading><heading>Accounting Adjustments</heading>"The Group has adopted FRS 17 retirement benefits into these accounts". Broadly speaking FRS 17 requires the assets and liabilities of the pension scheme to be valued by reference to current market conditions. This made it necessary to restate certain comparative information. A summary of revisions due to this policy can be seen on P51 of the Annual Report. An important point to take note of is that the loss for the year would have been £2million higher had this policy not come into play. The company have to make provisions for 'liabilities and charges'. From page 30 of the balance sheet it can be seen that this provision is £12.9 million in 2005, which has a large influence on profit. This is likely to be bad debt. The difference between 2005 and 2004 is quite remarkable; the large figure in 200 reduces the net assets quite considerably. <heading>True and Fair View? </heading>In the opinion of the auditors the report gives a true and fair view. The audit was conducted "in accordance with Auditing Standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board." by PricewaterhouseCoopers. The auditors give an opinion stating; The accounts give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the Group and of the loss and cash flows of the Group. The accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985. This opinion shows that the financial accounting standards have been applied to produce a true and fair view. <heading>Recommendation to Shareholder</heading>In my opinion a shareholder should hold their shares. The share price is relatively low, and the PLC has recently made some large acquisitions. The company is also restructuring, allowing for a more efficient business in the future. As stated earlier, it is likely that the company have released a lot of bad news in one year, allowing for a larger profit margin to be enjoyed the next year. The steel market is unlikely to get better quickly, "As the dinosaurs of vehicle production thrash round, Renold is too small to avoid getting mauled."3. Prospects for the short term do not look good, and a private investor must be prepared to endure a loss for the next few years in order to enjoy the longer-term benefits. The company may also be a target for take-over and so current shareholders will feel the benefits of any takeover. "Much now depends on how quickly the board can restore margins"3. <heading>The Future of Renold PLC</heading>From the Annual Report the following information related to the future performance of the PLC can be identified; The PLC is increasing its development in china. "Development of the Groups activities in China continued"1 "It is also proposed to establish a wholly owned manufacturing facility in China, to support a number of the Company's production lines"2. A more tightly focused business is being developed. "...targeting a more tightly focused business with a substantially lower cost base and a reduced level of borrowings"1. This will enable "further efficiencies"2 to be achieved. The PLC has acquired SAS. "In March the group completed its acquisition of Sachs Automotive France"1. This should provide increased turnover. The Dollar is restoring some strength. "The recent weakening of the Euro against the Dollar, if maintained will be a positive factor for the group"1. The steel prices should stabilise. "Steel prices appear to have stabilised, at some 40% higher than a year ago"2. Hopefully they will then drop, however the Group is not relying on this "It would be unwise to be dependant on any significant steel price reduction"2. A new development in Poland is a possibility . "It is proposed to establish a new facility in Poland"2. This will support custom and special chains in Europe and is likely to boost turnover. The European sales structure is being improved . "Improved IT systems will allow us to increase the efficiency of the European sales structure"2. It should also enhance customer service. Since the annual financial report the following relevant information on the company's performance and future performance has been published; <figure/>Steel prices fell until July to about $500/tonne, ~$120/tonne less than at the time of the report 3. "Steel prices came down in the first six months of 2005 but have since started rising, helped by stronger demand in the US and a keenness by steel users in North America to build warehouse stocks"4. It is expected however that prices will fall again in the next year "excess steel production from China will start leaking out into the rest of the industry and cause prices to go down"4. <figure/>Share prices were at their lowest in May and have risen since to a high in December of 62p.5,6 Renold still has not recovered properly from the previous, and in some cases ongoing problems. "Renold is still in intensive care after the triple blow of rising steel prices, a weak US dollar and the problems of the automotive industry - particularly General Motors, which accounts for about half the sales of the automotive division".7 The Burton Site has been sold for "...at least £7.7 million with potential up to £8.65 million, payable in cash"6." The net proceeds will be used to reduce Group borrowings"6. Henderson Global Investors bought 205,000 shares on the 18/04/2005.6 The Group's developments in China have made little headway. From the interim report "Negotiations continue over the establishment of manufacturing operations in China". Opinion is clear, the operations in China need to begin; "...it cannot afford any delays in negotiations to move into China, both to service the Chinese market and to export to Western markets."7 The Dollar has gained strength against the Euro. In April the average was 0.772678 EUR to the Dollar, it climbed steadily to peak at 0.848452 EUR to the dollar in November. 8 <figure/>Information on the PLC's performance and future can be found in the report from the Groups AGM. "...currency movements and a plateauing of steel prices give some encouragement for an improvement in performance later in the current year as forward contracts unwind."10. However market conditions "still remain patchy"10, and "Automotive production performance continued to be disappointing"10. Information can also be located in the PLC's interim report published on 12 th December 2005. Interim Report summarises; Results in line with Board's expectations reflecting impact of continuing high raw material prices and increased utility costs Operating profit, before exceptional items, was marginally ahead of previous six months at £0.2 million Loss before tax was £2.0 million (2004: £2.1 million profit) Strong forward order book Actions to reduce costs on going - Further shift of manufacturing to lower cost countries Sale of Burton site contracted for at least £7.7 million (£3.5 million carrying value).10 The PLC are optimistic, however the same problems are still a threat; 12/12/05) Interim Report: "...the second half performance should see an improvement. However, any further escalation of raw material and energy costs will continue to depress results"6. <heading>Analysis of Annual Financial Report</heading>In conclusion the financial report did contain useful information about the future of the PLC; The acquisition of SAS has made an immediate impact with "sales 40% higher"6 in the automotive sector in the first half of the year. The Dollar grew in strength, which would have been a "positive factor for the group"1. The huge increase in steel prices did stop and there was even a decline in price. However the proposed growth in China has not taken place. This proposal would have encouraged shareholders and investors alike, hence many will be disappointed with the lack of progress. This is likely to be due to the financial problems the Group is experiencing, and perhaps problems with the talks taking place in China. <heading>Changes due to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)</heading>Important ways that this will affect the firm are highlighted in the Groups released IFRS Update 9. The effects in summary are; IFRS 1 - First time adoption of IFRS - In accordance with the options available under IFRS 1, at the date of transition the Group will measure its freehold properties on a fair value basis and use this valuation as deemed cost going forward. This will result in a material increase in the value of property in the Group's balance sheet. The basis on which freehold properties are depreciated will be revised from a reducing balance basis to a straight line basis which is considered to be a basis more in line with general practice. The impact of these revisions is not anticipated to have a material change on earnings.9 IAS 19 - Employee benefits - Under UK GAAP the Group had adopted Financial Reporting Standard 17 ("FRS 17"). Following the revision made to IAS 19 in December 2004, FRS 17 has many similarities with IAS 19. Therefore, the impact on the Group's net pension scheme liability following the adoption of IAS 19 is limited. There will however be classification changes in the balance sheet, including the treatment of associated deferred tax balances and also there are alternative classifications available for costs within the income statement.9 IFRS 3 - Business combinations - Under this standard goodwill is carried at cost and subject to an annual impairment review. Under UK GAAP the income statement suffered a straight line amortisation charge, which will no longer be made. A charge to income will only be required if an impairment is identified.9 IFRS 2 - Share based payments - The Group is required for the first time to recognise a charge against operating profit in respect of the estimated fair value of share options granted to employees. IFRS 1 provides an exemption to apply IFRS 2 only to awards made after 7 November 2002 and which will vest after 1 January 2005; this exemption will be adopted by the Group. Whilst a charge against profit will result, following the adoption of this Standard, the amount involved is not considered to be material to the Group's results.9 IAS 10 - Events after the balance sheet date - This standard specifically prevents the recognition of a liability in the balance sheet for a dividend declared after the period end. Therefore, the UK practice of recognizing proposed interim and final dividends as liabilities in the respective balance sheets will no longer apply. This is because they do not meet the criteria of a present obligation as defined by IAS 37, the Standard on provisions.9 IAS 32 - Financial instruments: Disclosure and presentation and IAS 39 - Financial instruments: Recognition and measurement - As noted above these standards will have no impact on the financial statements of the Group as published prior to 31 March 2005, following the adoption of the exemption provided in IFRS 1. However, from 1 April 2005 the impact of these standards will include a revised treatment in relation to derivative financial instruments. Under UK GAAP the derivative financial instruments used by the Group to manage its currency and interest rate exposures (forward foreign exchange contracts and interest rate swaps) are not recognised in the financial statements until the hedged transaction has itself been recognised. Under IFRS such instruments must be recognised and stated at their fair values. The Group will not adopt hedge accounting for routine hedged transactions under the conditions set out by IAS 39 and therefore changes in the fair values of these instruments will be recognised in the income statement.9 IAS 12 - Income taxes - There will be changes to the deferred tax position resulting both from the impact of adopting the IAS 12 and also as a result of the deferred tax consequences of adopting other International Standards as set out above.9 