<heading>1. Introduction </heading>Global competition has massively speeded the using of information techniques and online communication to improve business performance. The object of this work is to draw properly technology and Internet solutions, for a small delivery company-- Send-Me Services, and to optimise the utilisation of business resources through the sell-side, buy-side and internal side of business. To specify those applications, these techniques in the sell-side activities of business will be presented firstly with the focus on how to attract customers and how to be interactive with them. Secondly, technologies in the buy-side business seek to facilitate greater efficiency in purchasing within lower operational cost. Finally, integrated business management and control systems will be suggested in the internal part of an e-business. <heading>2. Re-engineer a Real-Time Enterprise Strategically</heading>As a small delivery company, Send-Me Services was formed in 2000 and provides a fast evening-and-weekend delivery service for the public and commercial sectors locally (Aitken, n.d.). The size-related resource limitations and quick-response requirements in delivery service SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) make them more alert to the value-for-money, reliability, maintainability, effectiveness and productivity ICT solutions (Information and communication technologies) (Chaffey 2004, p18). Establishing a real-time enterprise could be a vital approach for the current delivery business to cooperate the Internet-enabled and other e-commerce mechanisms into an integrated management of within-firm (the internal operation activates) and cross-firm businesses (the sell-side and buy-side activities). To be a competitive real-time enterprise and to sustain the competitiveness, a "real-time" information system means that business transitions are executed by straight through processing (STP) - an internal online passthrough process. In the internal STP, a front-desk and back-office connection is carried by intranet, and the external STP interconnects business partners which could be inbound if the company get input from selling to customers and could be outbound if the company buys an input from company's counterparties. Therefore, the links between value chains can be tightened instantly with automatic connections to other counterparties' network, such as the fuel suppliers. Rapid performance can help the company to get competitive advantage in the supply chain (such as shorten the delivery lead time and quicken the cash flow in buy-side of business), expand marketplace (such as widen the interaction with customers in the sell-side of business), and especially upgrade the level of confidence for a further improvement in the organisation (such as reduce the work load and increase the profit-margins in internal side of business). (Chorafas 2004, pp83-85) An e-enabled business system should be a competently interactive system, from a consuming market to a business supply chain, which could be a highlighted task in this delivery company. The Figure 1 below shows the layered structure of business and the applications for the delivery e-business. Within the seamless database supported STP, the real-time information system through the business architecture is guaranteed by other network software solutions, such as enterprise resource planning (ERP), customer relationship management (CRM), Just-in-time (JIT) solution, supply chain management (SCM), online sales order handlers, execution report and treasury package (the controls over transactions, payment and settlement) (Chorafas 2004, p85). Information systems can help to integrate market research, information collection, sourcing, material requirements planning, warehousing and distribution through integrating systems with vertical integration. <figure/><heading>3 Techniques in the Sell-Side of e-Business</heading>Up to now, Send-Me Services has a very sample website interface, which only displays the business background and contacted information in document without an effective price search. There are various online marketing and customer communications techniques to encourage customers to find products using the web than traditional catalogues. <heading>3.1 E-marketing</heading>To start with, the first e-enabled aspect in the sell-side is e-marketing which gives an opportunity to develop a new channel to accelerate turnover. E-marketing techniques can build up or improve brand awareness in a cost-effective way -- if a customer has a good experience in terms of site performance or fulfillment, then the company will possibly get the brand loyalty effortlessly (Chaffey 2004, p318). Foremost, a user-friendly website interface with sound self-service tools will be a vital transaction in the e-marketing. As a delivery company's website, a straightforward searching tool for navigation with clear display page will contribute to classification. A consistent view template of electronic catalogue for standard service is appropriate for smaller business and customers with smaller quantity. Technical categorisation tools for site content layout requires the HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), CAD/CAM systems (Computer Aided Design/ Computer-aided manufacturing), 3D technology (such as Map Assistance) and engineering drawings (such as using Photoshop and Flash in advertisements). Those technologies can be used to visualise the service specification and availability information on the on-line catalogues, and to style attractive advertisements for customer. (Chaffey et al 2004, pp248-53) Secondly, a transactional e-commerce website interface is not only just concentrating on the category display, but also on effectively matching the varied consumer requirements. A clear Searching tool on browser and a speedy Calculator are indispensable to show the possible delivery period, achievable destinations, accredited dispatching time, relatively price and discount. A different price responding to the customer's each selection using an on-line Auctions technique -- according to different area or different period of arriving time, like purchasing a rail tickets, will help to promote the individual customers to make their decision. Additionally, the company might set up different language sections for different target users in the UK and a set of the FAQ (frequently asked questions) and index to assist site visitors. Thirdly, secure e-payment service is particularly vital to small company in accepting on-line payment by credit cards from customers. Send-Me Services can apply payment service providers for securely and efficiently professional services. Protx is the largest independent third party payment gateway with quite lower monthly fee in the UK. It provides transaction confirmation e-mails to company and customers, and settles down the payment automatically in three days. FactMerchant's payment system is another integrated, secured and flexible assistance, where customer can settle in different currencies (it could be a competitive advantage to attract foreign customers in UK and prepare for global marketplace) and demand historical spending account details on secured pages (Cunningham 1999, P83). Alternatively, UPS Capital's Merchant Services Program which supports various credit cards payment, flexible platform options (customers can pay on computer beforehand, stand-alone terminals or point-of-sale (POS) interfaces when goods are arrived) and provides expert chargeback handling process (UPS, n.d.). Fourthly, other marketing channels may have been traded by businesses for spread information. As one of the SMEs, Send-Me Services needs to reinforce the online brand image -- online communities and e-mail are probably the most cost-effective solution. Communication to customers can be placed in intermediary sites (such as the e-publication (Times) or other portals (Google or RRS) to promote the service offers, via a banner linking to the company's site. Those media agencies tend to offer all the skills in content development, advertisement design and online promotion. This online adverting -- banner advertising is a small banner with keywords graphically pops up on a web page, which is normally charged by spot lease, click-through or ad impressions rate (cost per mille (CPM)). And on the other side, Send-Me Services website also can get revenue by offering the banner advertisings for other companies. Co-branding is a free way for promotions by affiliating banner advertisement, such as banner exchanges and allied sites (Chaffey 2000, p249-51). Banner is a valuable method for Send-Me Services in the e-marketing process, but problems will be from people's disregard. Special promotions can be sent to customer directly by opt-in e-mail or instant message on a monthly or periodic basis without sending extra booklet to customers (Wilson, 2000). It is a more push strategy supported by customized databases, but it will cause antipathy when the company not regulate suitably. Nevertheless, large savings in time and expenditure (including the expense in material resource and human resource) are possible by removing the paper-based work from the process. <heading>3.2 Customer Relationship Management</heading>Moreover, the second e-enabled aspect in the sell-side is the customer relationship management also will affect the performance in business's sell-side. The marketplace performance includes the online and offline communication to carry the customer-company connection. The main prospect of a cost-effective e-business is to integrate those support services: technology-enabled selling (TES) (to attract customers to visit to web site to review the service and specification), e-business, call centers and data warehousing and data-mining to afford seamless customer service (Norris,al. 2000, p98). The technology-based selling (TES) focus on customer self-service (to help customers arrange an online order, online pay, require the status which is online). A customer facing system can be used to improve customer service, and those techniques involve the user guides, price comparison engines, chat platforms (forum), language selections and document management systems can assist visitors to analyse standard and technical specifications. Specially, the forum can be used to set the customers' knowledge and confidence of the services from other's experience, and that also can encourage the company to provide a better service satisfaction for customers. Moreover, the usage of phone-call centers is also a main assistant support; however it can be enabled by computer-telephone integration (CIT) or Teleweb integration technology on computer that technology can be provided by eFusion, Ericcson and Lightbridge. Data-mining and data warehousing will define and capitalize customer's historical buying pattern (as customer-demonstrated preference captured in customers' click patterns) to support decision making for driven selling, based on the personalised data. (Norris,al. 2000, pp98-105) Furthermore, the third e-enabled aspect in the sell-side is to adopt just-in-time delivery and downstream supply chain management. Afford a high-class value to customers implies that Send-Me Services - a delivery company-- has to set a quick-response-system for the customer satisfaction. Through Internet, the customer requirement data can be delivered directly from customers to business processing sections through supply chain management, not need traditional manual information input with high operational risks such as mistakes and delays. The online sale (customer ordering) channels is used as a tool to manage complex customer orders (e.g. processing orders) which supports sales and conducting marketing operations. In this environment the action or response time can be reduce to minimum, with 24 hours business undertaking. Using a virtual order system, website not only allows customer to select the date and place more clearly and visually, but also can show the individual customer the automatically updated status on delivering by using the digital trail-maps. Once customer's decision is completed, the delivering progress will be stored in a virtual package until the customers receive their products. Then, the data-based virtual business processes, with its corresponding order tracking technique (barcodes and WAP (Wireless Application Protocol)) and networked sensors, will program the status of delivered products and then dispatched the warrant into customers' mobile messages or e-mails, or give an notification when order delayed (Chorafas, 2005). Additionally, all the customer transaction information will be recorded at database under individual account catalogue. When the customer log in, the history transaction information will be clear displayed which is useful for database mining to analyse individual customer buying behavior and then provide personalised marketing solution for effective and efficient promotion activities. <heading>3.3 Just-In-Time Delivery and Downstream Supply Chain Management</heading>In order to deliver products and service to customers in a cost-effective way with low stock levels, flexible and quick-response delivery processes are the objects to e-enable the downstream supply chain management. A time-based performance can be achieved from the Just in Time (JIT) service, which poses an efficient consumer response, reduced fulfillment time and flexible supply and customer service in a delivery company. The order tracking technique alerting for product and information flows also is used by the carriers and company to monitor the delivery process in a paperless method which is in real-time too. E-commerce facilitates collaborative planning by combining the similar target customers' requirements (according to pickup locations and destinations) and rearrange the accessible schedule for seamless delivering cooperation's in the supply chain. JIT contributes to more efficient shipment planning, faster order processing and reduced mistake return cost by removing time and manual work from various elements in the order-delivery cycle. The greater accuracy and quicker response will assist Send-me Service to position itself as price competitive online. (Chorafas, 2005) <heading>4 Techniques in the Buy-Side</heading>The procurement of procurement of non-production goods and services is an essential part in a company, such as to purchase office equipments, computers, peripheral (printer, storage equipment and telecommunication equipment), packaging tools and materials, transport vehicle and fuel. The major efficiency benefited from e-business in the Send-Me Services will not only from the effective customer service, but also through the well-organized transport of the business supporting materials (such as fuel, vehicles). <heading>4.1 E-procurement</heading>Firstly, the e-procurement system and transactional web site are clearly the best strategic value investments in the buy-side of business. It is requisite to enhance the dependable and orderly arrangement of the deliveries of a supply chain value stream mapping. Through utilizing the workflow system, the Web-based e-procurement solutions can automatically produce and transfer the requisition and entry of purchasing information and get e-warrants or e-invoice via e-mail rather than paper-based post (Chaffey 2004, p295). E-procurement, under an enhanced budgetary control, can improve the efficiency and accuracy without the involvement by the purchaser which may pose a non-strategic sourcing and purchases along with duplicating redundant and disconnected ordering of information (because the purchase-order has to be specified separately by Send-Me Services and again on the order for the suppliers through a disposal cycle of transport, delay, process, transport, delay). While, combined with ERP system, an advanced planning and scheduling (APS) software provide a better way to provide a simultaneously integrated management of supply-chain activity and customer services information flows in real-time processing. Additionally, APS is a vital enabler in process and behavior transformation, from being functionally based to being process driven, with inventory reductions between 20 percent to 70 percent and cost and capital diminution up to 10 -15 percent (Norris,al. 2000, pp173-174). As a small company, the most straightforward implement of e-procurement is to catch one or several favoured suppliers for the materials and be integrated with the suppliers' SCM system. Alternatively, Send-Me Services can use e-marketplace to develop different types of links to work with different suppliers or using an intermediary with many suppliers. That will help the company get pricing advantage, but with higher setup cost. (Chaffey 2004, pp300-05) <heading>4.2 Upstream Supply Chain Management</heading>The saving and profitability will come form the reduced need for material stock, owing to faster purchase cycle times (increased sales will result on an increased turnover automatically), as well as the reduced cost in physical printed order forms and invoices when the spreadsheet can be downloaded. Additionally, a lower price can be obtained through standardisation and consolidation of purchase. The e-mail messaging technique, the WAP and the barcodes for traceability all can be used to facilitate the connection within upstream supply chain management. The However, the delays still will be occurred in this workflow system when the order is in the e-mail inbox of the authorizer and purchaser, which require advance agreement between the counterparties. (Chaffey 2004, p293) The benefits come from disintermedium is the cost saving and time efficiency. However, the specialization trends to be an expedient way for modern companies focus on their core competition and outsource the rest. Therefore, another B2B e-business application for small company procurement is Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenishment (CPFR), where a variety of information is exchanged electronically throughout partners to coordinate joint forecasts and then product business plans (Chorafas, 2005). Send-Me Services can use the collaborative transportation management (CTM) as an online reintermedium --- joint the forces with other delivery companies---to reduce delivery time and improve delivery reliability which can be enabled depending on agent-based environment and agent interaction platform. <heading>5 Techniques in the Internal Processes of Business</heading>First and foremost, to e-enable a delivery business, this is a management challenge. One cost-efficient way is to design a virtual organisation to manage the knowledge resource in environmental uncertainty variables by providing Internet connectivity for staffs. Information through an ERP system can be effectively allocated to balance the business's scarce resources. This ultimate tool designs a Web interface to seamlessly integrate front-end customer service (sell-side) with back-end systems such as finances management, human resources management, knowledge management, and market research, product design, sourcing, material requirements planning, production, warehousing and distribution, as showed in Figure 2. <figure/>ERP system is an integrated business management and control application, based on a day-to-day intranet application (EDI links or web-based open-standard groupware systems) which needs to be installed on each desktop to fill orders and provide account information electronically on a real-time basis. However, web-based technique --- many-to-many--- is more appropriate to small organizations than the EDI --- one-to-one. Additionally, Microsoft products often provide greater functionality, e.g. Support for Internet protocol (IP) with HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), XML (Hypertext Markup Language), or Visual Basic. Those methods are more flexible and can be tailored to the organizations needs. Internet Explorer is currently free and can be used in all types of organizations. For further development, Microsoft development tools are likely to be more expensive, so for the small to medium company, non-Microsoft tools are probably best if there are sufficient trained staffs available (PHP/MySQL languages, IBM Open Source). (Norris,al. 2000, pp41-42) However, in any case, the key to a successful e-business is to use the same language and grammar in electronic dialogue. On a personal level, to increase the speed of the process, e-enabled business involves fewer staffs. An ERP system offers the techniques to help the human resource management to recruit staff, educate staff, review staff and get feedback from staff. HR manager can use the announcement board to publish the company's policies, display job description and issue events for its employees without paper-based booklets. Computers also can memory the whole career of each staff to enhance career and succession planning, coordinate training programs ( using on - line 'hands-on' training software without time and place restriction), and maximise time management (Norris,al. 2000, pp33-34). For instance, in Send-Me Services, the salary for a carrier usually includes a basic salary, performance salary (delivery quantity and quality) and other parameters such as job grade, absentation, as well as the satisfaction feedbacks from customers. All the information can be mentioned and stored in the database which results an efficient way to calculate numbers by computers. Then the payroll within detailed records can be delivered to individual by e-mail or in a personal page with permission to view. The bulletin boards, e - mail, instant messaging, e - conferencing, virtual white boarding, and forum will help to collect the ideas, share the project process and drive the business intelligence throughout the company in digital form. That sort of value-based strategic management capability can gain from ERP vendors, from PeopleSoft's Enterprise Performance Management Workbench to modules by Oracle and Sap (Norris,al. 2000, p176)). For example, the marketing staff will give a better feasible e-business consideration after sharing the web enhancement technique concepts with webmaster, and otherwise, the webmaster will set up good knowledge of marketing technical on time and within budget after well communication. The intercommunication and multi-comprehension facilitated by e-business will encourage a harmonious company culture. Moreover, ERP system supports the management of accounting and financial data. Although it requires person to analyse the problems and make decisions at last, computer software with backup database will make the statistical processes more quickly and accurately. Furthermore, in addition to paper documents management, an effective information management is required by EPR system to control the capacity of information and to capture the competent evidence in the first place for the organisational success. The personalised web side under privacy policy requires a sign-on, which is valuable to give individual information and special authorities to access separate information level. Financial report forms can be updated instantly after accountants finish their input work. Within ERP, the resulting financial effect of a physical transition will be shown to provide decision support for corporate leadership, produce strategic measure for performance, and hold a strategic cost management (Norris,al. 2000, p31). Furthermore, e-business can help to audit the internal information flow-- internal control - in a management information system (MIS). This also is part of knowledge management in business to facilitate the decision making, which make an effort to transfer the various intangible data and information to tangible knowledge can be shared by other ones. The management of the information is broader than maintaining a centralized control on files registry and records management, multimedia and electronic objects (those digital storages, such as CD records and Floppy Disk and Fixed Disk) that combine image and audio are also evolved to reduce the physical forms requirement. The risk of financial records missing or mess also can be avoided if database is duly copied. Good information management system, with an efficient management of both the quality and quantity of the information which links the organisation's routine processes - logistic, manufacturing, sales and marketing, will ensure interoperability as being capable of independently of location and time (Deserno & Kynaston, 2005). The office workplace redesign, about shared service centers (SSCs), also take account of a range of alternative techniques, such as a standardized allocation of space--the universal footprint which help to configure a flexible setting to meet the alternate needs of individual workstyles. The tools (the software such as CSCW (Computer Supported Collaborative Work), teleconferencing) support cooperation over an distant in virtual offices - which refer to a non-territorial office, shared assigned spaces, and alternative touchdown areas --- afford a new way to work without the limit of location and time, provide an opportunity for home working and flatten management hierarchies, empowerment and customer interaction. (Jackson & Suomi 2002, pp14-15). <heading>6. Conclusion </heading>E-technologies and the Internet facilitate an efficient and effective re-engineered process for business. This work focus on outlining those cost-and-risks-reduction and time-saving techniques for a delivery SMEs-- Send-Me Services, over through the buy-side e- business (as the inputs of resource), internal processes (as communications and transactional processes), and sell-side e-business (as the output). Buy-side e- business is mainly considered as integrating the marketing management, customer relationship management and downstream supply chain management, sell-side e-business mainly involved in the upstream supply chain management, which focuses on managing the relationships with suppliers - procurement, stock control and distribution (also including intermediaries), and internal e- business is focus on a integrated ERP system, supported by knowledge finances management, human resources management, knowledge management. Additionally, although there are various techniques can be adopted for business, the success of e-enabling the business is basing on the harmonized cooperation of these practicable e-technologies. 