The definition of a professional engineer is not clear, and has been the subject of debate for many years. Below are four suggestions justifying what makes a professional engineer which I will discuss and conclude which I feel is most accurate. The first argument suggests that by having a BEng or MEng from an accredited university course, someone should be considered a professional engineer. I would say this is a very valid argument: it demonstrates that the engineer has spent a considerable amount of time studying the discipline and reached a level of competency recognised and approved by the governing bodies of engineering. Having an accredited degree in engineering should certainly ensure that high level engineering, such as large scale bridges or buildings or complicated (and consequently potentially dangerous) machinery, are built to a certain standard. With this level of study in engineering principals to the degree that they are accredited, we have confidence that they are constructed well by knowledgeable and experienced engineers - engineers whom we should consider to be professionals. This argument does exclude manual engineers, such as those who might come to fix the electrics in one's house. However, it could be argued that these people have not studied engineering to the same level of detail, and we would not have such confidence in them designing or repairing a more major project such as a dam perhaps, where many people's lives would be at risk if it were designed incorrectly and in some way failed due to a lack of training and knowledge. This definition does include anyone who has achieved an accredited engineering degree, regardless of whether or not they still practice any "engineering" in their professional life: it could, for example, consider someone working in journalism who hasn't done anything engineering related for 30 years as a "professional engineer", when in reality they most likely consider themselves a "professional writer", which is clearly an incorrect description of a professional engineer. The second argument states that a professional engineer is someone who performs work commonly recognised as "what engineers do". I would say that, although this includes most people who practice some engineering in their professional occupation, it doesn't necessarily make them professional engineers as they may have an engineering knowledge limited to that which they practice daily. The level of study required for their job may be little more than a practically minded member of the public could manage. Arguing that a professional engineer is a Chartered Engineer is quite the opposite. It is very exclusive: whilst Chartered Engineers are without a doubt practicing, skilled, professional engineers, they are a very select group; this excludes many engineering graduates who are still practicing engineering in their professional lives, and certainly excludes all engineers without formal accredited degrees. For this reason, I do not think that Chartered Engineers can be considered to be the sole definition of professional engineers. The final argument to what a professional engineer is states that it is acting in a morally responsible way as a practicing engineer. I think that this is using "professional" in a different context to how I have been considering it in previous arguments. In the previous arguments I have considered "professional" to mean "as a profession"; in the context of this question I think it translates more as "in a professional manner", i.e. the standard or skill of the practicing engineer is irrelevant, and it is very much the human side of the job that is important in this argument. I don't think this is what a professional engineer is, although I do think that a professional engineer must work in this "professional manner" - all engineers of all disciplines and levels of skill must consider the social, environmental and human factors in their occupation, whatever level of skill and training is involved in their specific employment. To exactly define a "professional engineer" is a difficult task. I have discussed a number of suggestions, but none of them are entirely fair representations of professional engineering. More, it is a combination of all of these: a professional engineer is one practicing engineering with a high level of accredited training, and always considering the moral effects of their occupation as a whole, as well as their own personal effect on society through their own actions or lack of. 