One of the most pressing problems in the developing world is the extent of population growth and the pressure that it exerts on the resources of the countries. The views in literature concerning this concentrate on the need of restrictive programs on fertility to be imposed by the government and on the other hand, the mechanism that more developed countries will automatically have less children through increased health care and education. This controversy is investigated empirically by Jean Dreze and Mamta Murthi in their article "Fertility, education and development: Evidence from India" for panel data gathered from the surveys made in the states of India. I will review the article by first summarising the proceedings and then commenting on the findings. It can be found that although the paper is very thorough in the form of econometric analysis, the value of the findings in terms of new information is limited, with the exception of the relevance of the income variable. <fnote>Dreze, J. and Murthi, M.(2001) "Fertility, education and development: Evidence from India" Population and Development Review 27, 1 </fnote>The aim of the article is to address the role of female education, female autonomy, infant mortality and income to the number of births in the Indian states. This is done in a multivariate framework using district-level panel data on the two most recent censuses at the time, 1981 and 1991. They are concerned about the path through which the education-fertility relationship operates as it is not clear if this is a direct causality effect or if it stems from greater autonomy of women through education or if it is income related. Also the endogeneity of the variables is discussed since for instance female labour force participation may both lead to and result from lower fertility. The regression estimated by the authors is:  FORMULA  The dependent variable is the total fertility rate in district d at time t, it is regressed on the intercept measuring a district-specific effect, a vector of explanatory variables, a time dummy and an error term. The explanatory variables are adult female literacy, adult male literacy, poverty, urbanisation, son preference, regional location and the social composition of population (castes, tribes, Muslim). The article finds that the connection between female education and fertility is robust and significant in terms of the size of the effect. Male literacy was found to be non-related to fertility. The role of son preference in keeping fertility high was also confirmed, as the incentive of additional births is higher especially when child mortality is high. Child mortality was found to be strongly linked with high fertility also in general. There was also evidence of a structural shift in the relation between fertility and the explanatory variables, possibly meaning the expansion of family planning programs, earlier developmental improvements or inter-district diffusion effects. Interestingly, none of male literacy, urbanisation or poverty was statistically significant implying that more than economic growth is needed to fight the population problem. The analysis technique used in the paper seems an appropriate and a sufficient way to approach these issues. Panel data methods used are good because they allow for the estimation of the model without too many considerations of common time series issues like autocorrelation. However, the regression coefficients that are represented in the several tables of the paper only tell so much about the actual relationships between the variables. If we take the surprising fact that poverty was insignificant for example, this might be a result of a wrong specification used as other studies have found evidence that income has a positive effect on fertility. Duflo and Udry find that when there was a positive shock on the crops controlled by women, the expenditure of the household on food and children went up. This did not occur when the crop was controlled by men. We can relate this to the poverty view that if there was more money available for women (for example, but not necessarily, through increased education), this would lead to more being invested on children and decrease child mortality, which was found to be an important factor influencing fertility. This inconsistency could be the result of the poverty measure not being accurate enough, the authors recognise the problems in having to interpolate the missing years as the poverty headcount index is only measured in intervals. What could be included is a measure that looks at income or expenditure more directly and then a dummy for women to see the possible separating effect. <fnote>Duflo, E and Udry, C. (2001) "Intrahousehold resource allocation in Cote d'Ivoire: Social Norms, Separate Accounts and Consumption Choices" NBER Working paper #10498 </fnote>The authors state that it was not possible to include child mortality in the main equation because it is likely to be affected by the dependent variable and this would cause problems. The solution presented in the paper is to use an instrument to remove the inconsistencies. The authors suggest that access to drinking water is a viable instrument because it can be assumed to be highly linked with child mortality but not with to fertility. I think this can be contested as access to drinking water has a straightforward effect on the health of the population, therefore including the mothers and areas where the access is low are also likely to be poorer areas. In that case, the inclusion of the access to drinking water should affect the coefficient estimates on the regional dummies, son preference (if mother's health is poor they require more assistance to survive in the future), poverty and female literacy. When comparing the coefficients presented in tables this seems to be case, as these variables have increased in significance. This change is acknowledged in the paper but it is explained to be the cause of controlling for child mortality. The possible interference of the drinking water variable could also be recognised, although it is not likely to cause estimation problems because of the lack of perfect multicollinearity with any of the explanatory variables. As stated in the concluding remarks, "the findings of this article consolidate earlier evidence on the connection between female education and fertility in India" (p.54). The additional value of this paper is the verified robustness of the fertility and education relationship, which is a relatively small accomplishment if we compare to the amount of analysis done. The approach itself is not very innovative but it manages to generate a conflicting result for income and additional value would have been added, had this been investigated further. The significance of the structural shift was also only introduced with a list of possible reasons without further consideration. After all, one of the reasons listed is the expansion of family planning programs and its role in reducing fertility, which was dismissed in the beginning of the paper by saying "experiments with authoritarian intervention, by contrast, have had disastrous results" (p.34). However, these programs have increased in India during the time period of the paper and therefore their effect on the reduction in fertility should not be neglected, especially as a variable that possibly represents these programs appears significant in the equation. Contesting theories have been presented for example by Galor and Weil as they argue for multiple equilibria in fertility. Firstly, there is a low capital to labour ratio where women's wages are comparatively low and therefore the opportunity cost of having more children is lower. As many more children are born this also keeps the ratio down. The other equilibrium is a high ratio where the female wages increase and they have less children as a result. The ratio is kept high as a result of low population growth. To adjust between these equilibria a process of demographic transition is needed, this could also be what the structural time shift represents. <fnote>Galor, O. and Weil, D. (1996) "The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth" American Economic Review 86, 374-387 </fnote>In conclusion, the fertility issue in India has been very strongly linked with female education. According to findings in the paper, a big difference can be achieved by tackling female illiteracy but this does not work through increased female autonomy but directly by reducing the number of children per fertile woman. Cultural issues are often relevant and although the caste or religion effect was not that important in the results, it can be seen to work through the continued separation and inequality between men and women in the developing world. The fact that increased education for men has no effect whatsoever in fertility describes well the social norms in place for having children, mainly to ensure a required number of sons for old age security because of the lack of insurance markets and social security. In total, the contribution of this paper to the literature remains as a sort of summary of fertility related findings, listing the different theories involved but not going into too much detail in any field. The methods used for analysis seem robust and correct apart from some possible inconsistencies noted above. Also the shortcomings, possible problems and suggestions for further work were well acknowledged in the text and the topics were presented very clearly. The effect of economic growth still cannot be fully put aside, as trade increases and benefits of growth are more widely spread, globalisation can act to change the social norms and through that affect the determinants of fertility. 