<abstract>The validity of Walden's Rule was examined by monitoring the conductivity of various concentrations of a range of salts in different viscosities of sucrose solution. </abstract>The Stokes- Einstein equation (1) links the diffusion coefficient and the viscosity of the solution and the Nernst- Einstein equation (2) connects the diffusion coefficient to the equivalent conductivity.1  FORMULA  (1)  FORMULA  (2) In both equation (1) and (2), D is the diffusion coefficient, k is the Boltsmann's constant, T is the temperature, r is the radius, η is the viscosity, R is the universal gas constant, F is the Faraday constant and z is ion charge. D is eliminated to obtain an expression relating the equivalent conductivity and the viscosity of the electrolyte. This expression is known as Walden's Rule.1 Walden's Rule states that the product of the limiting equivalent conductivity and viscosity at infinite dilution for a particular electrolyte is a constant at a given temperature. This can be expressed as an equation, where Λ0 is the limiting molar conductivity and η0 or η/ η0 is the viscosity.1  FORMULA  (3) Expression (3) can be used to explain the influence of large neutral molecules on the limiting mobilities of ions in solution. Large molecules such as sucrose was used. The viscosities of the sucrose solutions were measured as a percentage. Viscosities vary with temperature so the solutions were kept at room temperature of 20.0°c ± 0.9.8 Various masses of sucrose were dissolved in different volumes of distilled water to give a range of viscosities of sucrose solutions; 5 %, 10 %, 20 %, 30 %, 50 %. E.g.: For a 10% sucrose solution, 10 g of sucrose was dissolved in 90 ml of distilled water. The solutions were made up as above as the sucrose and the distilled water is a weight: weight ratio and the density of water at 20°c is 0.9982g/cm 3. 2 Salts containing different cations and anions of different concentration could be added to the various viscosities of sucrose solutions. Tetramethylammonium iodide was used as the added salt in the initial investigation. Concentrations of tetramethylammonium iodide of 0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.07 and 0.09 moldm -3 were investigated.3 The salts were added and stirred in the sucrose solutions until complete dissolution. The conductivity of the solutions can be measured using a Janeway conductivity meter (Table 3). The temperature of the solutions can be also be monitored using this meter. Trends of different cations and anions can also be observed. Analysis of different salts at various viscosities were carried out by different groups. <table/>,  and ,  and ,  and . Salt used for the initial investigation are all strong electrolytes therefore completely dissociate into ions. Conductivity is dependent on the number of ions in the solution and its mobility. The molar conductivities were calculated using equation (4) where Λm is the molar conductivity, κ is the conductivity and c is the concentration.3  FORMULA  (4) Kohlrausch's Law of independent migration states that at infinite dilution, cations can be considered to move independently of anions and vice versa i.e.: Λ0. The limiting molar conductivity can be extrapolated using this Law. The law (5) states that at low concentrations the molar conductivities of strong electrolytes vary linearly with the square root of the concentration.3  FORMULA  The product of η0 and Λ0 give the Walden's product. When the non- electrolyte lowers the conductance significantly less than fluidity, the Walden's Rule is no longer obeyed i.e.: not a constant.2,5 From Table 1, the Walden's products deviate from approximately 97 - 235. It was noted from the NMe 4I a salt, that the product increased dramatically when the sucrose solution is higher that 30% viscosity. This change concluded that the Walden's Rule is not obeyed at sucrose viscosity of about 30% or higher. Stokes found that the rule was broken above 40% sucrose solution when using KCl as the added salt.2 Solutions of high viscosities solvate the same ions to different extents so this would alter the hydrodynamic radius. <figure/>In all strong electrolytes, Λm decreases as c 1/2 increases (Fig. 1). This gives a linear relationship. This is due to three reasons; the relaxation effect, the electrophoretic effect and ion pairing.2 The relaxation effect, is the distortion of the ion atmosphere when it comes into close contact with other ions. This distortion could impede the ion mobilty which would decrease the ion conductivity.2 As the concentration of ions increase, the relaxation effect is more significant as the probability of having close contacts with other ions is higher. The electrophoretic effect is the viscous drag between ions as each move in solution which slows the movement of ions. This effect is directly proportional to the ionic strength of the solution. As the concentration of ions increase, this effect becomes more important therefore conductivity decreases.3 Ion pairing is also of concern, anions and cations in the solution could potentially bind together to form a neutral molecule. Neutral molecules are not conductive. As the number of ions in solution is of importance, the increase in concentration of salt could increase the probability of ion pairing therefore reducing the conductivity. (5) The trend for NaCl and LiCl were very similar as they both give a linear relationship and only differ by the cations (Fig. 1 and 4). The typical Na+ ion molar conductivity is higher than Li+ ion. Ions move with their hydration shells intact. Li+ ion is highly structure- making and has a large primary and secondary solvation shell where as, Na+ ion is less structure- making and more structure- breaking than Li+ ion. Na+ ion has a smaller solvation shell. As the ion radius increases, the size of the solvation shells decrease. As the solvation increases in size, the ions experience more relaxation and electrophoretic effect therefore the conductivity decreases. However, there are some anomalous results with the LiCl salt (Fig. 4). Li+ ion has a strong polarizing effect due to its small ionic radius so the size of the solvation shell is nearly unchanged in a range of water density.6,7 A similar trend can also be seen by comparing the salt NaCl, NBu 4Br and NMe 4I (Fig 2 and 3). The size of the anion differ and so do the solvation shells. As the anion radius decreases, the size of the solvation shells increase so do the relaxtion and electrophoretic effect. This would impede the mobility of ions and decrease the conductivity.3 <figure/>Alkyl ammonium ions such NBu 4+ have an unusual trend as these ions are hardly hydrated and are hydrophobic (Fig. 2). It gives an exponential curve. The intrinsic ion size for these ions are particularly important which makes ion pairing significant. As the ion size increases e.g.: from methyl ammonium ions to butyl ammonium ions, the limiting molar conductivity decreases (Table 1) as the extent of ion pairing increases. Ion pairing is more significant at low concentration as the number of ions in the solution would be affected more hence the exponential curve. A common trend is found with the different viscosities of sucrose solution, which can be explained by the Stokes' Law model.3 This model provides an understanding to the dependence of Λ0 on ion size. The more viscous the solution the lower the conductance. Ions move with their solvation shells intact and exhibit two forces; viscous drag and electrostatic force. Ions are effectively "swimming" through the solution so therefore as the viscosity increases, the ion mobility becomes difficult so reducing the conductivity. Retarding force also applies when the solution becomes visous therefore conductance decreases. Other mechanism of transport such as "hopping" exists for salts like HCl.2 Innovative steps such as weak electrolytes, divalent ions and salt mixtures were carried out using the same procedure. <table/>,  and ,  and ,  and . Divalent ions such as CaCl 2 was investigated. This is also a strong electrolyte therefore should completely dissociate. The linar realtionship was observed but however, the limiting molar conductivity for divalent ions are higher than monovalent ions (Fig 7). This is due to the increase in valency. Ca 2+ ion has a valence of 2 therefore can hold the primary and secondary solvation shells tighter. Overall, this gives a smaller ion size so therefore has a higher ion mobility and higher conductance. The trends of divalent ions should resemble monovalent ions. Mg 2+ ions is highly structure- making and has a large solvation shell. However, when the ionic radius increases to Ca 2+ and Sr 2+, it becomes more structure- breaking and has a smaller solvation shell so the conductivity increases.3 Weak electrolyte like sodium oxalate is not fully ionised in solution so it gives a reversible reaction.9 <figure/>Solvation and ion pairing apply to sodium oxalate so can alter conductivity.9 Molar conductivity is strongly dependent on the concentration as the equilibrium shifts to the right as the activity of disodium oxalate decreases thus changing the degree of ionisation. The degree of ionisation is important as conductivity is dependent on the number of ions. Kohlrausch's Law does not apply to weak electrolytes so a different equation; Ostwald's dilution Law (6) is used to determine the limiting molar conductivity, where K a is the association constant.  FORMULA  (5) A plot of 1/Λm vs Λmc can be used to extrapolate 1/Λ0 which is the intercept and 1/K aΛ02; the gradient of the line (Fig 5).9 At 5 % viscosity, the K a value is 0.036 which means the equilibrium lies to the right. At 30% viscosity, the K a value is 1.7289 so the equilibrium lies to the left. The number of ions dissociated reflects the molar conductance. Salt mixtures (Table 2) were carried out and found that the alkyl ammonium ions dominate as the trend is very similar to the alkyl ammonium salt. The large alkyl ammonium ions would undergo ion pairing to any halides in the solution therefore greatly affecting the conductivity (Fig. 6 and 8). The validity of Walden's Rule can be concluded that at about 30% sucrose solution, the rule starts to break and no longer obeyed. Results showed that conductance of ions is dependent on many factors; the concentration of salt, the viscosity , the ion radius, the mechanism of transport and the size of solvation This affects the relaxation effect, the elctrophoretic effect, the extent of ion pairing, the viscous drag, the retarding force and the electrostatic force. All these factors can alter the mobility of ions which is the key for how conductive the solution is. However, there are many errors in this investigation. The viscosity of the sucrose solutions and the amount of salt added were only an approximate. The solubility for some salts such as NMe 4I are not very soluble in high % viscosities as the solutions are already saturated so not all the salts have been fully dissolved which could induce errors. The temperature of the solutions deviated slightly which could influence the viscosities of the sucrose soultion. As the results were gathered by different groups and each used different apparatus so there could be some calibration errors or human errors. The investigation could be improved by each groups using the same viscosities so it is easier to compare. The solubility of the salts could be checked before to ensure that the masses of salts added would dissolve in solutions. Temperature of the solutions can be kept at constant by using a water bath so the viscosities errors can be minimised. Other innovation steps could be carried out further such as the effect of temperature, the non- electrolyte used, other salts e.g.: HCl, differences in conductance and Walden's product between weak and strong electrolytes. 