<heading>Introduction</heading>Hannah Arendt is one of the most original thinkers of our modern age. She was born into a middle-class Jewish family in Germany in the beginning of the 20 th century. Exhibiting a strong passion and sensitive insight into intellectual activities at an early age, she studied philosophy under two most influential modern philosophers, Jaspers and Heidegger. During World War II, being a Jewish woman, she suffered from Nazi-German's anti-Semitism and was once sent into prison for a short time. She managed to escape to the States in 1941 and spent the rest of her life there. These life experiences have unavoidably diverted her attention from pure theoretical and philosophical activities to practical area of politics. In The Origins of Totalitarianism and Eichmann in Jerusalem, Arendt answered the puzzling question, for all those who suffered and survived World War II, how is totalitarian domination and evil of both Nazism and Stalinism possible in the modern age. Without doubt is Arendt a great writer with extraordinary literary talent. Unlike most of the German scholars, her style is articulate, imaginative and passionate. However, judged from the standard of traditional political philosophical writing, these two studies have far more empirical facts than theoretical construction, and therefore are not so significant in terms of theory of political philosophy. Nevertheless, we could find some clues to her "hidden continent of thought" in Between Past and Future and Human Condition, in which she developed her most important concept of political "action". Arendt found the archetype of "action" in speech and action in the political arena of Greek polis: being seen and heard by one's peers. However, many of Arendt's critics argued that it is unjustified for Arendt to graft "action" onto the modern society. Arendt has ignored the conditions of "action" in ancient Greek: a small and comparatively homogeneous population and slave economy, which is non-existent in the modern society. According to them, Arendt's concept of action is no more than the dream of a philosopher and nostalgia of the irretrievable past, without much relevance to modern politics. This essay starts with the question whether Arendt is a modern thinker or an anachronism. By examining "labor", "work", "action" with her theory of concept of history and comparing her with Marx, the essay attempt to show that not only is Arendt one of the most creative and original thinkers in the area of political philosophy, but she also belongs to the modern age. Her writings are firmly rooted in the modern condition; dealing with the problems only arising in the modern age; giving her solution to the predicament of human in a new and unprecedented way. In the first section, Arendt's concepts of labor, work and action are introduced. I attempt to show these three are historical structure as the interrelation between them and between vita activa and vita contemplative depends on the particular historical settings. The next section continues the discussion of Arendt's identification of a modern historical consciousness and its break with tradition, under which Arendt's hierarchy, labor, work and action comes into being. The historiography of early Greek, Plato, Hegel-Marxian and their corresponding interrelation with politics will be discussed. In the next section, Bradshaw's interpretation of Arendt's "labor", "work" and "action" will be introduced and critically analyzed. Finally, by comparing and contrasting labor/action and alienation/world-alienation between Marx and Arendt, I point out that their theories are not necessarily antithetical but complementary. <heading>Labor, Work and Action</heading>According to Suchting, the phrase "the human condition" was borrowed from Montaigne, whose age, "like our own, was characterized by rapid and fundamental changes in every sphere of life. It is in such periods, when the traditional, customary framework of principles, implicit and explicit, is no longer able to provide an unquestioned orientation for thought and action". (Suchting, 1962: 47) In one word, "the human condition" signifies an opening-up of a new historical epoch and its departure from the history and the tradition. Another more important reason for using this phrase is that it stresses the conditions under which human beings lead their life. As long as they stay on the earth, they are conditioned not only by the law of nature, biological process of their body, but also by some self-made process to a more and more considerable extent. Arendt designates three fundamental human activities under the term vita activa: labor, work and action. Each of them "corresponds to one of the basic conditions under which life on earth has been given to man". (1958: 7) Labor is human's metabolism with nature. It is the most natural and spontaneous category of vita activa. All the products of labor are consumed immediately, leaving no long-lasting end-product behind. "Work provides an 'artificial' world of things, distinctly different from all natural surroundings." (Arendt, 1958: 7) Action is most "human" activity among the three, which is highly related with another concept of plurality: living among man, being seen and heard by one's peers. "...it is only in acting that a man defines himself, by making his essence into a tangible reality in the form of deeds" before the audience. (O'Sullivan, 1976: 231) Obviously, these three activities are not of same weight in Arendt's scale. "Labor, work, and action are not merely different forms of activity but comprise a scale in which each marks the achievement of a progressively higher level of consciousness." (O'Sullivan, 1976: 229) Whether the scale is level of self-consciousness is problematic or not, in Arendt's hierarchy, labor is at the bottom, which is bound up with human's biological needs and dictated by the law of nature. And action is the highest achievement of human beings. The differences between labor/work and work/action need to be closely analyzed here. Ring pointed out that "The distinction between work and labor centers upon what each activity produces, rather than the experiences of production itself." (1989: 435) His reason is that the labor's product is the most perishable stuff, such as food, while work produces cloth for example, which lasts longer than food, and is therefore more stable and secure. Therefore, "The distention between work and labor is objective, rather than subjective." (1989: 435) His interpretation is illuminating, but he ignores work, in Arendt's terms, is a category of human activity with higher self-consciousness. In other words, technically speaking, making clothes may be no more complicated than growing crops, but it does take into account more human elements besides the uncontrollable natural conditions. On the other hand, <quote>Fabrication is distinguished from action in that it has a definite beginning and a predictable end: it comes to an end with its end product, which not only outlasts the activity of fabrication but from then on has a kind of 'life' of its own. Action, on the contrary, as the Greeks were the first to discover, is in and by itself utterly futile. It never leaves and end product behind itself. If it has any consequences at all, they consist in principle in an endless new chain of happenings whose eventual outcome the actor is utterly incapable of knowing or controlling beforehand. The most he may be able to do is to force things into a certain direction, and even of this he can never be sure. (Arendt, 1961: 59-60)</quote>It may be problematic to say labor, work and action are positioned in sequence in the scale of self-consciousness. "These categories are not categories in the Kantian sense, i.e. a-historical structures of mind. They are themselves historical structures". (Ricoeur, 1983: 61) Here, "historical" does not mean that certain categories of the three only exist or disappear during some specific historical period. As Arendt made clear, as long as people stay on the earth, they are bound to all of these three activities. The point is that the inner structure between these three and the relation between vita activa and vita contemplative depends on the particular historical settings. <heading>Ancient and Modern Historical Consciousness </heading>What's the relation between labor, work and action in the so-called "history"? In this section, I will examine the historical consciousness in the time of early Greece, Plato, and Marx in order to connect to the hierarchy of the three human activities. Arendt reminds us in The Concept of History that history is not an independent and self-contained discipline, but is embedded in men's perception of the nature of the world and human themselves. There is no history without the existence of human beings. What's more, "The character of political experience and a specific understanding of history imply each other. In thinking and acting politically, we cannot help thinking and acting historically." (Hansen, 1993: 26) According to Arendt, in the eyes of Greeks, human are the only mortal beings in the cosmos, which means only human beings "move along a rectilinear line in a universe where everything, if it moves at all, moves in a cyclical order". (Arendt, 1961: 42) Therefore, the task of history is to save men from the ashes of time, which is taken by poets and historiographers, like Homer and Thucydides. Their writings recorded great deeds and great words of human beings. Action is history itself. The non-philosophical way of remedy to the paradox of the futility of human activities, sets up the example for Arendt, though it is lost and overshadowed by Plato's vita contemplativa. Plato denied his contemporaries the realization of immortality in politics, for in his time, Greek polis was already in the decline. He believed mortal men could "immortalize" in the capacity of thought, in vita contemplativa. All the earthly affairs, vita activa, are in continuous flux, and are therefore inferior to philosophical thinking, whose object is the eternal idea. Likewise, Plato's Republic, ruled by philosopher-king, is made up of soldiers (action) and laborers (work and labor). This hierarchy, which marks the beginning of the western political philosophy and exerts long-lasting influence upon western political world, is violently challenged by its last disciple Marx. Marx's doctrines, "labor created man", "violence is the midwife of history", "working class will be the only legitimate heir of classical philosophy" stand in radical opposition to Plato's teachings. "Marx's leap from theory into action, and from contemplation into labor" (Arendt, 1961: 29) does not come from nowhere. Combined with his labor theory, Marx's messianic project is an attempt to realize Hegel's philosophy of history, which regards the whole of world history as one continuous development. "The overwhelming mass of the most divergent values, the most contradictory thoughts and conflicting authorities, all of which had somehow been able to function together, were reduced to a unilinear, dialectically consistent development". (Arendt, 1961: 28) On the blueprint of Marx's communist society, politics will be cancelled out. There will be neither interest struggle nor class relation between people in the future according to the law of history. Marx is "the last those thinkers who stand at the borderline between the modern age's earlier interest in politics and its later preoccupation with history." (Arendt, 1961: 81) He "superimposed the 'the law of history' upon politics and ended by losing the significance of both". (1961: 30) Marx's break with the tradition, according to Arendt, is partly due to the development of modern science, and is culminated with the emergence of modern technology. As Arendt argued: <quote>Since the rise of modern science, whose spirit is expressed in the Cartesian philosophy of doubt and mistrust, the conceptual framework of the tradition has not been secure. The dichotomy between contemplation and action, the traditional hierarchy which ruled that truth is ultimately perceived only in speechless and actionless seeing, could not be upheld under conditions in which science became active and did in order to know. (1961: 39)</quote>Man's interference with nature, concomitant with his first attempt to split an atom, marks the new age when man starts his own process. In this way, man turns both history and nature into a process, which he could act upon. According to Arendt, it is "the modern concept of process pervading history and nature alike" that "separates the modern age from the past more profoundly than any other single idea." (1961: 63) Through tracing the evolution of historical consciousness in the "history", we can see Arendt is self-consciously a modern thinker. She examined the Greek polis with a distanced appreciation as it resembles to some extent the post-industrial society of Arendt's time. As Arendt said, <quote>...in the initial stages of the modern age, man was thought of primarily as homo faber, until, in the nineteenth century, mans was interpreted as an animal laborans whose metabolism with nature would yield the highest productivity of which human life is capable. Against the background of these schematic definitions, it would be adequate for the world we have come to live in to define man as a being capable of action... (1961: 63)</quote>Both Ancient Greek and modern societies have allowed considerate amount of freedom to human action and define man as a being capable of action, rather than of labor and fabrication. But Arendt sensed the danger that in the modern world, action is often reduced to work and labor, which could cause unprecedented disaster to the human society. <heading>Critique of Bradshaw's Interpretation</heading>In the previous sections, we have explored Arendt's hierarchy of labor, work and action along with their inner structure in Ancient Greece, Plato's republic and Marx's classless society. In this section, I will provide a more detailed account of Arendt's concepts of labor, work and action based on the critique of Bradshaw's interpretation. Bradshaw argued Arendt's concept of action is a deliberate rebellion against the tradition. "She rejected the idea that there is a transcendent object of contemplation from which affairs of the world are judged and the idea that history generates some comprehensive meaning 'acting behind the backs of men.'" (1989: 5-6) In other words, Arendt neither sympathized with the preponderance of vita contemplativa over vita activa in Plato's Republic, nor did she believe Marx's paradise on the earth will be realized in the unfolding of history. Arendt's concept of action is to defend genuine politics against the encroachment of both philosophy and society. In Bradshaw's interpretation, these two trends are represented by Plato and Marx respectively: <quote>Philosophy is antithetical to politics because it stresses the life and thought of the individual; society is antagonistic to politics since it is chiefly concerned with the common 'housekeeping' needs of men. The juxtaposition of political action to philosophizing and social housekeeping is similar to the contrast of action with work and labor. Philosophy is an enemy of politics because traditional philosophy, as Arendt understood it, was based on the model of work. And society is anathema to politics because it is occupied with the laboring activity. (1989: 13)</quote>Work is the worldliest activity among the three categories of vita activa, which builds up the artificial but long-lasting home and objective world for human beings. Plato is the first man to "liberate homo faber from his dependence on the realm of action" (1989: 15), at the same time he is to blame for the decline of man's capacity of action. "Any application of the model of work to politics denigrates action as a purposeful activity sui generis. For Plato, politics was not meaningful in itself, but only to the extent that it provided a secure place in which the philosopher could pursue his love of the divine". (1989: 15) "Once men began to think about the world they inhabited, they lost something of their capacities, or at least displaced these capacities on false objects and goals. With the advent of philosophy, action was deprived of its rightful expression in politics, and was deflected into other areas." (1989: 17) According to Bradshaw, traditional political philosophy is responsible for the degeneration of action into work. On the other hand, Marx is wrong "for making the laboring activity the basis of his theory of human emancipation" (1989: 14), which further reduces work to labor. "Once men start to view the products of their own hands as having no other end but to make more products, it is a short step from there to treating all the world, both natural and man-made, as the means to man's infinite making". Labor for labor's own sake, signifies for Bradshaw, "the mastery of homo faber degenerates into the slavishness of animal laborans; the objective world declines into the consumer world of modern society". (1989: 18) To conclude, Bradshaw connected Arendt's critique of labor with Marx and work with Plato. And both of them overshadow the dignity of genuine politics and pose threat upon action. Bradshaw's interpretation is reasonable to some extent in that he points out Arendt's concept of action is a conscious rebellion against the tradition and the past, but he failed to take the historical background of Plato's philosophical thought into account and therefore his imputation of Plato is unjustified. What's more, he underestimates the impact of Marx's theory of labor upon Arendt's concept of action. The connections of Marx-labor and Plato-work are also illegitimate. It should be made clear that Plato was born after the downfall of Greek polis. Therefore, his discovery of contemplative life for philosophers is not the cause for the decline of action. Instead it is the remedy to its predicament. Arendt has no intension to connect the concept of work with Plato's philosophical teachings as she mentioned "...in the initial stages of the modern age, man was thought of primarily as homo faber" (1961: 63) It implies that homo faber is already a modern phenomenon which appears with the development of modern science and is explicitly displayed in Hobbes's break with traditional philosophy. Hobbes's project is to "guild purposes and aims to establish a reasonable teleology of action". (Arendt, 1961: 76) The Leviathan is artificial man-made mortal god in order to guarantee the security of people, distinct from the previous whose legitimacy derives from God or Nature. It will also be oversimplified to equalize Marx's labor theory with labor in Arendt's terms. Marx's labor theory concerned more than the biological needs of human beings, based on which Arendt develops her own concept of action. We will take a close look by comparing Marx and Arendt in the next section. <heading>Marx and Arendt</heading>Towering over the work of Arendt is the spectre of Marx. Marx, according to Arendt, is a conscious rebel against tradition. He inverted Plato's hierarchy upside down to assign the highest position to labor, which has misled many critics to assume Marx's displacing is responsible for "the rise of the social", in Arendt's terms. "Marx did not invent the world he criticized, and Arendt believes that the declining importance of the objective world was well under way before Marx ever wrote". (Ring, 1989: 433) She warns us, "To hold the thinkers of the modern age, especially the nineteenth-century rebels against tradition, responsible for the structure and conditions of the twentieth century is even more dangerous than it is unjust." Their rebellion is noble and "their greatness lay in the fact that they perceived their world as one invaded by new problems and perplexities which our tradition of thought was unable to cope with". (1961: 27) The new problem for Arendt is the same as Marx's: She defined the modern age in its "theoretical glorification of labor" and a "factual transformation of the whole of society into a laboring society."(1958: 4) It is characterized with the rise of the social, which not only blurred the clear-cut distinction between the public and private, but turned both of them into the social sphere. "It also signified for Arendt a public arena in which human beings are assigned a common identity or a common characteristic" (Bradshaw. 1989: 12), which substituted the public sphere of equality based upon plurality. Here, plurality means <quote>...simultaneous presence of innumerable perspectives and aspects in which common world presents itself and for which no common measurement or denominator can ever be devised. For though the common world is the common meeting ground of all, those who are present have different locations in it, and the location of two objects. Being seen and being heard by others derive their significance from the fact that everybody sees and hears from a different position. (Arendt, 1958: 57) </quote>Arendt's account of the plurality being reduced into "sameness" and "conformity" echoes Marx's story in that use value hides behind the exchange value of commodities on the market. Money, or exchange value enables qualitatively diversified objects to be quantitatively measurable and comparable. Therefore, Marx's exchange value is also a historical concept, which is specific to the capitalistic production society. The concept of exchange value only emerges on the stage after the rise of the social sphere. Marx is definitely not an apologist for capitalist society. He is instead a great critic of capitalism, like Arendt herself. Both Marx and Arendt are aware of potential threat inherent in the rise of the social or in the dominance of the capitalistic production upon human freedom, but they provide different remedies in their own ways. Labor is the central theme of Marx's analysis. Marx's "Labor created man", in Arendt's eyes, is conscious break from the tradition of description of man as a n animal rationale, to an animal laborans. (1961) However, it is unjustified to assume Marx's concept of labor to be the same thing as Arendt's. Arendt's labor, as we have discussed, relates to the metabolism with nature, to the biological needs of human beings. By contrast, Marx's labor is inherited from Hegel's version, especially in the Phanomenologie des Geistes. Hegel conceived man as "the result of his own labor". Their distinction could be made more clear by Marx's identification of human labor and animal labor: "Animals 'produce only under the domination of immediate physical need, while man produces independently of physical need and truly produces only when free from this need' " . (Suchting, 1962: 50) <quote>He finds this peculiarity of human labor in the fact that the latter results in something "which, at the beginning of the process, already existed in the worker's imagination, already existed as an idea." The human laborer "not only...effects (bewirkt) a change of form in natural objects", as animals and insects do, but at the same time "realizes (verwirklicht) his own purpose" in nature. But this is precisely the second of Miss Arendt's criteria of "work". (Suchting, 1962: 49)</quote>For Marx, labor is more than an autonomous activity of biological life. It marks a higher level of self-consciousness and by means of which, man can fulfill his potential. However, under the conditions of capitalistic society, labor is deprived of humanity and becomes alienated. <quote>For in the first place labor, life-activity, productive life itself, appears to man merely as a means of satisfying a need－the need to maintain physical existence. Yet the productive life is the life of the species. It is life-engendering life. The whole character of a species－its species character－is contained in the character of its life-activity; and free, conscious activity is man's species character. Life itself appears only as a means to life. (Marx, 1978: 75-76)</quote>Alienated labor signifies that in the capitalistic production, man is estranged from the product of his labor, from his life activity, from his species-being, and from his fellow people, which corresponds to Arendt's description of dehumanized labor. In Marx's view, human emancipation from alienated labor is immanent in labor itself, not by any transcendent power. By pointing out the paradox of capitalist production, Marx forecasted capitalism is digging its own grave and a revolution organized by proletariats will eventually transform the capitalist society into a communist one. In the future human community promised by Marx, alienated labor will be abolished. Labor returns to be man's intrinsic nature, a voluntary need of human species, free from any external forces. Marx's diagnosis of capitalist society is incisive, but his prescription, for Arendt, is still confined within the framework of capitalist society. "Arendt believed that Marx's criticism was...not critical enough. He accepted the framework of a world that had already accepted laboring as its central activity and had already lost the importance of public space, the place of permanence, greatness, immortality, and eternity". (Ring, 1989: 434) In one word, Marx does not mean to challenge the status quo directly but presuppose the rise of the social and the eclipse of the common world, which is therefore bound to fail. As Arendt describes, "the process of world alienation started by expropriation and characterized by an ever-increasing progress in wealth, can only assume even more radical proportions if it is permitted to follow its own inherent law." (1958: 257) Arendt uses the phrase "world alienation", derived from Marx's concept of alienation, to depict not only the rise of the social in its initial stage, but also its complete dominance over the world: "Just as the family and its property were replaced by class membership and national territory, so mankind now begins to replace nationally bound societies, and the earth replaces the limited state territory." (1958: 257) Capitalism in the 20 th century has fixed and permeated into every corner of the society. The situation is even more desperate than Marx's time. What's more, the 20 th century has witnessed the deliberate break-up with the dominance of capitalism, which only leads to more disastrous violation of human freedom and human dignity, represented by the totalitarianism of Stalinism. Witnessing the impotence of both the traditional political philosophy and Marxian doctrines in dealing with the predicament of mankind in the age of world alienation, Arendt offers her prescription: the rediscovery of "action" in the Greek polis, which promises a public sphere independent of economical concerns. Action is closely linked with the existence of public sphere, where man discloses who he is before his peers through speeches and actions. We should bear in mind: <quote>The Human Condition did not present a sketch of a political constitution as Plato had done, but it did often in the Platonic sense, an "ideal" that embodied an ideal. And like Plato's, her idea owed virtually nothing to the facts of history and only slightly more to the history of political ideas. "The political" was the ideal. The intention behind it was to combat a different version of the masses. (Wolin, 1983: 6)</quote>"Arendt is interested in resurrecting a secure world that would provide structure for human activity and permit perspective and understanding for the activity". (Ring, 1989: 433) She is a more radical rebel than Marx. Her project attempts to secure a public sphere outside the territory of economy rather than inside in Marx's version. Her concept of "action" is originative and inspiring, which is a conscious rebellion against the tradition of vita contemplativa and transcendence over Marx's labor theory. Arendt has successively diverted our attention from the alienated world to the Ancient Greek, where she rediscovered the concept of action. Greek polis is an ideal model for Arendt, but it could not be copied into the modern world without adaptation. Arendt has made a tentative attempt, but she did not fully develop her theory political philosophy, which somehow allows much freedom for the interpretation. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This essay starts with the question, whether or not Arendt is a modern thinker or an anachronism without much relevance to the modern situation. By exploring Arendt's vita activa and comparing it with Ancient Greece, Plato's Republic and Marx's labor theory, I try to show Arendt is self-consciously modern. I also present a dialogue between Marx and Arendt, based on the critique of Bradshaw's interpretation. Marx is a great critic of capitalism. His labor theory forecasts the doom of capitalism and its overthrow by proletariats. However, Arendt thinks Marx's labor theory is still confined within the framework of capitalism. Arendt then provides a more radical prescription to the predicament of mankind in the alienated world since the rise of the social. The concept of Action for Arendt is alternative way to secure a public sphere independent of economic concerns. Greek polis serves to be the ideal model for Arendt. 