Anne Phillips who is quoted above believed that to fully achieve equality we must not only focus on the redistribution of wealth but make sure people are given equality of opportunity in all areas of life. Throughout this essay I will discuss the problematic nature of equalising money in particular with reference to income, as well as introducing feminist ideas on the inequality of women within society and whether economic policies such as equal pay is a successful way for feminists to achieve women's equality. <fnote>Phillips 2004. </fnote>Since the middle of the twentieth century women have progressively entered the workplace, in particular in careers which were traditionally male centered. This can partially be contributed to women's improvements in education, as well as women's general movement from the domestic to the public sphere. In the 1970s many feminists called for equal pay for equal value as women's pay was commonly less than her males equivalents. This resulted in the equal pay act, and the equal pay amendment act 1984. <fnote>Lovell 1990: 135 </fnote>Traditionally women had earned less than men because of the concept of the family wage, this was the concept that a male earner as the breadwinner should earn enough to support a wife and children. The family wage was supported heavily by trade unions in the 1970s and many used this as a reason for women not gaining equal pay. The decline in the family wage in the last twenty years has also been cited by many as the reason women need to work in the modern climate, as families need two wages. However there is evidence that women have always worked to gain extra household money when needed. One of the key problems when analysing economic equality is distinguishing between legitimate and illegitimate equality. Legitimate equality exists when some one has the freedom of choice and their choices result in equality, where as illegitimate inequality exists when the people involved have no choice to the path they take. With reference to the family wage traditionally many women have been unable to enter the public sphere (illegitimate inequality), where as now women have the choice but many still choose to stay at home (legitimate inequality). <fnote>Lovell 1990: 136 </fnote><fnote>Humphries 1977: 145 </fnote><fnote>Phillips 2004. </fnote>This is simplifying economic equality and introduces a popular argument made by materialist feminists. Within contemporary capitalist society money is distributed according to skill. If you possess a skill needed by others they will pay you for it, some skills such as doctors, lawyers are valued more highly than others and so receive higher pay. Many feminists critique that those skills which have a higher value are traditional male careers, those careers which use traditionally female skills such as care work are rewarded less economically. For there to be a true equality materialist feminists believe that the economy needs to be restructured so that those careers with feminine skills such as care work receive comparable pay with male dominated careers. To extend this argument further women's work which is currently not rewarded economically such as looking after children or caring for the elderly also needs to be financially rewarded. <fnote>Walby 1997: 24. </fnote>Equal pay between the sexes should not only be focused on economic equality. Many feminists have claimed that it is not money that matters. However if women are able to receive their own pay they are able to achieve equality in other areas of their life. In the past a woman was often unable to leave an unhappy marriage not only because of stigma but because the wife was reliant on the husbands wage for survival. Since women have entered the workplace there has been an increase in the number of divorces, one reason for this may be because women are now able to support themselves outside of marriage. Having financial independence also gives women more bargaining power in other areas of their lives. Women who work full time may have more bargaining power with her partner in the completion of household duties although the extent to which this is true is debatable. Women can also choose what to spend their money on, if a man is the sole earner a women is dependent on him giving her some form of access to the money and possibly controlling what she spends it on. Women are also able to participate more actively within the public sphere if they participate equally with men within the economics of the country. <fnote>Phillips 2004. </fnote><fnote>Humphries 1977: 143. </fnote><fnote>Walby 1997: 53 </fnote>Whilst equal pay can help women with many inequalities, it also can cause many inequalities. One of the most problematic concepts when discussing equality of money is how to achieve redistribution. We could redistribute money so traditionally female roles receive more recognition but this may cause a shortage in other skills such as doctors, as the current system rewards doctors for the long years spent studying. Money is in many ways not the only key item in redistribution. Time equality is something which is often discussed in male and female inequalities, whilst more women have entered the workplace many women have simply increased the amount of work they do. Many women still do what was previously perceived as women's work as well as a full time job, leaving them more tired and having less free time. <fnote>Walby 1997: 43 </fnote>Although women have entered the workplace with apparent equal opportunities with men, because of the current structure of work many women are still suffering inequalities. Women are more likely to work part time than their male counterparts, largely because they are more likely to look after children or do other tasks as well. Part time wok is often situated in lower paid jobs and the flexibility of it can lead to instability as well as part time workers having fewer rights and privileges as their full time counterparts. For example a part time worker is less likely to have a pension scheme and more likely to work unsociable hours. This fits with the historical idea of women as a reserve workforce able to be called in when needed. <fnote>Walby 1997: 31 </fnote><fnote>Walby 1997:73 </fnote>To achieve an effective source of redistribution we must first look at the outcomes of distribution and which we want to equalise. To achieve full equal outcomes we must depart from thinking in terms of equal opportunity. Everyone must have a chance to achieve success but this cannot be based on race, or gender as homogenous groups. Women may not have the same values towards things as other women, whilst some may be happy to enter the workplace on a traditional male model, others would be happier staying at home. <fnote>Phillips 2004. </fnote>There is a considerable amount of evidence that the reasons for inequality is because people enter the opportunities available before them, this may differ for different ethnicities or sexes. It is not necessarily a genetic difference between sexes or ethnicities. People often follow what they perceive as the right thing to do this may be a women giving up work to care for children or a Chinese person following his families business into a takeaway, this is not necessary a cultural difference. If we are to equalise ability to work within the higher regions of employment and focus on monetary gain as the source for equality we are ignoring those tasks which need completing which are not rewarded financially such as raising children, or caring for others. Unfortunately until there is the ability for everyone to take equal responsibility for these tasks we are unable to say whether a certain sex favours one or the other, in the current environment it is women who usually volunteer as these have been traditionally women's roles. <fnote>Wakby 1997: 43 </fnote><fnote>Phillips 2004: 12 </fnote>To achieve a fairer society we could redistribute money due to principles based on antipoverty. This would mean that no one lived in poverty, and is loosely connected to the principles behind the founding of the welfare state. However stopping poverty does not necessarily redistribute wealth equally among everybody. If we were truly to collect all wealth and redistribute it equally among everybody, everyone would have equal share but it doesn't account for why some people work harder than others to achieve their wealth. Someone who had worked all their life would have the same as someone who had done nothing; this may be fair economic distribution but would not reward work done. <fnote>Phillips 2004 </fnote>If we look at equality solely based on income we can evaluate it two different ways to redistribute income we could call for women and men to receive equal pay for equal work. An idea strongly connected to second wave feminism. This idea has been criticised by many feminists as the redistribution of income based on a patriarchal model rewards those attributes connected with men. So to combat this we would have to combat the current structure of pay, distributing pay more highly amongst caring and more female orientated careers, however this model only rewards those women who are working within the public sphere. To overcome this problem we would need to redistribute pay amongst women who choose to stay at home which would mean an entire restructuring of the economic system. Money is not the only thing that matters when achieving redistribution whilst it can give equality of choice it doesn't necessary mean equality of treatment. But if to achieve full equality we need to restructure the whole of society it is unlikely we will be able to come to an agreement on what constitutes equality or be able to put it into practice. Perhaps re-equalising monetary distribution forms a foundation for achieving other equalities as it gives those who are currently unequal a louder voice within our society. <fnote>Lovell 1990: 135. </fnote>