Sex and the City boasted huge popularity during its production in the late 1990s the show was seen by many as a platform for the discussion of contemporary sexuality and women. The protagonist Carrie spends each episode looking at the problems of young single successful women, problems which usually focus around sex. Sex and the City appears to represent the post feminist view that women could now have it all. The women in sex and the city are financially independent, can go out and enjoy being women in the public sphere, and are able to compete with men in careers, relationships and finances. This was the old feminist ideal of the independent women however these women were sexy.  <fnote>Connell in Segal 1997: 60 </fnote><fnote>Richardson D in Holland and Adkins. 1996: 148 </fnote>Since the beginning of the feminist movement sexuality has been closely linked to women's freedom from domination. The idea that a wife should consume, but does not require sexual gratification from her husband was championed throughout the 19 th century. However Sex and the City portrays a contemporary view of consumption sex, to be enjoyed by women as much as men. In Sex and the City sex is consumed like the rest of culture, the women seek sex like a pair of shoes and then discuss whether their needs were met amongst friends. On a more basic level the women also consume sex through sex toys the explosion of popularity in the 'rampant rabbit' vibrator was closely linked to sex and the city. In episode 72 'critical condition' Samantha even uses a vibrator as a last method to get Miranda's baby to sleep. This consumption sex is further discussed by Weeks, sex is now a market choice to be chosen and sampled. <fnote>Connell in Segal 1997: 71 </fnote><fnote>Dr William Acton Influential Victorian writer on sexuality in women and children: 1813- 1875 </fnote><fnote>Weeks J in Segal 1997: 50 </fnote>The dual model of women as Madonna or whore is something which in many ways Sex and the City aims to challenge but also a typology which many of the episodes draw upon. This dichotomy draws upon the patriarchal perception of women as mother protector, or whore. Classically those women who are seen as whores are on the outset of society. Through portraying the women's active sexuality sex and the city challenges the dichotomy of whore or loose women, as their sexualities are contrasted with their rich lifestyles and attraction by men. However even the program itself questions the full extent these women can avoid the labelling of loose women, throughout the series the women's sexuality is questioned and in episode 41 'running with scissors' Samantha is asked by a potential sexual partner to perform an aids test confirming her position as a loose women, as well as briefly highlighting the role aids and STIs have played in the controlling of contemporary women's sexuality. <fnote>Richardson D in Holland and Adkins. 1996: 164. </fnote><fnote>Edwards in Holland and Adkins. 1996: 186 </fnote><fnote>Richardson D in Holland and Adkins. 1996: 167 </fnote>One of the main themes in Sex and the City is the power of the successful, independent women. The women in the program are young single and portrayed as having it all. They have the perfect division between work and life. Out of the three main characters only Miranda has problems in balancing her work and private life, and this is only temporary after the arrival of her baby. The other women all do jobs which overlap with their social lives, meaning they can still enjoy their social lives. Many feminists have claimed this does not reflect the realities many contemporary women face struggling to balance career and family, within a patriarchal society. Within Sex and the City the only character who portrays this is Miranda, and whilst Miranda's character struggles briefly after having her baby she is ultimately helped by her housekeeper and the baby's father. <fnote>Arthurs 2003 :84 </fnote><fnote>Segal L. in The Guardian 2004 </fnote>For the women in Sex and the City independence not only comes from power of social status but money, they do not need men to finance or care for them. It appears that the any thought of marriage or the sexual contract is inexplicable to these women. However rather than spending each episode discussing the triumphs that they can achieve, these four women spend each episode, six seasons falling in love and out of love with men. Whilst the ever optimistic Charlotte is the only character who considers marriage as a goal, all the women appear to be mapping their lives through men. The programme certainly does not support the view that marriage or men will help solve the girls problems, it is Charlotte's perfect marriage failing that shows the viewers that even in the perfect husband there are still major flaws. However as the voice of Carrie in episode 61 'All that glitters' explains although Charlottes dream has fallen apart 'little girls in their mothers pearls' will still look at the photo shoot of the happy couple and desire to live their life. In this sense Sex and the City is recognising the historical femininities which influence contemporary culture, but also recognising that this ideological life is rarely as it appears. Being single is also portrayed as problematic in episode 3 'bay of married pigs' where Miranda is mistaken to be in a lesbian relationship, through this she gains career opportunities unavailable to her when she was single. In 'the baby shower' however the girls are not enviable of the women who has just given birth but return to the city with relief. The women's friendship at many times proves to be an alternative for heterosexual dependence as they rely on each other for support, even financially, however this questions the extent of their independence as they are replacing heterosexual dependence for the dependence of friends. <fnote>Bunting in The Guardian 2001 </fnote><fnote>Weeks in Segal L. 1997: 44 </fnote><fnote>Arthurs J. 2003 </fnote>The women in sex and the city do not face the problems of choosing a career over marriage. In episode 3 'bay of married pigs', being single is portrayed as a problem, this theme is carried throughout until in the final series Carrie finally realises she's meant to be with her true love 'Mr Big' and Miranda and Charlotte also end up with the men who they have been on and off with throughout the series'. The message is clear here whilst it is ok to be young free and single ultimately a woman needs a man in life. Something which many critiques claimed is not comfortably juxtaposed with the undercurrent themes of the rest of the series of being the independent woman. <fnote>Giddens A, 1992: 12 </fnote>The males within sex and the city prove an interesting reading into the gender dynamics. There are three key males in Sex and the City who could be explained as alfa males. Mr Big is desired by Carrie the central protagonist throughout the seven series, with the series ending when they finally get together. Mr Big is successful and businesslike as the sex and the city website claims 'There is an elusiveness to Big that most women have encountered at some point in time' as his name suggests he is the ultimate man who supports Carrie throughout even offering her the money to buy her apartment, which she refuses. Another key male in sex who fits the alfa male typology is Trey Macdougal, the man Charlotte marries, and Samantha also has her own alpha male in the character of Richard Wright. A self confessed womanizer even Samantha struggles to exert power over Richard. All these three males portray the image of the successful male who exerts his power through patriarchal systems. Another source of male in Sex and the City are the homosexual males the best friends and confidants Anthony Marentino and Stanford Blatch prove to be sounding boards for the women's problems as well as explaining some of their own. <fnote> URL  - HBO Sex and The City </fnote><fnote>Richardson in Holland and Adkins. 1996: 165 </fnote>Historically the city and the public space has always been a male dominated sphere. Within sex and the city the women dominate their public sphere, this is perhaps most notable in the character of Samantha who dominates her world and controls those around her within her role in PR. However whilst these single girls frequent the city, the city sphere is portrayed as being a hostile place for married women. Those women who are married as portrayed in episode 83 'a women's right to shoes' retire from the city and the city girl's life, to suburbs such as 'The Hamptons'. These women no longer spend their time and devotion on themselves represented in the shoes of this episode, but have 'grown up' and devote their time to their family and children. This questions the view that these women are completely free in their situations, or whether upon marriage they are still confined to the existing power relations within marriage.  <fnote>Weeks in Segal L.1997: 50 </fnote>Along with exercising power in the public sphere these women are able to exercise power over their own sexuality, the women want sex and they go after it. However both in sex and within the public sphere many problems everyday women face are hidden. Despite having fluent sexual partners throughout the series' very little mention of contraception is made. None of the women have any contact with sexually transmitted diseases, they also have no encounters with rape despite the fact that this lifestyle can lead to a new burden of choices and mistakes. In many ways this generation are the beneficiaries of the 1970s feminist movement they are able to enjoy the privileges gained through careers, and equality within the public sphere. These women exert power over their domain they can financially support themselves. If money controls the power in relationships these women have equal standing in their relationships and equal bargaining. <fnote>Week in Segal L. 1997: 50 </fnote><fnote>Giddens A. 1992: 12 </fnote>Sex and the City is by no means a perfect embodiment of the feminist dream and it is not meant to be. These women are in charge of their own lives they work hard and can then afford to play hard. Whether sex and the city has transformed the normative feminine subject is highly debatable. The women in Sex and the City showed women and girls that it was ok to have fun, be selfish and enjoy yourself. Issues which were bought up throughout the series gave women confidence in what was acceptable to discuss amongst friends. The differences within the characters also gave women someone to relate to whether it is Charlotte who embodies the little girls dream, or fiercely independent Samantha these women show the troubles of everyday life and all its imperfections. If we are to analyse the power and position of the women in sex and the city it has to be said it does ignore many of the problems of real life. These women are all rich and successful and yet except the occasional episode with Miranda we never see them struggling with work or balancing being sexually abused, 'it's soft vanilla feminism', touching on the issues but not being able to explore them deeply. Sex and the city reinforces the woman's need to be adorned but not for the pleasures of a man the women in sex and the city adorn themselves to fulfil their own desires as well as expressing their own independent status. However many have criticised its obsession with consumption.  <fnote>Segal L in The Guardian 2004 </fnote><fnote>Hertz in The Guardian 2004 </fnote>Sex and the city showed powerful independent women. It highlights contemporary issues of money, sex and power, these women are able to exercise control over their relationships, finances and social life, and however they still desire a man. The series also questions whether this autonomy of control will continue after marriage. The women are also subject to underlying patriarchies within their world, for example of loose women. The public sphere is open to them and they belong to the city but only as long as they are single, once married these girls will move to the suburbs to live as wives and mothers. Within their sexual demands these girls are most certainly free but the price of this is hinted throughout, even the tagline 'Carrie Bradshaw knows good sex' is seen as a source of embarrassment amongst the protagonist when walking the streets of New York. The program also ignores many of the problems of balance everyday women face in trying to balance it all. These women appear to have it all but below the surface there is still doubt about whether being single and free is the life a woman can last forever or there comes a time to move on, as the last episode makes clear to develop the next stage in life, that with a partner. Their current stage in life is still in many ways being controlled by the men around them, as the series indicates their next stage of life will be, although it appears these women are truly independent. <fnote>Fraser N. 1989: 172 </fnote>