In this essay I will assess Derek Parfit's fission-example in his article "Personal Identity". Parfit states that the "the most important claim in the Reductionist View" of personal identity, which he holds, is that "personal identity is not what matters" in survival. Psychological continuity and connectedness is. Thus, I persist over time if certain psychological states exist in the future which are casually connected to my own present psychological states. If my present brain and body were destroyed, I should not consider it death, as long as there exists a replica of me, with my memories, intentions and the like. In "Personal Identity", Parfit argues that survival can be a matter of degree, and that we should give up the language of personal identity. But there are weaknesses with his argument that are strong enough to cast doubt on reductionist views of personal identity. My aim is not to offer a coherent theory of personal identity in its place myself, but merely to criticize Parfit, in particular his first and most important thought-experiment of a person undergoing fission. I will proceed by outlining the relevant aspects of Parfit's argument in Section I and assessing it in Section II. <fnote>Derek Parfit, "Personal Identity", reprinted in Jonathan Glover, ed., The Philosophy of Mind, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976), pp. 142-163. </fnote><fnote>Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), p. 241. </fnote><heading>Section I</heading>The fission-example tackles the question of what would happen if I split into two people. Parfit describes three possible answers: I survive as none of these post-splitting people, as one of them, or as both of them. He swiftly dismisses the first two answers. For the purposes of this essay I will not consider the second answer. I think the important weaknesses of his argument lie in the first and third alternatives. Believing that I survive as none of the resulting people, Parfit argues, is to regard "double success like failure." This is because of two reasons. Firstly, he takes it for granted that if I imagine my brain being transplanted into another person's (brainless) body, I would think that the resulting person would be me. Secondly, he claims that "people have in fact survived with half their brains destroyed." Thus, fission is not sheer fantasy, it could be possible. Parfit also compares the situation of me thinking prior to my fission that I will die to that of someone who upon being told that she could take a drug to double the years of her life, would see it as death. <fnote>Parfit, "Personal Identity", p. 144. </fnote><fnote>Parfit, "Personal Identity", p. 144. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 147. </fnote>Parfit's own answer is that I survive as two different people, without meaning that I am these people. His alternative is that we "give up the language of identity" because "there is no answer to a question about identity." In terms of identity, the fission case simply is perplexing. He concludes the first section of his paper by stating: <fnote>Ibid, p. 146. </fnote><quote>The relation of the original person to each of the resulting people contains all that interests us - all that matters - in any ordinary sense of survival.</quote><fnote>Ibid, p. 148. </fnote>To support the alternative of me surviving as both people without being them, Parfit uses the idea of quasi-memories. A quasi-memory is something I have if I hold a belief about a past experience which in all ways seems like a memory belief, and there is indeed someone who had such an experience, and my belief depends upon this experience in the same way that a memory of an experience depends upon that experience. If we use this new definition of memory, then we can describe a memory of an experience "in a way which does not presuppose that they are had by the same person." We do not need the continued existence of one person to describe relations like memories. Experiences can be impersonal. Thus, I could prior to fission quasi-intend what my successor selves would do. After fission, the resulting people could quasi-remember what the original person had done. <fnote>Ibid, p. 152. </fnote><fnote>Ibid, p. 153. </fnote><heading>Section II</heading>There are three main problems with the fission example, as well as some general problems with using thought-experiments like this in the first place. Recall that Parfit dismisses the possibility that we survive as neither of the two resulting people by referring to two claims. The first claim was this: <quote>We suppose that my brain is transplanted into someone else's (brainless) body, and that the resulting person has my character and apparent memories of my life. Most of us would agree, after thought, that the resulting person is me.</quote><fnote>Parfit, "Personal Identity", p. 143. </fnote>Parfit assumes that his readers will agree with this brain-transplant intuition. The rest of his paper rests on this agreement. Indeed, in much of neo-Lockean thought, brain-transplants are regarded a decisive argument that it is psychological continuity that matters in survival. In a footnote, Parfit says that those who disagree are not necessarily making a mistake; rather, he would have to present the sceptics with a different version of the brain-transplant scenario to convince them. This, however, is not something he does in "Personal Identity". But there are reasons for disagreeing with this scenario. One problem is brought out by Bernard Williams in a Locke-inspired example of 'mind-swapping' where a magician switches the brain-states of an emperor and peasant, so that the emperor-body ends up with all the memories of the peasant. This example is not about brain transplants per se, but it brings out the significance of us being embodied creatures, which Parfit ignores. Most people are inclined to say that the emperor-body now is the peasant, because it has all the memories and characteristics of the peasant, i.e., it is psychologically continuous with the peasant. But Williams points out that it is nearly impossible to 'be the peasant' without being embodied in the peasant's body and for example being able to smile the characteristic peasant smile. It is possible that so much of what the brain-donor was would be lost in a brain-transplant that it is no longer acceptable to think that the same person survives. <fnote>Bernard Williams, Problems of the Self: Philosophical Papers, 1956-1972, (London: Cambridge University Press, 1973), pp. 11-2. </fnote><fnote>P. F. Snowdon, "Persons, Animals, and Ourselves", in Christopher Gill, ed., The Person and the Human Mind: Issues in Ancient and Modern Philosophy, (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990), p. 99. </fnote>One could object to this by posing a new question to Williams. Would he say that a woman whose face gets severely disfigured in a fire has lost so much of her bodily self that she does not survive? Surely, this seems absurd. The scarred woman is spatially and temporally continuous with her former self, the body has just undergone some external changes. To say that we are embodied creatures is not to say that if our body gets altered, we cease to exist. The illustrations Williams uses to make his point are perhaps not convincing enough to suggest that in brain-transplants where the two bodies are very different, too much is lost for the brain-donor to survive. But his example does point to the fact that there is a strong link between the person and her body. Perhaps it does not make sense to distinguish so clearly between body and mind and only pay attention to the mental features of the persons involved as Parfit does. This takes me to what I consider to be the most pressing problem at the very core of Parfit's argument. This is the tension between neo-Lockean theories of personal identity and theories rooted in materialism and the idea that biological continuity is essential for survival, i.e., the animalist view. Parfit, a neo-Lockean, believes that one can distinguish the person from the human animal. A person is seen as "software", as a mode rather than a substance. This software involves memory and intention and is seated in the brain. As long as there is a psychological connection between this software over time, one survives. Material or biological discontinuity is irrelevant. Others, like Michael Ayers, Eric Olson and P. F. Snowdon, disagree. For example, they object that if the person is not identical to the human animal, then who is sitting in a chair typing these words, the animal or the person? If the person is not identical to the animal, then there seems to be two simultaneous mental lives in me, the perceptions of the animals and the same perceptions of the person. They reject this as absurd, and conclude that the animal in the chair is me. Another objection to the neo-Lockean approach is that since we are first unborn foetuses with no psychological continuity with our adult selves, our persistence conditions must be biological, not psychological. The view held by Eric Olson is a useful example of a fundamentally different way to conceive of what matters in survival that challenges Parfit's fission example. <fnote>Michael Ayers, Locke, vol. 1, (London: Routledge, 1991), p. 281. </fnote><fnote>Ayers, p. 283. </fnote><fnote>Eric T. Olson, The Human Animal: Personal Identity Without Psychology, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), p. 73. </fnote>Most likely, Olson would target the above quote from Parfit like this. It is very problematic that Parfit does not specify whether "my brain" means my cerebrum or my whole brain (which includes the brain stem). Two sentences later, Parfit refers to David Wiggin's example of imagining my brain being divided into two. Here the term "brain" seems to suggest the cerebrum only, as the hemispheres can be split into two and function independently, but the brain-stem cannot. If we assume that Parfit means that it is only the cerebrum that is removed, one could object that I am not the resulting person who has my characteristics: I am the animal body left behind, with whom I have a biological continuity. Biological continuity means that my life-sustaining functions like metabolism and excretion are continuing without interruption. From the point of view of biological continuity, I am a human animal, and when my cerebrum is transplanted I simply lose an organ and the capacities that depended on that organ - it is analogous to losing a kidney. On this view, I will survive an event if there in the future exists a being that is numerically identical with me. Numerical identity cannot be a matter of degree. Numerical identity cannot be a matter of psychological continuity either, as this might take a branching form and we cannot count distinct psychological identities for example in the case of multiple personalities. Because we fundamentally and essentially are animals, Olson believes that our persistence conditions should be just the same as they are for other biological organisms. <fnote>Ibid, pp. 42-46. Olson discusses the Whole-Brain Transplant versus the Cerebrum Transplant in general, and not in direct relation to Parfit's argument. </fnote><fnote>Eric T. Olson, The Human Animal: Personal Identity Without Psychology, pp. 7-21. </fnote>Parfit might reply that this simply misses his point. Olson thinks that what matters in survival is numerical identity, that is, biological continuity. But Parfit is arguing that what matters is psychological continuity because it is psychological continuity that gives judgments of personal identity great importance. We just need to free these important judgments from the presupposition of identity, so we can focus on what really matters: matters of merit and desert, guilt, memory and so on, matters that Olson does not discuss. Thus, Olson's arguments do not directly address Parfit's actual concerns. But they do address the "almost unargued" traditional and popular neo-Lockean emphasis on thought being distinct from the bodily self. Furthermore, Olson's animalist views are not irrelevant for practical concerns. In fact, they are highly relevant. What it is to be a person is highly contested. Parfit makes a normative judgment when he argues that what matters is just our mental capacities. On Olson's view, what matters first and foremost is that we belong to the species Homo sapiens. With this as a metaphysical basis for what our persistence in time consists of, we could then proceed to make moral decisions about psychological relations that bear on punishment, the moral status of foetuses and the like. But these judgments are more ethical than metaphysical. <fnote>Parfit, "Personal Identity", p. 149. </fnote><fnote>Ayers, p. 287. </fnote>The second problem with the fission example is the empirical data Parfit relies on to support it. The only empirical evidence he mentions is a footnote on R. W. Sperry used to support the existence of "separate spheres of consciousness" after certain surgical operations dividing the two hemispheres. But there is also empirical evidence which suggests that the two hemispheres are not capable of functioning independently. The human brain is not just two hemispheres, which might or might not have all the essential functionings so as to work by themselves, and retain all the characteristics of one person. There is also the brain stem. Colwyn Trevarthen has done research on monkeys and subsequently humans. He has claimed that the brain stem plays a crucial role in the production and unification of consciousness, and that it is false to regard the two hemispheres as independent and separate streams of consciousness. There are also a number of other scientists who argue based on research on commissurotomy patients that "we must regard the [...] patient as a single subject of experience and action." Thus, what Parfit states as fact is actually a highly controversial area for scientists. In this light, the thought-experiment seems more like sheer fantasy rather than technical possibility. <fnote>Parfit, "Personal Identity", p. 144. </fnote><fnote>John Robinson, "Personal Identity and Survival", The Journal of Philosophy, 6 (1988), pp. 324-7. </fnote><fnote>Robinson, p. 327. </fnote>The final problem regards Parfit's comparison of me seeing fission as death with someone who upon being told that she could take a drug to double the years of her life, considers it death. For him, the only difference with fission is that here, the years run concurrently.  <fnote>Parfit, "Personal Identity", p. 147-8. </fnote>But Parfit's analogy is a 'disanalogy' and overlooks salient differences. The only difference is not that the years would run concurrently. If I took a drug that double my life time, I would live, say, 150 years instead of 75. Let us say I marry one man, have kids and a job. Now, I am a socially embedded creature. My husband and kids have a relation to that unique person, that one person I refer to when I say "I". If I split, this would be upset. Which one of my successor selves would put the kids to bed? Who would go to work? Both my successors would quasi-feel the same love for the children, and have the same quasi-memories of their career. But it would be absurd if both put the kids to bed and went to the same job. If I take the drug, my body and psyche may change quite a lot between now and the age of 150. But I am spatio-temporally continuous. People around me can refer to me by my one name and know which unique person that refers to. If I split, it will not seem like a 'double success' to anybody around me. It will just be absurd and they will have lost that one person that was me. Moreover, in addition to being a socially embedded creature, I am also an embodied creature and 'in any ordinary sense of survival' this interests me. Successor selves have to view their memories as quasi-memories. Thus, they have no autobiographical memories. John Campbell argues that anything that disturbs the autobiographical organization of our memories, be it extrinsic or not, actually disturbs psychological connectedness. Autobiographical memories, remembering what I did, is something that really matters in an ordinary sense of survival. It is the glue that sticks various experiences together in a meaningful frame of what I have done, what my life is. Thus, Parfit wants to free the important questions of memory and responsibility from the idea of identity because these questions are what actually matters, they are of practical concern. But the result is a view of persistence in time that seems highly impractical if not outright absurd. <fnote>John Campbell, "The First Person: The Reductionist View of the Self", in David Charles and Kathleen Lennon, eds., Reduction, Explanation and Realism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992), p. 409. </fnote>Generally, one could object to the usage of thought-experiments to ground metaphysical arguments altogether. Kathleen Wilkes has argued that using thought-experiments when considering personal identity is entirely misconceived. Fission takes us into the land of fantasy that has no bearing on actual human beings, and thus, it is pointless. I do not think Wilkes's argument is sufficiently philosophical to undermine the long-run tradition of thought-experiments. She does not engage with the main writers on personal identity at all: she does not discuss neither Parfit nor Williams nor Wiggins. Moreover, a world where the imagination is not allowed to enter philosophical debate seems both dull and ignorant of what enables abstract thinking in the first place. What we need to be careful of, however, is how thought-experiments are framed, and whether there is any bias 'tricking' us into seeing 'the obvious'. The assumption that the person is different from the animal is problematic, and frames the intuitions Parfit relies on. Perhaps if William's examples of brain-information-swapping in "The Self and The Future" was extended to brain-transplants, and animalist frames altered the brain-transplant intuition, Parfit's thought-experiment would seem even less compelling. That, however, would be a matter for another paper. <fnote>See Kathleen V. Wilkes, Real People: Personal Identity Without Thought Experiments, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), p. 45. </fnote><fnote>Geoffrey Madell, "Book Review of Real People: Personal Identity Without Thought Experiments by Kathleen V. Wilkes", Philosophical Quarterly, 157 (1989), pp. 515-518. </fnote><fnote>In Bernard Williams, Problems of the Self: Philosophical Papers. </fnote><heading>Conclusion</heading>Thus, to conclude, Parfit is too hasty and too dismissive of some very important points. There are real problems with the nature of brain transplants, the relationship between the body and the person and whether it even makes sense to distinguish the two, empirical evidence for his claims, one of his analogies and the role of autographical memories and how to use thought-experiments in philosophical reasoning. In the light of these weaknesses, Parfit's argument that identity does not matter seems unsettlingly unresolved. 