<heading>1.0 Introduction</heading>Despite remarkable rise in female labour force participation and a persistent, though slow movement towards greater equality in society, household work remains highly segregated and predominantly a woman's responsibility. Over the past decades, research has recorded a decrease in time women spend on household work, but evidence from several researches carried out shows that women still do more work compared to men. This essay addresses two important questions in the area of domestic and care work in the household. Firstly, why is it that globally, women continue to shoulder the major burden of domestic and care work in the household, and secondly how can this phenomenon be explained? To answer the questions, the essay will investigate feminist theories on sexual division of labour, drawing specifically on three major feminist theories, the essay will compare research data from various regions of the world on sexual division of labour, to explore the reasons why women continue to shoulder the major burden of domestic and care work. Furthermore, it will discuss women and men's perceptions of fairness of domestic division of labour. The paper draws its conclusion from available data and argues that there have been a slight change in domestic division of labour between women and men, but this change remains very insignificant in measuring gender inequalities and the subordination of women. <heading>2.0 Feminist Theoretical Perspectives</heading>Since the early 1920s many feminist have attempted to search for the origin of unequal and hierarchical relationships in society in general and the asymmetric division of labour between men and women in particular, this has been an unmentionable field (Mies, 1998). Various theories and ideologies have been developed to explain this anomaly. In this section, I will attempt to review various feminist theoretical approaches. <heading>2.1 Biological perspectives </heading>Social origin of sexual division of labour within a feminist perspective tends to explain sexual division of labour as a natural phenomenon. The concept of nature has been used to explain social inequalities or exploitative relations as inborn and beyond the scope of social change. Women's share in the production of life is usually defined as a function of their biology or nature. Thus women's household and childcare work are seen as an expression of their physiology, which makes them responsible for giving birth to children, and the fact that they naturally bear the uterus (Mies, 1998). This concept seems to suggest that men and women simply divide different tasks between themselves, it hides the fact that men's work are considered as truly human ones (that is productive) while women's tasks are determined by their nature. This definition explains sexual division of labour as one between human labour and natural activity. In addition, it obscures the fact that the relationship between male (that is human) and female (natural) labourers or workers is a relationship of dominance and exploitation (Mies, 1998). This is in line with Firestone's argument that the natural reproductive differences between the sexes led directly to the first division of labour at the origin of class (Firestone, 1970 cited in Armstrong and Armstrong 1990). Armstrong and Armstrong (1990) however have a contrary view, that capitalist mode of production not biology renders women subordinate, and ensure that their reproductive capacities are a liability rather than a resource. They argue that biological capacities are structured, defined and evaluated within the political economy. <heading>2.2 Socialization gender - roles attitude</heading>Greenhalgh's (1988) study of Taiwan family systems supports the hypothesis that the roots of women's subordination lies in the family system. She argues that although both the economic environment and the family worsened gender differences, the capitalist environment only provided the resources that the family systems used to reproduce and strengthen traditional hierarchies. The study reveals that parents were agents of sexual stratification within the family, perceiving that their future well being depended on their sons, after their daughters have been married out, they employed strategies to improve opportunities that will improve their son's resources. Ultimately daughters were used to improve sons; this resulted in increased gap between sons and daughters in their degree of personal autonomy. While parents gave their sons increasing autonomy to develop the knowledge, skills and contacts that would augment their future earning potential, they sought to increase their control over their daughters (Greenhalgh's, 1988). I would say that this practice is still being exhibited in many societies in Africa, and has given rise to the phenomenon of son preference. Socialization theory suggest that men and women with ''traditional'' attitudes will share less housework, whereas men and women with ''non-traditional'' attitudes will share more housework. These theories assume that from childhood on, men and women are socialized to conform to predetermined ''sex roles'' and thereby develop gendered personalities and preferences (Coltrane, 2000) Some feminist propose that from birth, children are socialized into roles that are different for each sex and that are differently valued by each sex. Learning roles means learning sex-specific beliefs and behaviour patterns. Such early learning provides the foundation for later years, but some adult socialization and re-socialization continues through out life. These ideas and roles guide both women and men into sex-appropriate work within and outside the household (Armstrong and Armstrong, 1990). Armstrong and Armstrong (1990) however argued that both at the descriptive and analytical levels, the role theory is inadequate in explaining behaviour patterns in women and men. Theories and research based on the socialization of women and men into belief systems and appropriate roles have demonstrated that ideas are important, and that women and men often think and behave in different ways. However, such theories have not provided a systematic explanation of how or why ideas and behaviour patterns develop, or how and why they change (Armstrong and Armstrong, 1990). Even then, it's obvious within every society that most institutions especially educational institutions develop their curriculum and books around these gender norms. Most books use illustrations that reinforce gender roles, and so individuals grow with these perceptions. <heading>2.3 Economic and Exchange Perspectives</heading>Becker (1981) suggested that three overlapping economic models of household labour allocation have dominated research agendas. The neoclassical economic theory of human capital investment and its ''new household economics'' variants suggest that women and men allocate time to household or paid work based on maximizing overall efficiency. Human capital is usually measured by education, previous labour market experience, and the wages or jobs available to an employee (Bergen, 1991). The resource-bargaining viewpoint focuses on family power. It examines the division of household labour as a product of negotiation between people who use valued resources to strike the best deal based on self-interest, and focuses on conjugal exchanges in the context of gender and class inequalities. In this variation, women are assumed to enter into a 'contract' where they exchange household labour in return for economic support from a main breadwinner (Brines, 1993). In most household labour studies, these three economic-exchange approaches are lumped into a single relative resource hypothesis, though Becker's human capital theory, with its assumptions about the efficiency of labour specialization by gender, is sometimes operationalized using time availability (Becker, 1981). All three theories share an emphasis on how partners' income enters into the allocation of housework between husbands and wives (Coltrane, 2000). The relative resources approach takes an exchange-based perspective, such that the division of housework reflects the resources that women and men bring to their relationships. Individuals with the most resources (e.g. earnings, education) use those resources to negotiate a favourable division of labour for themselves (Davis and Greenstein, 2004). Similarly, Lewin-Epstein and Stier (2006) suggested that in the resource dependency perspective, the division of household tasks reflects the degree of difference of power, of the spouses within the household, and this in turn is determined by their relative social status. From the perspective of the relative resources theory, it is expected that there will be a decrease in women's household labour, when their contribution to household income increases, because of a gain in bargaining power in relation to other household variables (Artis and Pavalko, 2003). Other factors that may affect the exchange relations between the spouses could be market work, which imposes time constraints on the amount of time available for housework (Coltrane, 2000). <heading>2.4 Time availability approach</heading>The time availability perspective suggests that there is a relationship between the number of hours that spouses work outside the home and the number of hours that they spend doing domestic work (Davis and Greenstein, 1994). In the time availability approach, spouses' employment patterns may as a result have an unwavering effect on the time they dedicate to housework, although not necessarily on gender segregation of household chores. Life course factors such as transitions to marriage, childbearing, and aging also influence the division of household labour. Having more and younger children increases the demand for housework (Coltrane, 2000), and this typically affects women's housework more than men's (Artis & Pavalko, 2003). An important means for coping with time constraints is the outsourcing of domestic tasks, as in the case of employing a third party to do housework (Lewin-Epstein et al, 2006). This approach has enhanced women's time at work, and given rise to commoditified domestic labour, creating the new servant class and new markers of class identification, leading to a growing class division between women. However, for the purpose of this essay I will focus on three feminist theories, which appear to be the most prominent in literature and research, the relative resource approach, the time availability approach and the gender ideology approach. <heading>3.0 Global perspectives of domestic division of labour</heading>The aim of this section is to analyse research data on domestic and care work from different regions of the world to verify a global trend of the phenomenon that women continue to shoulder the major burden of household work. The essay will rely on the following research reports: - Davis and Greenstein's research on cross-national variations in the division of household labour, using data from the International Social Justice Project. The research investigated the division of household labour in married couple households, using samples from 13 nations; Western nations (Great Britain, West Germany, and the Netherlands), former Soviet nations (Russia, Slovenia, Estonia, Bulgaria, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and East Germany) and an Asian nation (Japan). Other researches used for the analysis focused on the following countries United States, Israel and Sweden and Third World nations, South Korea, Indonesia, the Philippines and Taiwan. <heading>3.1 Organisation of household work</heading>From the research carried out by Evertsson and Nermo on 'dependency, families and division of labour: comparing Sweden and United States' it was obvious that the time that Swedish and American women spend on housework has decreased since the mid-1970's, and that men in the two countries have increased the number of hours spent in housework. Still, in the years around 2000, Swedish and American women spent 10 to 13 more hours each week on housework than did the men (Evertsson & Nermo, 2004). The research on Germany and Israel reveals a similar trend as in the United States and Sweden, where women devoted more time to housework, for every hour husbands devoted to housework, their spouses spend an average of 2.8 hours. However, Israeli couples invest fewer hours to housework than their German counterparts would do (Lewin-Epstein & Stier, 2006). Data from Third World countries shows some level of participation in housework by husbands, only one country (South Korea) reported that more than one-half of husbands regularly helped their wives. The South Korean case is especially strange, as sixty percent of South Korean wives reported that their husbands were regularly helping with housework, whereas only 22 percent of Taiwanese wives reported regular husband household participation. This extreme difference between the two countries is significant because they share similar percentages of wives not employed, and they both have patrilineal family systems with strong son preference (Sanchez, 1993). I would argue that it is difficult to compare this finding with those for Western countries, as the measure used for husbands participation in household work is relative and so is dependent on wives perception of the level of participation of household work and how household work is defined. This is also dependent on how wives in the survey perceive and measure household work participation, the gender ideology approach explains this trend. <heading>4.0 Factors predicting the division of household labour: a global analysis</heading>Next, I would examine factors predicting the division of household labour in different nations. According to Coltrane (2000) in contrast to research conducted in earlier decades, 1990's studies find that men's share of housework has several consistent predictors, including women's employment patterns, ideology, and earnings, followed by men's employment hours and ideology. Other predictors of men's relative share of housework, includes age, life-course issues, marital status, and children influence the relative share of housework performed by men. <heading>4.1 Germany and Israel</heading>Research results on Germany and Israel reveals that the amount of time women spend in market work has a positive and significant effect on the sharing of essential household tasks. Time spent by the husband has an opposite effect, and longer hours are associated with greater segregation of household tasks. Results also show that neither dual-earner nor no-earner couples differ significantly from single-earner couples with respect to the sharing of household tasks, taking into account hours of market work (Lewin-Epstein and Stier, 2006). For these two countries the greater the dependence, the more hours women spend doing housework, in other words when the woman is least dependent on her spouse, as measured by the relative earnings gap, the more likely she will devote less time to housework. (Lewin-Epstein and Stier, 2006) In relation to gender ideology for Germany and Israel, a central finding of the study shows a consistent effect of gender ideology on the division of household labour. Research results indicate that the more liberal the wives' attitudes, the less time they spend on housework, practically there is no effect on men's attitudes on the time their spouses spend on housework. The degree of sharing household responsibilities is primarily affected by women's attitude, although husbands' attitudes also have a specific positive effect on sharing (Lewin-Epstein et al, 2006). <heading>4.2 America and Sweden</heading>In America and Sweden an analysis of economic dependency model shows that, the less economically dependent a wife is on her husband the less housework she performs (Evertsson and Nermo, 2004). In both countries, women living in couples in which, both spouses are higher educated perform less housework than do women in couples in which neither spouses had more than 12 years of schooling. In other words, the more the woman contributes to the total household income the less housework she performs (Evertsson and Nermo, 2004). The relative resource perspective receives support from both findings, because women whose occupational status are lower than that of their husbands spend more time in housework than do women whose occupational status is at the same level with that of their husbands. This is partly explained by the fact that some of these women were out of the labour force, and so do not have an option than to engage with household work (Evertsson and Nermo, 2004). The fact that highly educated women do less work might be because highly educated individuals more often hold gender egalitarian attitudes (c.f.; Kane, 1995; Knudsen and Waerners, 2001; Thornton et al, 1983 cited in Evertsson and Nermo, 2004). I would suggest that this might be because of changes in family values, leading to change in gender roles. More importantly, the economic revolution and the need for participation of both women and men in the labour market to fulfil family needs have resulted in new definitions of roles within families. In America and Sweden, women in households in which the man is economically dependent on his wife, do more work than women in households in which the woman and the man have equivalent earnings, an explanation for this could be gender deviance neutralization. Women appear to act to neutralize gender deviance on the part of their spouse by doing more housework than would be expected, given their work hours and their resources compared to his (Evertsson and Nermo, 2004). These findings are in line with Coltrane's suggestions that women's egalitarian gender ideology is a reliable predictor of household labour sharing (Coltrane, 2000). In this instance, one would ask, what the perceived fairness is for the woman, and the amount of burden on her as a worker outside and within the home. <heading>4.3 Cross-national variations</heading>In a research on cross-national variations carried out by Davis and Greenstein, using data from 13 countries, results suggest that wives with the same or more education than their husbands would be less likely to perform the majority of household labour. This finding also supports the relative resource approach, but the ability to use one's relative power to negotiate out of unpleasant tasks is not the same for women and men. There are two possible explanations for this. Firstly, because of low expectations for men's domestic work, men may have an easier time than women using their personal resources to negotiate a favourable division of labour. An alternative explanation is that, women with more education than their husbands choose not to negotiate out of more household work in order to protect their own gendered identities. (Davis and Greenstein, 2004) <heading>4.4 Third World Countries</heading>Research carried out in Third World countries; suggest that men's domestic labour efforts are related inconsistently to women's material conditions across a variety of development context. These findings fully support other research, showing that men's housework changes very little in response to women's work demands. Women's resource via occupational status, educational attainment, and decision-making does not seem to predict husband's participation for these cross-sectionally surveyed countries (Sanchez, 1993). Davis and Greenstein's (2004) study of Cross-National variations in the division of household labour shows that, wives with the same or more education than their husband's would be less likely to perform the majority of household labour. This finding supports the relative resource approach. Education disadvantage may weaken women's resource accumulation, especially relative to men, and legitimate societal ideologies that women should naturally be homemakers (Sanchez, 1993) <heading>5.0 Women and men's perceptions of fairness of domestic division of labour</heading>Though women carry out two thirds of the total household labour, only about one third of them rate their division of labour as unfair (Coltrane, 2000). In a study carried out by Zuo and Bians on 'gendered resources, division of housework, and perceived fairness - a case in urban China', focused on equity theory and gender construction perspective, similar to those used in earlier discussions in this essay. Equity theory assessed husbands and wives' sense of justice by comparing the material-based resources each spouse brings to the marriage (Zuo and Bians, 2001). According to this theory, wives low sense of injustice is due to their lack of comparable resources and dependence on their husbands for financial support (Lenno and Rosenfield, 1994; Thompsons, 1991 cited in Zuo and Bians 2001). Gender construction theory, on the other hand, affirms that culturally entrenched and socially constructed gendered meaning of housework perpetuates male advantage, while preserving the perception of the inequality as fair (Thompson, 1991; Wilkie, Ferre, Ratchiff, 1998 cited in Zuo and Bian, 2001) Neither the gender construction theory nor the equity theory completely explains the discrepancy between the distribution of household labour and judgements regarding its equity. Gender theory for instance assumes that housework is hard and that anyone would avoid it when possible (Zuo and Bian, 2001). This did not however explain the dual earner situations in which wives have relatively more resources but still do more housework (Brines, 1994). Gender theory attempts to complement equity theory by highlighting the gendered meaning of housework, but it is yet to account for what motivates wives to accept the unequal housework division that seems to preserve 'male privilege' and 'female disadvantage' (Zuo and Bian, 2001). Zuo and Bian's (2001) research found that, though the wives carried out more chores than their husbands, few perceived this difference as unfair, and also that the unequal division of housework did not necessarily bring into play a sense of unfairness, but that one's failure to perform the culturally prescribed role did. In line with these findings, the research showed a considerable sharing of household tasks by husbands. Nevertheless, the husbands' participation in housework still does not measure up to that of their wives, given that 90% of wives hold full time jobs. Husbands' domestic labour seems unrelated to their relative economic resources. According to Zuo and Bian gendered ideology produces gendered resources in the exchange of paid work for unpaid work between spouses in Beijing. The husband, whose gendered benefit yield more power from status and financial contributions, claims lighter or no housework responsibility. The wife, whose gendered advantage yields more power from domestic work, is released from an equal sharing of the breadwinner responsibility. Neither men, who believe to have failed, increase performance in domestic tasks, nor women who climb the corporate ladder in both salary and status are able to turn their work into valued resources in marital exchange. On the contrary, their work is viewed as a debt to their spouse because they have breached gender boundaries. Thus men are reluctant to participate equally in domestic work even if their breadwinner status has diminished. By the same reasoning, working-women assume a greater domestic workload without feeling deprived (Zuo and Bian, 2001). From the above, a conclusion can be drawn that Chinese women accept the unequal distribution of housework not because they lack economic resources or passively follow traditional gender rules at their expense. Instead, like Western women are active agents with interests and stake in creating and maintaining a certain gender order (Zuo and Bian, 2001). In the process of marital exchange, the study finds that women do compare their gendered resources with those of their husbands. A failure of a husband to fulfil the provider role may increase the value of his wife's resources, while reducing his own, leaving his wife with a sense of unfairness on his part. All this depends on how resources are defined within the household (Zuo and Bian, 2001), and how women have been socialized to combine their waged work effectively with household work, this could actually explain why, full time working women still perform a large share of domestic work in order to maintain an accepted gender regime within the household. Baxter's research found that women spend 24hours per week on housework compared to 9hours per week for men. Similarly in relation to childcare, women report spending more than twice as much time on childcare than men. Nevertheless, most women and men consider the arrangements as fair, although the results show that women are significantly more likely to perceive them more unfair than men (Baxter, 2000). An analysis of the main factors predicting men's and women's perceptions of fairness show that both men and women's perception of fairness are based primarily on the distribution of household work. This Baxter suggested is a more significant factor in determining house hold division of labour than time availability, he also noted that men and women tend to take women's contributions in the home for granted, and look to men's level of involvement as the critical factor in determining if the domestic division of labour is fair (Baxter, 2000). This is true, if one relates it to women's roles being defined as natural because of their natural functions. However, research in the 1990s isolated circumstances associated with labelling divisions of household labour as ''fair'' or ''unfair.'' Some also call attention to measurement problems in the area of fairness evaluations. Resource theories and their derivatives envisage how people make fairness evaluations about housework.(Coltrane, 2000) Classical exchange theory suggests that women will see as fair those situations in which they are doing the smallest amount of housework and unfair those in which they are doing the most (Suitor, 1991). Equity theory speculates that partners will feel uncomfortable with situations in which they are either over- or under-benefited, suggesting that both men and women will see as most fair those situations in which they share the household labour almost equally (Pina and Bengtson, 1993). Challenges to these theories come from studies showing that even employed women tend to label unbalanced divisions of labour as fair, and from research showing that men who do little persist in seeing the allocation of household tasks as fair (Ward, 1993). Findings differ on how much men and women pay attention to their own contributions, but most studies find that when one spouse does less and the other does more, the chances of perceiving unfairness increases (Dancer & Gilbert, 1993; John et al., 1995; Robinson and Spitze, 1992). In contrast, as men do more of the occasional tasks (such as washing the car) both spouses are more likely to judge the division of household labour as fair to wives (DeMaris and Longmore, 1996). Fairness evaluations are also influenced by employment, education, and ideology (Coltrane, 2000). Some research find that men's greater employment hours are related to their own evaluations of fairness in the division of household labour (Ward, 1993). Others find that men's greater employment hours are concurrent to their evaluations of unfairness (Robinson and Spitze, 1992). DeMaris and Longmore found that husbands' greater employment hours, relative to wives', encourage wives (but not husbands) to see the division of housework as fair to her (DeMaris and Longmore, 1996). Women with less education than their husbands, and those who perceive the costs of leaving the marriage to be high, perceive more fairness (Lennon and Rosenfield, 1994; Wilkie et al., 1998). Higher levels of education for both spouses are associated with seeing less fairness in the division of labour (DeMaris and Longmore, 1996; John et al., 1995; Robinson & Spitze, 1992). From the above, it is obvious that fairness in household work is determined, by the type and amount of work performed by husbands and wives, their educational background, their work status and their gender ideologies. Dissatisfaction with the household division of labour may be a more important catalyst for change than perceptions of its unfairness. Men are almost universally satisfied with the division of housework, whereas women are often less satisfied, especially if they hold egalitarian attitudes and like their paid work (Baxter & Western, 1998). Although findings about fairness evaluations vary considerably, the majority of studies in the 1990s concluded that the single most important predictor of a wife's fairness evaluation is what portion of the routine housework her husband contributes (Coltrane, 2000). I would argue that gender ideology plays a major role in justifying how women and men perceive fairness of household work. If men and women believe that domestic labour is women's responsibility, then it will be comparatively easy to justify a situation in which women do the bulk of the work. Research has found for example that men justify their lack of involvement in terms of incompetence, lower standards or lack of time (Sherpe, 1984). In situations where the woman is employed, works more hours, and earns more than the husband earns, but still perform more work at home, it is difficult to justify that time is an important determinant of fairness, I would argue that gender cultures and ideologies proffer better explanations to women's perceived fairness in this case. <heading>6.0 Conclusion</heading>Several researches have shown that women consider domestic work to be a form of family care and devote considerable energy to it; women's performance of housework is guided by an ethic of care, which entails various family members and are often demonstrated through the activities of meal preparation, food shopping, cleaning, washing clothes and child tendering (Ferree, 1990; Stohs, 1994). Other studies reveal that, for women, feeding their families is a display of love and motherhood that involves considerable time, effort, and energy, an approach much less common among men who do this work (DeVault, 1991). This definition tends to promote the approach that socialization plays a major role in determining how housework is defined and shared between women and men, and reiterates the finding that gender ideology plays a major role in women's attitude to household work. The differences in household division of labour is associated with different approaches discussed earlier, although women's share of housework in all countries investigated remains high, culture, relative resource, time availability and gender ideologies remain important factors in determining the level of equality of gender division of household work and care. Although recent trends on studies of housework, suggest there has been a change in the average level of housework done by women. (Bianchi et al.; 2000; Gershuny & Robinson, 1988; Robinson and Godbey, 1997 cited in Artis and Pavalko, 2003) Change has been slow, and women continue to shoulder greater responsibility for household labour (Shelton & John, 1996 cited in Artis and Pavalko, 2003). I would argue that these results indicate that change has taken place in household division of labour but this change has been slow, due to gender ideologies, economic and relative resources, and time availability. It seems very difficult to change these ideologies, as men are reluctant to adjust to evolving change in gender roles, for fear of loosing the power they have so enjoyed over the years. Unbelievably, men are determined to remain in control and the easiest way to do this is to continue to promote patriarchy and domination over women, in whatever form it is possible. Nevertheless, the fact remains that division of household work between women and men is beginning to change, no matter how slow it has been. 