The use of medical technology is now an integral and more or less accepted facet of medicine in the 21 st century. The use of highly technical apparatus, for example MRI scanners and life support machines, are now in common use in the practice of western medicine, and the rapid pace of medical research has meant that medical technologies, together with the possibilities and promises they bring with them, are never long out of the media spotlight (Williams, 2003). From Dolly the Sheep, to the more recent engineering of tissue from patient's cells to reconstruct (and subsequently re-implant) damaged bladders (Chung, 2006), it seems that medical science is increasingly pushing back the boundaries of possibility, and reconfiguring our understandings of the human body, and its potential for manipulation . In line with this transformation of medical possibilities have arisen corresponding social, legal and ethical uncertainties; indeed, whilst promising various 'cures' and 'treatments', when these technologies should be implemented, as well as for whom, and to what extent, raises many uncomfortable ethical dilemmas and issues. Indeed, as Fox (2000) comments, the use of medical technology has substantially shifted our understanding of life itself, thus bioethics as a whole faces important new challenges, <quote>... What is life? What is death? When does a life begin? When does it end? What is a person? What is a child... Is it better not to have been born at all than to have been born with a severe genetic defect? How vigorously should we intervene in the human condition to repair and improve ourselves? And when should we cease and desist? (Fox, 2000: 422)</quote>As well as the ethical issues raised by the current uses of medical technologies, the potential they appear to offer for the future, and the possible abuses of the technologies, have furthermore led to speculations around the emergence of a Huxley-esque homogenised human society, whereby human beings are mass produced (Gurnham, 2005). Indeed, Fukuyama's fears about a 'post human' future, in which human life is endlessly subject to manipulation and replication, seems to echo in many of the responses to medical technologies which highlight the 'sanctity' of human life as a value to be protected. In many instances, responses to the current uses of medical technologies merge with these perceived future risks and have led to calls for greater regulation and surveillance (Warnock, 1985), as well as education (Fletcher, 2002), and an increased acknowledgement of the social as well as the biological impact of medical technologies (for example, Scheper-Hughes, 2001). This essay will highlight some of the ethical dilemmas and implications of medical technologies in the areas in which they have proven to be the most contentious, namely that of genetics, IVF, surgery and the care of the critically ill. It is these areas in particular that fundamental ethical dilemmas have been raised and particular challenges levelled at our commonly held understandings of what constitutes a human being, as well as our definitions of life and death. Developments in medical technologies in these areas therefore, will be examined in order to demonstrate not only the tensions arising from their implementation and future possibilities, but also evaluating societal responses to them. Since Watson and Crick's 1953 discovery of the double helix structure of DNA, 'the new genetics' has emerged as one of the most profoundly exciting and promising fields for medical research to date (Conrad and Gabe, 1999). Scientists are now able to specify the precise location of 'faulty' genes to demonstrate the aetiology of certain conditions and also to screen foetuses, with the ultimate goal being the total elimination of the genetic 'fault'. Genetic screening in itself however, raises many uncomfortable ethical issues. Pre-Implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD), arguably the most controversial form of genetic screening, combines two technologies, (IVF and genetic testing) with fertilisation taking place artificially in a laboratory, and the resulting embryo being screened for genetic faults prior to re-implantation in the womb. Currently, PGD is used to screen for single gene disorders alongside other forms of genetic screening such as ultrasound, nuchal translucency scans (most commonly used to screen for Down's syndrome), amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling and cordocentesis. Whilst some of these forms of screening are diagnostic, many predict 'risk', determining whether the tested foetuses have the propensity to develop certain genetic conditions. Typically, those families deemed to be at 'high risk' of genetic conditions may be offered pre-natal screening, with the option of aborting those foetuses either diagnosed with, or at risk of developing, disabling disorders. Clearly, the ethical dilemmas these technologies bring to light, including what we deem life to be, whose lives are `worth` living and which lives are accorded rights, are controversial and inherently difficult to address. The very existence of these screening technologies (with the possibility of subsequent abortion), may create a sense of obligation for parents, a duty to prevent a life that could possibly be hampered by pain and social exclusion, and potentially become a 'burden' to existing family members. Indeed, in instances of genetic defects being discovered, parents may find it difficult to opt to keep the child in light of commonly held assumptions about the quality of life for people with disabilities, and also for fear of social stigma (Remennick, 2006). Medical technologies, therefore, can be seen to in some ways redefine the obligations and responsibilities involved in 'good' parenting, so that the birth of a healthy child, rather than being a chance happening, comes to be seen as the result of the vigilance and 'responsible actions' of the parents. Genetic information, furthermore, once obtained, can in itself be the cause of much distress and grief to parents, as they are forced to confront the resulting dilemma of whether their would-be child should live or not, based on the precarious notion of genetic 'risk' (Helen, 2002). As Davison (1996) points out, such knowledge is not necessarily a benefit, as it may simply pose more ethical problems, <quote>Although augmenting...ethical, political and social issues...genetic prediction is likely to pose new ones... Unavoidable decisions, choices and dilemmas will arise in any or all of a wide range of personal, group and institutional activities. (Davison, 1996: 328)</quote>Thus, the question of how much benefit can be gained from genetic screening, especially in light of the fact that the majority of disorders with a genetic component rely on the interaction between genetics and environmental factors, remains debatable (Davison, 1996). As well as the involvement of difficult decisions for parents, many critics have also pointed to eugenic undertones involved in the practice of genetic screening. Indeed, the research into, and practice of, the new genetics clearly reveals an assumption on the part of clinicians and scientists of the desirability of preventing the birth of children with certain conditions or of a particular gender, and thus by implication attributing a negative value to people of that gender or those already living with that condition (Fletcher, 2002). Disability rights activists have called into question the automatic categorization of the lives of people with genetic impairments as 'not worth living' and the weight given to genetics in determining whether or not a child should live (Shakespeare, 1995). Supporters of the social model of disability, furthermore, have demonstrated the way in which the new genetics can direct attention away from the social nature of disability, by reducing it to a biological 'malfunction', <quote>...the individual affixed with a genetic label can be isolated from the context in which s/he became sick...the individual, not society, is seen to require change; social problems improperly become individual pathologies. (Lippman, 1992: 1472-3)</quote>Thus, whilst termination on the basis of sex (in the absence of a sex dependent condition) or race would be (and in the case of sex selective abortion, are) considered discrimination and outlawed, genetic screening has allowed what Duster (1990) has termed a 'backdoor' for eugenics, whereby the gradual elimination of people with disabilities is normalised, rendering people currently living with impairments in a state of 'suspended extinction' (Bauman, 1997). As well as the ethical concerns surrounding genetic screening, the use of IVF, (which is often used in conjunction with genetic screening) raises further ethical concerns in its own rights. Through the ability to relocate the site of fertilisation from the body to the laboratory by extracting human gametes, IVF enables the implantation of embryos into women who are (potentially) biologically unrelated to them. The implications of this is that reproduction has now been extended to those who would otherwise be unable to conceive 'naturally'; infertile or homosexual couples, for example, and even post-menopausal women as in the recent case of 63-year old Patricia Rashbrook. The public outcry surrounding Rashbrook's case, however, highlights the general unease around IVF and its ability to meddle in previously natural processes; indeed, many have questioned whether it was ethical to allow Rashbrook to purchase such treatment given her age, and the potential implications for the resulting child. Indeed, the issue of the commodification of reproduction implies serious ethical debates. Although some IVF treatments are available on the NHS, long waiting lists and strict eligibility guidelines have meant that only 25% of IVF cycles are state funded in the UK, with the majority taking place within private clinics either in the UK, or as in Rashbrook's case, abroad(Birenbaum-Carmeli, 2004). This lack of sate funding for access to IVF technology means that it is often only a viable option for those with the finances to support it, and even then treatment can be financially, physically and emotionally draining on the couples/individuals who opt for it, especially for women whose bodies bear the brunt of the physical risks (Steinberg, 1997). Given its low success rate therefore, the ethics of allowing couples to expend such huge amounts of their personal and financial resources, with all the physical risks it entails, remains contentious. IVF has furthermore allowed for the sale of human gametes to infertile couples, and also for a particular type of surrogacy whereby the surrogate may carry a child of no biological relation to herself (the embryo being created artificially by the couple's own cells, and then transferred into her womb). The disruption to social roles that this separation of reproduction from gestation may involve raises important ethical dilemmas concerning the definition of motherhood itself, and these ethical concerns are exacerbated further when eggs or surrogacy services are purchased from poorer, less powerful women, introducing possibilities of exploitation, and potentially reinforcing existing inequalities. Thus far, the implications and ethical debates surrounding the current practice of IVF and genetic screening have been discussed; however, ethical debates concern not only what medical technologies can do in the here-and-now, but also their potential or future capacities. Indeed, whilst medical technologies may be used for certain specified purposes only, their capabilities may extend beyond this, raising questions of how far we should go, and what limits we should apply. One such question has given rise to the phenomenon of 'designer babies', or the ability of parents, through the use of technology, to select (or perhaps more accurately) reject aspects of their offspring's genetic make up, at a financial cost. The possibility of this practice one day being commonplace has caused concerns about the ethics of consumerism being extended to reproduction, <quote>The phrase 'designer babies' implicitly compares the child to a fashion accessory or just one more aspect of medical technology becoming a lifestyle choice, like 'designer drugs' for mood enhancement or body-enhancing surgery. (English and Sommerville, 2002: 7) </quote>Thus, choice surrounding reproduction has led to a concern that children may be treated purely as commodity objects, with standards and expectations to live up to, potentially leading to an increase in unwanted or abandoned children (Lee, 2002). Further concerns raised by the future of the new genetics, and reinforced by the development of cloning technology, has been that of the homogenisation of the human race, a vision articulated in Huxley's Brave New World (1970), whereby human beings are mass produced on Fordist principles (Gurnham, 2005). Rather than celebrating diversity and difference, the new genetics, it is feared, may lead to a world of genetically enhanced 'ideal' humans. David Gurnham (2005) has drawn attention to the way in which such 'spirit crushing homogeneity' made possible by cloning technology, counteracts human dignity and dispels the inherent mysterious value attributed to human life which explains why, as individuals, we turn out the way that we do. Thus, both in the case of cloning as well as 'designer babies', what appears to be threatened is the sense of mystery and chance involved in creating unique human beings, which, as Gurnham argues, should be a valued condition of the human race. Societal responses to the new genetics and IVF have been extremely varied, some regarding them as signalling a revolution in medicine, others regarding them as scientists 'playing god', whilst still others fearing the possibilities for surveillance and discrimination (Nelkin and Tancredi, 1989). Indeed, the current use of amniocentesis in India to abort female foetuses (Henry, 2003) and the termination of those foetuses with genetic conditions, highlight the way in which medical technologies can be used to discriminate against foetuses with genetic attributes that a society happens to devalue at any given moment. Thus, some critics have highlighted the role of education in tackling the social context in which these lives are rendered 'not worth living'. Fletcher (2002), for example, argues that information and education for prospective parents on the reality of living with genetic conditions prior to termination, would help to prevent people making automatic assumptions about the standard of life that people with impairments enjoy. Regulation and surveillance have also formed a crucial part of the response to the new genetics and IVF, and its anticipated futures. In the early 1980s, a committee chaired by the moral philosopher Mary Warnock was set up in order to examine the practice of embryo research and other controversial areas of the new genetics and IVF, such as human cloning. The report resulted in the passing of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act of 1990, which put in place legal guidelines surrounding the practice of the new genetics. The act prohibited human cloning, and only allows certain procedures to be carried out (for example, the creation of an embryo outside the human body) with a specific license, to be issued by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HEFA). The establishment of a legal framework and regulatory body, in some ways offered reassurance to public concerns about the potential of new medical technologies to 'interfere' with nature, and the ethical problems posed by this interference, <quote>...we accept that scientists must not be unduly restricted in pursuing their research interests...but doctors and scientists work within the moral and legal framework determined by society...they should not depart radically from that framework. (Warnock, 1985: 75)</quote>Thus, the role of regulation in preventing what is often perceived as the ruthless pursuit of medical breakthroughs at whatever cost, is an important societal response to new medical technologies. As the new genetics and IVF enable us to manipulate life at the level of the cell, advancements in new medical technologies are also being applied to the body at a macro level, through the restoration, substitution or manipulation of organs and tissues. Indeed, the current possibilities of modern medicine to transform our bodies, whether aesthetically or restoratively, has rendered our physical selves increasingly malleable and unstable; whole body parts can be removed, replaced, reshaped or substituted, freeing us from the restrictions of our biology and launching us into the realm of the 'cyborg'(Williams, 2003). The 'cyborg' as Haraway (1991) suggests, is a postmodern 'leaky' figure, breaching the boundaries between human and animal, human and machine, a vision of science fiction and the future, but also one, arguably, increasingly becoming a future prospect. Indeed, medical technology has the potential to transform us into cyborgs in a variety of ways, either through enhancing, restoring or substituting our body parts through various surgical techniques, and enabling us, to a greater or lesser extent, abandon our biology through artificial means. One example of this possibility lies in the area of cosmetic surgery. Developments of medical technologies have meant that the potential for body refiguring and 'correction' has expanded rapidly, rendering our bodies increasingly 'plastic' (Williams, 2003). Today in Britain, the cosmetic surgery is a multi-million pound industry with an astounding array of procedures for sale, and thousands of people going under the knife every year in order to aesthetically manipulate their bodies. The recent completion of a face transplant in France (Simpson and Batchelor, 2006), furthermore, sparked media debates as to how far this manipulation could potentially go, with the opportunity to one day buy a brand new face being cited by the media as a realistic and looming possibility. Whilst it remains uncertain whether or not such a practice as face transplantation could feasibly become commercially available, its possibility raises important questions and considerations. Aside from issues concerning what it is acceptable to do (or not do) to a human body, the commercial basis on which the cosmetic industry is founded also raises ethical problems. Indeed, in western societies which value 'beauty' and dictate standards of physical attractiveness, living up to 'ideal' body standards is often a means by which people may seek to attain happiness and success, <quote>Aesthetic surgery is composed of those surgical interventions that claim that the acquisition of an idealised or imagined body type or physiognomy is a "cure" for "unhappiness"...surgeons operate on the body to heal the psyche. (Gilman, 1998: 24-5)</quote>With women constituting the majority of cases putting themselves forward for cosmetic interventions, feminists have questioned not only surgeon's willingness to operate on (often) otherwise healthy people, with all the risks and complications involved, but also the underlying pressures felt by women to enhance their bodies to ensure an appearance of youth, health and beauty, a pressure perhaps facilitated by the 'normalisation' of cosmetic surgery through the media (Davis, 1995). However, despite the growing acceptability of cosmetic surgery as an expected means of obtaining beauty for those with wealth, it could also be argued that one response to the development of body enhancing procedures has been an increasing valuing of the authentic. Indeed, the media fascination with cases of plastic surgery going wrong or simply too far, with the likes of Michael Jackson and Jocelyn Wildenstein often being listed as examples, together with the forming of a celebrity elite whose beauty is claimed to be natural as opposed to surgically enhanced represents a line of thinking in which there is deemed to be inherent value in remaining untouched by medical technologies. Indeed, there seems to be an implicit assumption in society as a whole that 'natural' is in many ways better, thus creating a tension between the pull towards the artificial, as well as to the natural. Other societal responses to advances in cosmetic surgery and the accompanying ethical dilemmas have been varied, with feminist writers calling for a reduction in the cultural pressures on women to achieve physical beauty (Wolf, 1990), whilst others, including Orton (2002) express concerns about the number of under-qualified surgeons willing to perform cosmetic procedures in the name of profit, and calls for greater regulation of the industry. As the case of face transplantation surgery highlights furthermore, the potential of the cosmetic surgery industry to incorporate increasingly drastic procedures has further extended these ethical debates. In such instances, questions need to be asked as to how far aesthetic procedures should go, especially in cases where women are deemed to have poor body image, as Bordo (1998) argues, whilst women may demand cosmetic procedures and make rational choices to opt for them, it is difficult to disassociate these choices from the cultural context in which they are made. Perhaps, therefore, an appropriate response to cosmetic surgery could be the placement of more resources into the task of rooting out and addressing underlying causes of people's body dissatisfaction, and ways to combat it, rather than developing means for the "surgical fix". Whilst cosmetic surgery offers us the possibility of transforming our bodies aesthetically, medical technologies also have the capacity to manipulate their internal functioning, particularly through the development of transplantation and implantation techniques. The 'harvesting' of tissues and organs from dead as well as living donors, indeed, has challenged legal, social and physical definitions of life and death themselves, and raised fundamental questions concerning human identity (Brown and Webster, 2004). Lock (2002), for example, has argued that our identity can be fundamentally shaken by undergoing transplantation; transplant recipients are often eager to know biographical details about their donor's age, gender and lifestyle, sometimes even developing new tastes consistent with those of the dead donor, thus revealing how our sense of identity can be heavily inscribed in our own embodiment. Heart transplants, for example, may carry particularly difficult implications in terms of identity due to the cultural understanding of the heart as constituting the very core of our emotional and physical being (Williams, 2003). Aside from implications for identity, the transplantation of organs and tissues has also led to ethical concerns regarding the 'commodification' of the human body, whereby organs may become disposable objects to be bought and sold, blurring the distinction between humans and commercial goods, a situation that would <quote>...contravene the moral ethos that distinguishes humans from commodity goods or instrumental resources. Further, the commodification of body parts might encourage impoverished people to trade their only absolute asset, their bodies. (Brown and Webster, 2002: 109)</quote>Indeed, Scheper-Hughes' (2001a) international work on the trade in human organs discovered widespread racial, class and gender inequalities in the acquisition, harvesting and distribution of organs, whereby organs have become the 'objects of desire' for those with economic resources, and a 'commodity of last resort' for those without. This situation, she argues, has led to a divide in global society between the organ 'donators' and organ receivers, with the latter being treated as valued patients and the former merely suppliers of spare parts (Scheper-Hughes, 2001a). The exploitation of those without economic resources is disguised behind the rhetoric of 'gift' and 'aid', whilst in reality the selling of body parts is often as much a desperate bid for survival as for the receivers. As Scheper-Hughes notes of the women living in a Madras slums in South India, <quote>]Forced to the brink by crippling debts or by the incapacity of a husband and primary wage earner, the women had sold a kidney to feed the family, the most common explanation given by kidney sellers worldwide. (Scheper-Hughes, 2001b:1)</quote>Thus, to those living in dire poverty, organ selling can be a way of ensuring survival for both sellers and their families, in world which values them only as a 'reservoir of spare parts' (Scheper-Hughes, 2001a: 32). Aside from 'voluntary' organ donation, the development of medical technologies has also facilitated the phenomenon of 'organ theft', whereby organs are taken from both living and dead individuals, to be sold for profit. Indeed, as Wilkinson (2003) notes, the practice of executing Chinese prisoners in order to provide fresh organs for transplantation either for high paying foreigners or members of the communist elite, is facilitated by medical technologies which, following execution, keep the prisoner's heart beating until adjacent to the organ recipient. Similarly, as Scheper-Hughes' (2001a) research exposed, organs are often removed without consent during routine operations, or taken after death without the prior consent of the individual or their families, typically from young, black bodies, and are then transplanted into 'older, debilitated, affluent white bodies' (Scheper-Hughes, 2001a: 40). Such worrying practices of organ theft and issues of consent in organ donation have been brought about by technologies which allow for the commodification of body parts, and their sale in global markets. As Scheper-Hughes' (2001a) research points out, the politics of the movement of organs and tissues (primarily from poor, black bodies into white affluent ones) requires stricter regulation and surveillance to prevent 'rapacious needs and desires for the body of the other' and also a 'human refusal of mortal sickness and death at all or any cost' (Scheper-Hughes, 2001a: 50), both fuelling the illegal trade in organs, and reinforced by the promises of medical technology. The 'Berkeley Organs Watch' , established in 1999, was designed for this very purpose of surveillance with a view to reducing the gross violation of individual's rights and bodily autonomy involved in organ trafficking. Indeed, a monitoring of the social impact of transplantation technologies is crucial to uncovering the hidden exploitations they mask. As well as the current practices of transplantation medicine, future prospects, such as xenotransplantation, also raise important ethical dilemmas. Whilst the concept of using animal tissues is not in itself a new phenomenon, with 17 th century physicians often prescribing lamb's blood to cure fever, in recent years, the prospect of xenotransplantation has seen a massive investment in research and bioethical commentary (Brown and Webster, 2002). Scientists are already able to transplant pig cells into human beings, with the hope of soon being able to transplant whole organs, and indeed, the creation of customised pigs with a decreased likelihood of organ rejection has already become a reality (Williams, 2003). Whilst many have hailed the prospect of xenotransplantation as signalling a decrease in waiting lists for transplantation, and a break through for medical science, it undoubtedly also raises some uncomfortable moral, social and ethical dilemmas. As Brown and Webster (2002) note, modernity is premised on a 'cultivated distance' between humans and animals, a distance that would be broken down by xenotransplantation, agitating questions of species boundaries and the 'natural' order. Indeed, if allotransplantation (human to human) raises questions of personal identity for organ recipients, having a pig's heart or other organ inside one's body my heighten this discomfort further, especially given the cultural meanings assigned to pigs as being 'unclean' animals (Williams, 2003). The possibility of transpecies diseases in the wake of the BSE, and its human variant, CJD, furthermore are very real concerns with regards to xenotransplantation. Some pig viruses, for example, can be transmitted across species and the prospect of hitherto unknown diseases emerging has to be taken seriously as a major complication of xenotransplantation (Pilnick, 2002). The moral implications of using animals in this way have further ramifications for ethical debates; whilst many argue that animals have long been used in medical research and in food production, the use of animal's organs in this way may contravene certain religious or moral beliefs (Buddhist or vegan for example), and therefore prove unacceptable to certain social groups on this basis. Indeed, perhaps one response to these ethical dilemmas would be the placement of more resources into stem cell research, so that organs can be manufactured, rather than moved around, and indeed, as recent developments in the engineering of bladders from stem cells suggests, such advances are on the horizon. Further to the creation, and transplantation of, human and animal organs, the implantation of artificial devices into the body has resurfaced the notion of 'cyborgs' through machine-human couplings. There is a broad range of artificial devices and components which can be surgically placed in the body, from inert joint replacements to devices which actually take over the innate functions of the body; pacemakers, for example, electronically regulate the rhythms of the heart whilst cochlear implants generate tiny oscillating vibrations to stimulate auditory nerves (Brown and Webster, 2004). The future these technologies suggest is one in which bodies are increasingly 'inhabited' by technology, and where natural ageing is a thing of the past, with our body parts being replaced by technological devices, marking the end of 'pure humans' (Deitch, 1992) <quote>At the hyper-real extremes are those who write of a science future where cyberminds are endlessly downloaded from outdated machines into new expectant motherboards; cryofresh freaks who seek to freeze time and reverse history. (Gilleard and Higgs, 1998: 5.1)</quote>Indeed, Rucker et al (1993) suggest, due to advances in biotechnology, this 'postbiological humanity' is achievable in the next fifty years, heralding the beginning of a time where we will be able to endlessly change, replace and modify our bodies into different forms. Whilst this 'liberation' from biology may seem appealing, the possibilities of ever-extending our lives and manipulating our bodies, as well as the 'technological contract' (Brown and Webster, 2004) such developments forge between people with disabilities and the medical profession, whereby the impaired body is subject to continual technological 'normalisation', raises important ethical debates, not only about what it is ethical to do to a human body, but just how far we should go. Thus far, discussion has centred on technologies which have the capacity to redefine our notions of human life and the human body. Genetics and IVF, for example, can intervene in the creation of life, whereas transplantations and implantations modify existing bodies. A further area of medical technologies, however, concern the ending of lives, and the way in which death is reconfigured through the use of highly sophisticated equipment. Life support machines in particular have played a fundamental role in reshaping the concept of death itself. Through acting as proxy organs, death can be postponed for those individuals whose entire brains have been traumatised beyond hope of recovery, in a "new, technically manipulated death" (Lock, 2002: 263). This new state of 'brain death', whereby individuals may experience an irreversible loss of consciousness and yet still be biologically alive, challenges previously held assumptions about what death constitutes. Whilst in the UK brain death is often treated as tantamount to the death of the person, this is defined in contrasting ways by differing countries, highlighting conflicting understandings of 'death' and 'personhood'. Japan for example, does not recognise 'brain death' as biological death nor the death of the person, therefore organs cannot be taken from patients in this condition, as is permitted in other countries (Lock, 2002). Such differing understandings of 'death' (facilitated by medical technology), therefore, can pose ethical dilemmas and indeed tensions between family members and medical professionals, who may perceive an individual's condition in contrasting ways, and demand conflicting clinical approaches. Tensions between the individual's and/or the family's wishes and that of the medical profession, are often at the centre of ethical issues involving the care of the critically ill, and many concern the use (or withdrawal) of medical technology. As medical technologies have the capacity to restart and maintain organs (thus keeping the patient alive even if their body is failing), this raises profound questions as to when and for how long this technology should be implemented. Issues of 'quality of life' are fundamental to ethical debates in this area, as was highlighted by the high profile media cases of both Charlotte Wyatt, a young child born prematurely and who suffered substantial lung damage, and baby MB, a 17 month old baby boy with type I Spinal Muscular Atrophy. Charlotte Wyatt, due to her intensive care needs and poor prognosis, was issued with a 'Do Not Resuscitate Order' (DNRO), so that in the event of respiratory arrest, she would not be revived. Similarly, doctors fought to defend their belief in the 'intolerable' quality of the life of baby MB (who could not breathe unassisted and required continual intensive care) and subsequently their right not to treat him. In both instances, the families insisted that their child had some quality of life that was worth protecting and sustaining, and went to court to uphold this belief. In the case of baby MB, Judge Justice Holman ruled in favour of the parents in March 2006 (the Telegraph, March 2006), whereas the Wyatt family lost the battle to have Charlotte's DNRO removed in early 2005, as the judge deemed her improvement to have been minimal. As these cases illustrate, the existence of the technology to keep children like baby MB and Charlotte Wyatt alive, present new and challenging ethical dilemmas, in terms of when this technology should be implemented and when it should be withdrawn, to 'allow' those to die whose quality of life is deemed to be intolerable, or who are already perceived to be socially dead, a practice often referred to as 'passive euthanasia'. Thus, through the use of medical technologies, death's boundaries and definitions are fundamentally challenged, through either postponing or even preventing death altogether through the use of life support systems. Ethical debates arise, however, in the decisions regarding when and for how long these technologies should be used; decisions often monopolised by the medical profession. However, as the case of baby MB exemplifies, it is possible to override such medical dominance, through legal action, and indeed, perhaps one societal response to life support technology could be the increased involvement of independent judgements from courts of law, to consider not only the wishes and views of the family, but also the perceived quality of life for the individual, and the implications for and opinions of, medical staff. In conclusion, the new medical technologies have reconfigured ethical debates in dramatic ways. However, there appears to be distinct differences between ethical issues concerning the future of medical technologies, and how far they should be allowed to go, and ethical debates surrounding their current usage, both warranting differing societal responses. There has been much speculation, fear and 'science fiction accounts' in the media (Butler, 1997), concerning the direction in which the new medical technologies are taking us. The 2002 completion of the first rough map of the human genome, research into ectogenesis (foetal gestation outside of the womb), as well as the possibilities of face transplants and xenotransplantation, all point toward a future in which human beings will be freed of the constraints of the body (disease, disability, ageing and even death), to be artificially designed, produced and maintained by medical technologies. However, the degree to which this vision is a realistic possibility is still largely contested, with various responses to such developments indicating not only potential technological problems with this future, but also social, ethical and psychological debates. The threat to human identity, whether this be physically through the introduction of animal organs, or morally through a loss of our 'inherent dignity' which distinguishes us from other living species (Fukuyama, 2002), have provoked varying societal responses. The Warnock Committee (1985), in response to the first test tube baby, for example, imposed strict legal frameworks on doctors and scientists, on what can (and cannot) ethically be done to human embryos, thus preventing the ruthless pursuits of medical breakthroughs at whatever human cost. Public debate may also be a useful forum to discuss the futures and ethics of such technological advances, together with greater surveillance of illegal research practices. Aside from the futures of the new medical technologies, their current use has also reconfigured ethical debates, raising profound questions as to when a life begins, when it ends, and what we deem a 'worthwhile life' to be. Genetic screening, transplantation and the use of life support machines, whilst in many instances alleviating human suffering, also force us to question whose lives are deemed worthy of living, and how far we should intervene to prevent or prolong such lives. In the light of such dilemmas, many disability rights activists have called for greater information and the education of parents on the reality of living with genetic conditions before termination is carried out in cases of genetic defects, or even the abandonment of genetic screening altogether, in order to concentrate on the disabling effects of society, not the impaired individual (Fletcher, 2002). Furthermore, the complex ways in which the new medical technologies reinforce pre-existing inequalities and divisions, perhaps warrants further sociological input into this area. The procurement or theft of organs from those in developing countries for transplantation into affluent (usually white) bodies and the ability of infertile wealthy couples to purchase eggs from younger and often poorer donors, for example, reveals the way in which new medical technologies allow for the exploitation of the relatively powerless, whose organs become 'commodities of last resort' (Scheper-Hughes, 2001a); class, gender and racial inequalities come to be reinforced through the very implementation of new medical technologies therefore, disguised under the rhetoric of 'gift' and the saving of lives. Any examination of the ethical debates surrounding the new technologies, therefore, needs to take into consideration their implications for marginalised groups and existing inequalities. Medical technologies emerge out of the social, economic and political context of a society, and their existence as well as their implementation is invariably shaped by this context, thus opening up spaces for social, as well as medical and technological research. 