<heading>Part B</heading>1. The data set consists of three dependent variables measuring some form of cognitive or motor development : IQ, reading comprehension score (Rcomp) and test of motor impairment score (ToMI). <figure/>Figure 1, a histogram of the dependent variables, gives an indication of their distributions. IQ appears to be fairly well Normally distributed, with the majority of values clustered around the mid-90 level as would be expected. There appear to be a few outlying observations of IQ but this is most likely to be the result of random variation. On the other hand, reading comprehension score and test of motor impairment score seem to fit a Normal distribution poorly. Reading comprehension score appears as though it might be Normally distributed with a significant positive skewness. Test of motor impairment score also has a significant positive skew, but does not seem to fit the Normal distribution well at all. Most of the values are found at zero and one, with the bulk of the data falling into this region with a long positive tail gradually tapering out. The data set also includes three quantitative birth characteristics : birthweight (bw), birthratio ratio (rbw) and gestational age (ga). <figure/>Birthweight seems to adhere fairly well to a Normal distribution, with a clear peak in the centre of the data. However, there are some outliers in both tails, although these seem to be well within the limits of standard variation. Neither birthweight ratio nor gestational age seem to fit a Normal distribution well. Birthweight ratio has a broad peak containing the majority of the data, with a few extreme values falling outside this region. Gestational age might be considered fairly Uniformly distributed, excepting a few extreme premature births occurring before week 28. There are no extreme long values of gestational age since the study only occurs preterm births (those with gestational age 32 weeks or less). Finally, the data set includes five qualitative variables : the sex of the baby, whether the mother left education before or at the age of 16 (ed16), whether the mother lives in owner-occupied housing (owner), whether the family receives social service benefits (benefs) and whether the mother is a non-smoker (cig). <table/><table/>Table 1 indicates that sex is fairly evenly distributed between male and female, although a slightly higher proportion of male babies were included in the study. Table 2 provides some interesting results about the distribution of the social characteristics. A very high proportion of the preterm births included in the study had mothers who left education at or before the age of 16. The babies in the study are fairly evenly distributed in terms of having a mother living in owner-occupied housing and having a family receiving social service benefits. Finally, a fairly low proportion of babies included in the study had mothers who were non-smokers. It would be interesting to compare this data to the general proportions found in the population at large, as these results do not seem to be representative of the general population. A basic indication of the relationships between the variables can be found with a few exploratory graphs. <figure/>Figure 3 gives an indication of the influence the birth characteristics have on IQ. None of the plots seem to indicate a strong linear relationship between the variables and IQ. Gestational age seems to be pretty much constant in terms of IQ, suggesting this variable does not have any effect. However, birthweight and birthweight ratio both have a slight increasing linear relationship with IQ, giving an indication that IQ may increase with these variables. <figure/>As with IQ, the linear relationships of the birth characteristics with reading comprehension score are generally weak. Gestational age and birthweight do not appear to have much effect on reading comprehension score, but birthweight ratio seems as though it has a slight increasing relationship with reading comprehension score. <figure/>The test of motor impairment (ToMI) score seems to have a different relationship with the birth characteristics than seen with the other response variables, which both seemed to increase with birthweight ratio. ToMI score shows a more dramatic relationship with gestational age, with a clearly decreasing linear relationship. There also seems to be evidence of a decreasing relationship with birthweight, while birthweight ratio has minimal effect on ToMI score. <figure/>A boxplot of the dependent variables split by sex seems to indicate that gender has little impact on any of the measures of cognitive and motor development, with all three variables being at the same level regardless of gender. This would suggest that sex is not an important variable for consideration when modeling the variables. <figure/>A similar set of split box plots for the mother's age when leaving education produces a different result. There seems to be a significant different in IQ and reading comprehension score depending on whether the mother left education before or at age 16. People whose mothers left education after the age of 16 generally seem to have a higher IQ and reading comprehension score. The variable does not seem to have a significant effect on test of motor impairment score. <figure/>Whether the mother was living in owner-occupied housing seems to have an effect on both IQ and reading comprehension score, although not as dramatic as that found for the age the mother left education. People with mothers living in owner-occupied housing generally seem to have a slightly higher IQ and reading comprehension score than those with mothers not living in owner-occupied housing. Again, this variable does not seem to have any effect on test of motor impairment score. <figure/>A similar pattern to the other social characteristics is again found with the benefits variable. People with a family receiving social service benefits generally have a lower IQ and reading comprehension score, while a family's benefits have no real effect on test of motor impairment score. <figure/>The effect of maternal smoking seems to be minimal. While people with a mother who is a non-smoker seem to have a slightly higher IQ and reading comprehension score, the effect does not appear very significant. Maternal smoking does not appear to have any effect on test of motor impairment score. There is a high level of correlation between the independent variables. This is worrying as it is evidence that there is collinearity present in the data, which poses problems in modelling. Including several variables which are highly dependent on each other in a model can inflate the significance of effects and lead to unreliable coefficient estimates. Figure 9 shows the strong linear relationships between birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age. The relationship between birthweight and birthweight ratio is particularly strong, with high birthweights resulting in a high birthweight ratio, suggesting that the estimated birthweights are not that accurate. In additional, birthweight tends to increase with gestational age, which is not that surprising. The social characteristics also display some evidence of collinearity, with signs of correlation between the various variables. In particular, the correlation between living in owner-occupied housing and being in a family receiving benefits is -0.45, indicating that those living in owner-occupied housing are much less likely to be receiving benefits. <figure/>In summary, some of the variables (notably reading comprehension score, test of motor impairment score and gestational age) do not seem to follow the Normal distribution. This may present problems when attempting to model the data. Further modelling problems are posed by some highly correlated variables, which are evidence of collinearity between the variables. The relationships between the variables seem readily apparent from a few basic plots. Both IQ and reading comprehension score display similar relationships, increasing with respect to birthweight ratio and not having a clear relationship with birthweight or gestational age. Both IQ and reading comprehension seem to depend reasonably heavily on the social characteristics (ed16, owner, benefs and cig). Test of motor impairment score displays a different set of relationships. It seems to decrease with birthweight and gestational age and does not seem to be related to the social characteristics. Sex does not appear to have an effect on IQ, reading comprehension score or test of motor impairment score. 2. The results of the four individual simple linear regressions of IQ on each of the birth variables are given in the table below. This tests the hypothesis that IQ depends individually on birthweight, birthweight ratio, gestational age and sex in a linear relationship. <table/>The four models suggested for IQ are : <list> FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA </list>This suggests that IQ increases with birthweight and birthweight ratio, but decreases with gestational age. An increase in birthweight of 1kg leads to an increase in IQ of 8.364 points, while an increase in birthweight ratio of 1 leads to an increase in IQ of 22.058 points. One extra week of gestational age corresponded to a minimal decrease of 0.023 points. The individual model of IQ on sex also indicates that males have a lower IQ than females, with males having a lower IQ by 1.347 points. However, the significance of these effects varies between birth characteristic. The R-squared values indicate that none of the birth characteristics individually explain a great deal of the variance in the data. The only individual model significant at a 5% level is that of IQ on birthweight ratio, which indicates pretty strongly that there is a linear relationship between IQ and birthweight ratio. While not significant, birthweight seems as though it has a reasonably strong relationship with IQ. Gestational age and sex do not appear to be important factors in determining IQ. The fit of these relationships can be assessed by examining the residuals. The residuals of all four linear regressions seem to be fairly similar. There are some deviations from Normality in the distribution of the residuals but on the whole the residuals seem reasonably well Normally distributed. <figure/>However, all four sets of residuals have two large negative residuals (the same observations in each case). While the residuals appear to be reasonably randomly distributed (with constant variance), these two large residuals seem to be extreme values. These seem to indicate that the fit of the individual models for IQ is not particularly good. The large residuals seem to occur for extreme high or low values of IQ, indicating that the model is not fitting particularly well at the extremes. <figure/>The results of the four individual simple linear regressions of Rcomp on each of the birth variables are given in the table below. This tests the hypothesis that reading comprehension score depends individually on birthweight, birthweight ratio, gestational age and sex in a linear relationship. <table/>The four models suggested for reading comprehension score are : <list> FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA </list>The results are similar to those of the individual regressions of IQ on the birth characteristics. Reading comprehension score seems to increase with birthweight and birthweight ratio, with a 3.427 and 10.335 point increase in reading comprehension score for a 1kg and 1 increase in these variables respectively. Reading comprehension seemed to decrease with gestational age, with an extra week of gestational age corresponding to a decrease of 0.007 poins. The individual model of reading comprehension on sex also indicates that males have a lower reading comprehension score than females, with males having a 0.803 decrease in reading comprehension. Like IQ, none of the individual relationships seem to be that strong, with none of them being significant at the 5% level. However, it does appear that birthweight ratio has a strong effect on reading comprehension score, while considered individually gestational age and sex do not have an important effect. This backs up the general findings for IQ regarding the effects of the birth characteristics on cognitive development. None of these models seem to be a particularly good fit for reading comprehension score. The residuals do not appear to conform well to Normality, with extreme non-Normality in the tails. <figure/>A plot of the residuals of the regression against the fits paints a similar picture of a significant number of extreme values. There are a large number of high positive residuals. Similar residuals properties can be seen in all four individual regressions of reading comprehension score. This would seem to indicate that none of the individual models was a particularly good fit for the data. <figure/>The results of the four individual simple linear regressions of ToMI on each of the birth variables are given in the table below. This tests the hypothesis that test of motor impairment score depends individually on birthweight, birthweight ratio, gestational age and sex in a linear relationship. Given the significant non-Normality of ToMI score, it might be worth transforming the variable to provide a better fit to the Normal distribution. A linear regression makes the assumption that the response variable is Normally distributed, which does not seem to be the case for the ToMI scores. However, the ToMI score is problematic in terms of transformation due to the large number of responses with value zero. This means that a log or inverse transformation cannot be applied and this skew will be difficult to remove with any transformation applied to the data. <table/>The four models suggested for reading comprehension score are : <list> FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA </list>The results for the regressions of test of motor impairment score on the individual birth characteristics has produced slightly different results to those seen with IQ and reading comprehension score. Test of motor impairment score appears to decrease with birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age, with 3.112, 2.507 and 0.314 point decreases corresponding to 1kg, 1 and one week increases in these variables respectively. The individual model of motor impairment score on sex also indicates that males have a lower test of motor impairment score than females, with males having a 0.145 point decrease in ToMI score. The relationships appear to be stronger than those found with IQ and reading comprehension score. Both birthweight and gestational age have a significant effect on ToMI score at the 5% level. While the result for birthweight ratio is not significant, it does seem to be an important factor with a reasonably strong relationship with ToMI score. Again, there is no evidence to suggest that sex has an effect on cognitive or motor development. However, the goodness of fit for these models of ToMI is not particularly great. While the residuals appear to conform reasonably well to the Normal distribution, there are a lot of deviations in the lower tail of the residuals, which is worrying. <figure/>There also appear to be a significant number of large positive residuals, which suggest that the model is a poor fit for the individual relationships of the birth characteristics on ToMI score. The other birth characteristic regressions produce very similar residuals properties to those shown for gestational age. <figure/>3. The results of the simple linear regressions of the effects of the birth characteristics on each of the development variables seem to indicate that individual models for the development variables on each birth characteristic are not the best choice. This presents a variable selection problem in terms of deciding which birth characteristics to include in modelling each development variable. The problem can be solved by using all subsets regression, which runs regressions on all possible combinations of independent variables and selects the best ones based on some criterion. The criteria Cp and adjusted r 2 will be considered here. The best model will be that which includes all the necessary variables to model the data but no more. Adjusted r-squared and Mallow's Cp both compensate for inflation of fit of the model by adding variables. In particular, models with a low Cp value and high adjusted r-squared are good choices of models. <figure/>Selecting purely on the basis of the Mallow's Cp statistic, it appears that a regression model including just birthweight ratio in the regression would be the best choice of model for IQ, since it has a similarly low Cp value to the model considering birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age but fewer variables. However, going purely on the basis of the adjusted r-squared statistic, the model including all birth characteristics appears to be the best model for the data. Both the Mallow's Cp and adjusted r-squared plots show that the model including birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age is the second best choice of model. This seems to be the most sensible choice of model - a regression of IQ purely on birthweight ratio has already been considered and did not seem to be that good a fit. Likewise, inclusion of all the variables does not seem wise since sex seemed to have no effect at all on IQ. Judging from both the Cp and adjusted r-squared values, a model based on the variables birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age seems the most sensible. <table/>The model for IQ produced is  FORMULA  Hence babies with a high birthweight ratio seem to have a higher IQ, particularly those with a high birthweight ratio but a low birthweight, as an increase of 1 in birthweight ratio corresponds to an increase in IQ of 63.666 points but an increase in birthweight of 1kg corresponds to a decrease of 26.754 points. An increase of one week in gestational age also leads to an increased IQ of 4.231 points. However, only birthweight ratio is significant at a 5% level, although gestational age is practically significant. This model seems to be a slight improvement over the model with just birthweight ratio on its own, with a comparable Cp statistic and a higher adjusted r-squared value. The goodness of fit of this model seems to be an improvement over that of just birthweight ratio as well, with the residuals proving to be a better fit for the Normal distribution. However, there are still two large outlying residuals, which suggest that the model does not fit well for a few extreme observations. <figure/><figure/>An all subsets regression on reading comprehension score produces some unusual results. Rather than Cp decreasing with additional variables, it increases dramatically, and the adjusted r-squared values for the regressions are all negative. <figure/>Despite the anomalies, both criteria highlight the model just based on birthweight ratio as being the best choice of variables for reading comprehension score. <table/>This produces the model :  FORMULA  This model has already been discussed previously, in the section regarding individual simple linear regressions of the various birth characteristics on reading comprehension score. The model does not have a particular good fit, with significant deviations from Normality in the residuals and a high number of large positive residuals. The poor fit of the model may be due to the significant non-Normality of reading comprehension score or the social characteristics being excluded from modelling, despite having been shown to have some effect on reading comprehension score. Considering an all subsets regression on ToMI score, both the Mallow's Cp and adjusted r-squared methods yield similar results. <figure/>A regression model using both birthweight ratio and gestational age seems to be the best choice of model for ToMI score, as it is the optimal model in terms of both Cp and adjusted r-squared, having the lowest Cp score and highest adjusted r-squared. <table/>The model for ToMI score produced is  FORMULA  As seen with the individual regressions of ToMI score on the birth characteristics, ToMI score decreases with both birthweight ratio and gestational age. An increase of 1 in birthweight ratio reduces in a 4.725 point decrease in test of motor impairment score, while an increase in gestational age of one week leads to a 0.469 point decrease. It is unusual that birthweight has not been included in the model when it was seen to have the largest effect on ToMI score individually. This may be due to the collinearity between birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age, meaning that the effect of birthweight on ToMI score is adequately explained by birthweight ratio and gestational age. This appears to be an improvement over the individual models for ToMI score on the various birth characteristics. All the coefficients are highly significant and the model explains quite a bit of the variation in the data. However, the expansion in variables does not seem to have improved the fit of the model much. The residuals still deviate from Normality fairly strongly at the extremes, there is still evidence of non-constant variance in the residuals and there are still a significant number of large residuals. These large residuals do not appear to occur within any particular group or be associated with any particular variable. <figure/><figure/>4. A model based on some subset of the birth characteristics has been identified for each of the response variables. However, there seems to be considerable room for improvement in the fit of the models and initial exploratory analysis suggested that the social characteristics had some clear impact on cognitive development. Considering an all subsets regression on both the birth and social characteristics is likely to change the models found so far. An all subsets regression including the new variables suggests that the model for IQ does need to be changed to take into account the social characteristics. <figure/>As would be expected from the exploratory analysis, the social characteristics have an impact on IQ. The models 'RSEON', 'RGSEON' and 'BRGSEON' all have similarly low Cp values, with 'RSEON' being most preferable due to the lower number of variables included. These three models are again highlighted by the adjusted r-squared criterion, this time with 'BRGSEON' being slightly more preferable as it has the highest adjusted r-squared value. However, in the interests of having a parsimonious model, it does not seem wise to include quite so many terms, especially since several of them display signs of collinearity which could cause problems with the model. The increase in adjusted r-squared from including gestational age and birthweight is not that great, so taking the model of IQ on the variables birthweight ratio, sex, ed16, owner and benefs seems to be the best choice of model in the interests of keeping the model as simple as possible. <table/>The model for IQ produced is  FORMULA  Inclusion of the social characteristics in potential modelling means that the model now explains a fair amount of the variation in the data. All of the variables are significant at the 5% level with the exception of sex. The model confirms the earlier relationships between the variables - an increase of birthweight ratio by 1 corresponds to an increase in IQ of 22.739 points, while males have a decrease in IQ of 3.277 points. Having a mother who left education at or before the age of 16 equates to a decrease in IQ of 7.452 points, having a mother living in owner-occupied housing equates to an increase in IQ by 5.373 points, while being in a family receiving benefits equates to a decrease in IQ of 8.970 points. In addition to improving the amount of variation explained by the model, the expansion to include the social characteristics has also helped to improve the fit of the model. The residuals now fit a Normal distribution extremely well, deviating for only a few extreme values. <figure/>The improvement in fit can also be seen in Figure 24, the residuals vs. fits plot for the regression. The residuals seem to have more constant variance, although there are still a few outlying observations. Generally, the chosen model seems to be a good one for modelling IQ. <figure/>Figure 25 shows the results of an all subsets regression including social characteristics on reading comprehension score. This indicates that the inclusion of social characteristics for consideration has quite a dramatic effect on model choice. The model including ed16, owner and benefs seems to be the best choice, having drastically lower Cp and only slightly lower adjusted r-squared than more complicated models. This would seem to indicate that the addition of further variables does not have a significant effect on the model. <figure/><table/>The model for RComp produced is  FORMULA  All of the variables are significant at the 5% level with the exception of owner, which is likely to be significant nonetheless. The model indicates that having a mother who left education at or before age 16 equates to a decrease in reading comprehension score of 10.209 points, having a mother living in owner-occupied housing equates to an increase in reading comprehension score of 6.063 points, while living in a family which receives benefits equates to a decrease in reading comprehension score of 9.562 points. While the model has been improved in terms of variation explained, the addition of the social characteristics has only improved the goodness of fit slightly. The residuals from the regression fit a Normal distribution slightly better, although they deviate significantly in the extremes. The variance of the residuals appears to be constant, although there are still a few large residuals. The model does not have a perfect fit, but it is the best of the models for reading comprehension score considered so far, especially considering the non-Normality of reading comprehension score. <figure/>Examination of the large residual values suggests that the model fits poorly for people who come from a less affluent background but still have a high reading comprehension score. This could be due to other variables involved, although a number of these cases have a high birthweight ratio. It is possible that birthweight ratio warrants inclusion in the model. <figure/>From the exploratory analysis of the data, inclusion of social characteristics in an all subsets regression on ToMI score would not be expected to have a large effect. <figure/>Although the model including birthweight ratio, gestational age and owner has a higher adjusted r-squared value than the one including just birthweight ratio and gestational age, it has a slightly higher Cp value and contains more variables. The difference in adjusted r-squared value between the two models seems minimal, so from an all subsets regression including social characteristics it appears that the variables birthweight ratio and gestational age produce the best model for ToMI score. This is in line with the observations from the exploratory analysis that ToMI score does not appear to be influenced by the social characteristics. Therefore the previously selected model does not need to be adjusted for any of the social characteristics or the effect of maternal smoking, as this all subsets regression has highlighted the same best choice of model as that found previously. <heading>Part C</heading>In an attempt to study the effects of preterm birth on cognitive and motor development, a cohort study took data on all infants with a gestational age at birth of 32 weeks or less and weighing 2 kgs or less at birth born in 1980 or 1981 to mothers resident in the county of Merseyside. Several children were excluded from the study for various reasons, leaving 121 infants in the study. Scores from IQ and reading comprehension tests were recorded to measure the infants' cognitive development, while a test of motor impairment was conducted to measure motor development. Four birth characteristics were recorded - birthweight, birthweight ratio (calculated by actual birth weight divided by expected birth weight), gestational age and sex. In addition, four social characteristics were observed - whether the mother left education before or at age 16, whether the mother lived in owner-occupied housing, whether the family received social service benefits and whether the mother was a non-smoker. An initial exploratory analysis gave an indication of the different relationships between the variables. Both IQ and reading comprehension score showed similar patterns, increasing with birthweight ratio and also being affected by the social characteristics. This suggests that cognitive development is affected by birthweight ratio. The exploratory analysis also showed that infants with better educated mothers and those in a more affluent family tended to have a higher IQ or reading comprehension score. In terms of motor development, test of motor impairment score appeared to depend more on the birth characteristics of birth weight and gestational age, with the social characteristics having no effect. Sex did not appear to have an effect on either cognitive or motor development. The exploratory analysis also indicated that collinearity in the data - particularly between birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age - could prove a problem when modelling the data. Initial model fitting for IQ, reading comprehension score and test of motor impairment score involved doing individual linear regressions of each of these variables on each of the four birth characteristics. These regressions confirmed the initial observations of the exploratory analysis. Birthweight and birthweight ratio both showed clear positive linear relationships with IQ, while none of the birth characteristics had a significant relationship with reading comprehension score. Test of motor impairment depended heavily on both birthweight and gestational age. However, none of these individual models proved to be a particularly good fit for the data. All of the models did not explain that much of the variation in the data and included a number of large outlying residuals and demonstrated clear signs of deviating from Normality. This seemed to indicate that modelling the response variables on just one predictor was not a particularly good choice of model. A better model would need to take into account a combination of the observed variables, although the selection of the variables to be considered would need to be done carefully due to the potential collinearity in the data set. To select the variables to be involved in modelling each of the response variables, all subsets regression was used to select a subset of the birth characteristics for each model. Considering both Mallow's Cp statistic and adjusted r-squared, the variables birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age were chosen to predict IQ, while birthweight ratio alone was chosen for reading comprehension score. Test of motor impairment score appeared to be modelled best by birthweight ratio and gestational age. For IQ and test of motor impairment score, the additional variables seemed to result in a better, but not perfect, model. Further consideration by performing all subsets regressions, this time including the social characteristics as possible variables, improved the models further. The final three models selected were : <list> FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA </list>All of the coefficients in the above models are significant at the 5% level with the exception of Sex in the IQ model (which is significant at the 11% level) and owner in the RComp model (which is significant at the 6% level). IQ increases with birthweight ratio, with an increase of 1 corresponding to an increase in IQ of 22.739 points. IQ differs between the genders, with males having a lower IQ by 3.277 points. In terms of social characteristics, having a mother who left education at or before the age of 16 equates to a 7.452 point decrease in IQ, having a mother living in owner-occupied accommodation equates to a 5.373 point increase and living in a family receiving social service benefits equates to a 8.970 point decrease. Similarly, having a mother who left education at or before the age of 16 equates to a 10.209 point decrease in reading comprehension score, having a mother living in owner-occupied accommodation equates to a 6.063 point increase and living in a family receiving benefits equates to a 9.562 point decrease. Test of motor impairment score depends heavily on birthweight ratio and gestational age, with an increase in ratio of 1 corresponding to a 4.725 decrease in ToMI score and an increase in gestational age of one week corresponding to a 0.469 decrease. Generally, it appears as though cognitive development depends heavily on the social background of the infant. Reading comprehension score appears to depend almost completely on social background, indicating that improvement in this area is affected heavily by the environment in which they are raised rather than the effect of preterm birth. The other measure of cognitive development, IQ, does appear to be affected heavily by birthweight ratio, suggesting that preterm birth can have an effect on general cognitive development. On the other hand, motor development does not appear to be based heavily on social background, with the chosen model suggesting it is mainly affected by birth characteristics. Infants who are born closer to term and who weigh more than expected display better motor skills. The study has some significant limitations. The final models arrived at are still not totally satisfactory. While the model for IQ seems to fit pretty well, the models for the other two variables show non-Normality and evidence of non-constant variance, suggesting that some of the assumptions of modelling have been violated. This casts doubts on the reliability and usefulness of the final models. A key assumption of linear regression is that the variables being modelled follow a Normal distribution. This did not appear to be the case for reading comprehension score and test of motor impairment score, so a generalised linear model may be a better approach to modelling these variables. In particular, in the case of test of motor impairment score, a log-linear model may be more appropriate. It may also be worth examining interactions between the independent variables, or looking at quadratic effects. One concern when examining the data is that gestational age is measured in weeks. A more useful variable might be gestational age measured in days, which would allow for further analysis of this birth characteristic. This might prove be an interesting extension of the study. Furthermore, since the study only considered those infants born with a gestational age of 32 weeks or under and those weighing under 2kg, the model can only be applied to predicting infants in this range. The results of the findings of the study cannot be extended to infants born at term or afterwards. The data set does not appear to be that representative of the general population, with an average IQ of below 100 and higher proportions of the social characteristics than would be expected. An interesting and useful extension of the study would be to consider data from all births, allowing further application of the model. 