Euro-dollar deposits are deposits in United States dollars deposited at banks outside the United States. Since Euro-dollar deposits are based on interest rates, the Euro-dollar deposit rate gives an indication of the interest rate of the United States economy. It can be considered the interest rate on dollars held in European banks. A time series of Euro-dollar 6-month deposits was collected from the Federal Reserve website ( URL ) consisting of 753 weekly values spanning from the 1 st of January 2002 to the 31 st of December 2004. Since this data is only available for business days and there is a lot of missing data, the time series is presented with a time index as the date scale is unavailable. This interest rate series was chosen since my date of birth is the 2 nd of November, which has remainder 2 when divided by 4. (i) The graph below shows the Euro-dollar 6 month deposit rate between 2002 and 2004. Over the period the interest rate seems to dip and then increase in level, which might be considered a deterministic trend of the series. However, much of the behaviour appears to be local trends in the data rather than any long-term pattern. The series is non-stationary - it does not fluctuate around any one value, rather the data appears to fluctuate around a local level which changes over time. The series appears to drift over time, which could be an indication of a stochastic trend in the series. <figure/>Applying backward exponential smoothing to the series using a moving average of unspecified extent and with the smoothing parameter which gives the best one-step ahead predictions using ITSM suggests an optimum smoothing parameter of 0.95. Since using a parameter of 1 in backward exponential smoothing has the effect of applying no smoothing at all, this produces no real change to the time series. <figure/>ITSM does not appear to have produced the best smoothing parameter for the series as the time series appears to still be quite 'rough'. A lower choice of smoothing parameter would be better suited to the time series. The graph below shows an exponential backward smoothing of the time series with the choice of parameter 0.8. <figure/>This still does not seem to have made much difference to the series, smoothing only a few extreme points. The line still passes through most of the points in the series. The graph below shows the exponential backward smoothing process applied again, this time with choice of parameter 0.5. <figure/>Even with quite a dramatic change in smoothing parameter the backwards exponential smoothing has still had little effect on the series. A few of the more extreme values have been smoothed quite well but the new smoothed graph deviates little from the original plot. This may be a good choice of smoothing parameter but a 'smoother' option may provide a better result. The experimentation with different smoothing parameters suggests that backwards exponential smoothing does not have much effect on interest rate series unless extremely low values of smoothing parameters are chosen. The backwards exponential smoothing process may not be particularly useful in this case. (ii) Since the time series being considered is an interest rate series, it is inappropriate to log and difference the time series since it is already in percentage format. However, in order to perform further analysis of the time series the local level behaviour of the series must be eliminated so that the series has zero level with no evidence of drift. This is best accomplished by performing a lag 1 regression on the data and examining the residuals from the regression. The regression coefficient produced from the autoregression is 1.0008, very close to 1, and the constant in the regression is approximately zero. Therefore taking the residuals of the regression is very nearly equivalent to subtracting the previous value in the series from the current value, an effect extremely similar to merely differencing the data. The graph below shows a time series plot of the residuals from a regression of the rate at time t on the rate of time t - 1. The new series appears quite similar to a return series, being generally centred at the zero level and having no evidence of drift. There also appears to be quite a bit of volatility in the series. <figure/>(iii) The graph below shows a histogram of the autoregression residuals series from the Euro-dollar 6 Month Deposit Rate series. <figure/>The histogram seems to suggest that the data does not follow a normal distribution very well. There are a large number of extreme values at the ends of both tails of the distribution and the central peak is extremely high. The data is heavily peaked at the centre. There is also a hint of the data being negatively skewed, with slightly more data to the right of the peak and a larger number of low extreme values. These observations are confirmed by examining the skewness and kurtosis values for the residuals series. The series has a slight indication of skewness with a skewness value of -0.14, indicating that the data may have a weak negative skew. The kurtosis value is 6.78, which is quite high and indicates that the data is heavily peaked. These features are again demonstrated by the normal probability plot below. <figure/>The probability plot confirms that the Normal distribution is not a good fit for the data, with a large number of values outside the 95% confidence interval for the data. In particular, there are too many values in the centre (confirming that the data is heavily peaked) and a large number of extreme values. The residuals series is very representative of the stylized facts of interest rate series - they typically show a high degree of non-Normality, have heavy peaks and display skewness and kurtosis. The residuals series here displays all these properties, although the skewness is not quite so pronounced. (iv) Possible linear and non-linear statistical dependency of the residuals can be investigated with various autocorrelation and lag scatter plots. The graph below shows the autocorrelation function for the residuals and suggests that there may be some linear dependency, with some initial high values before the autocorrelation dies away. The latter high values are probably just a result of randomness. <figure/>Linear statistical dependency can also be investigated by plotting the values of the residuals series against the previous value in the series. The graph below is a lag-1 scatter plot of the residuals series. <figure/>This confirms the suggestion that there is some low order linear dependency in the data. Rather than a random spread of the data, there is a large block where most of the values are found and the data seems to conform to a rough cross pattern with some extreme values. This is strong evidence that the residual at time t and the residual at time t - 1 are not independent - there is some low order autoregressive linear correlation in the residuals. <figure/>The above graph is the autocorrelation repeated for the squared values of the residuals. There are a few high autocorrelation values at the beginning before the autocorrelation becomes random, although none of the values is clearly significant. It is weak evidence that there might be low order autocorrelation present in the residuals. These results are consistent with the stylized facts. The residuals of an interest rate series usually display both low order linear and non-linear autocorrelation. The residuals series here displays some autoregressive linear correlation as well as some weak non-linear autocorrelation. (v) The residuals series of the Euro-dollar 6 Month deposit rates, plotted again below, shows some evidence of volatility. The amplitude of the series changes considerably over time, with considerable volatility at the start and near the end of the series where the values jump around a lot compared to other sections of the series which have a small amplitude. This is some indication that the variance of the time series changes, with local areas of the series having different variances. <figure/>A primitive approach to volatility is to examine (x t - μ)2 and assume that μ = 0, that is looking at the squared values of the time series. The graph below shows the squares of the residuals, cut off at 0.015 so the graph isn't distorted by the high peaks. <figure/>The plot gives a clearer idea of the volatility present in the data, demonstrating that there is quite a lot of volatility at the start and near the end of the series. Another primitive approach to volatility is to examine the series of absolute values, which can give a clearer picture of periods of high volatility in the data. A plot of the absolute values of the residuals is found below, which gives a similar picture of the volatility of the residuals though it is not as clear. <figure/>An even better indication of volatility can be gained by applying backward exponential smoothing to the plot of the squared residuals. In this case, ITSM suggests a predictively chosen smoothing parameter of 0.04. <figure/>This choice does show some clear periods of high volatility in the data (indicated by the peaks in the smoothed line), although these are not tremendous, having around twice the variation of non-volatile periods. However, the result is a graph which is perhaps too smooth. The choice of a lower smoothing parameter would either produce a very similar result or something resembling more or less a straight line across the series. It might be better to select a higher smoothing parameter. The graph below is another backwards exponentially smoothed plot of the squared residuals series, this time with a smoothing parameter of 0.1. <figure/>This paints a similar picture in regards of the volatility of the residuals series, highlighting the same four peaks of high volatility. This choice of smoothing parameter seems to have produced a slightly clearer result. The effects of choosing another smoothing parameter are shown below. This time the parameter was specified as 0.2. <figure/>This choice of another higher smoothing parameter has had similar effects to the earlier increase in smoothing parameter. There are more peaks in the smoothing curve and they have greater amplitude. The graph is clearer but it is not necessarily the best choice of smoothing parameter as the result is similar to the original plot of the squared autoregression residuals but with truncated peaks. There does seem to be evidence of the volatility in the series. From sight, the residuals plot seems to have periods of volatility at the beginning and end of the series and this is backed up by a primitive approach of analysing the plots of the squares and absolute values of the residuals. A clearer picture of the volatility in the residuals series is given by the smoothed squared residuals plots, which seem to indicate that there are four peaks of high volatility present in the data. This is consistent with the stylized facts of interest rate series, which indicate that the residual interest rates often exhibit volatility. (vi) Another approach to volatility is the conditional variance approach, where the variance of the data is examined to see if it depends on previous variances. This can be accomplished by producing a scatter plot of the mean-adjusted absolute value at time t against the value at time t - 1, as shown by the below scatter plot for the autogression residuals of the Euro-dollar 6 month deposit rate series. <figure/>The result is slightly surprising. A Lowess smoothed line (with parameter 0.1) has been produced to give a clearer interpretation of the volatility scatter plot. It gives a weak indication that there is volatility in the series, since the line is not flat in the middle and has several peaks. However, the curve appears reasonably symmetric and is generally fairly flat. This is surprising since one of the stylized facts about interest rate series is that their residuals display volatility and this volatility tends to be greater following high values. Therefore you would not expect the Lowess smoothed line to be symmetric but rather to rise considerably with high values of the residual at time t - 1. This suggests that the volatility in the case of the residuals of the Euro-dollar 6 month deposit rates is not typical of interest rate series on the whole. (vii) While a primitive approach to volatility showed consistency with the known behaviour of interest rate series, the comparison does not seem to hold for a conditional variance approach to volatility. In terms of the primitive approach, the residuals of the Euro-dollar 6 month deposit rates series showed peaks of high volatility in the squared residuals, absolute values of the residuals and smoothed squared residuals plots. There appeared to be clear evidence of volatility, which confirms the known behaviour of residual interest rates exhibiting volatility. However, residual interest rates are also noted for having high volatility following high values of interest rates. The scatter plot of the volatility based on the previous residual value showed no evidence of this and did not show particularly clear evidence that volatility was present in the series. There is possibly an explanation for this. The known behaviour of residual interest rates exhibiting high volatility following high values of residuals might be due to increases in interest rates leading to worries over high interest rates affecting spending and profits. However, over the period studied (1 st of January 2002 to 31 st December 2004) the interest rate remained at a fairly low level. The graph below shows a time series plot of the monthly Euro-Dollar 6 month deposit rates over the period 1971 to 2007. Looking closely at the graph it is obvious that between 2002 and 2004 the interest rate was generally at a low level compared to the rest of the period. The generally low interest rate may have meant that fears caused by high rises in the interest rate may not have been as problematic as normal, meaning that the usual volatility following high residual interest rates is not present in the period examined. This may explain the discrepancies between the volatility properties of the data and the stylized facts of interest rate series. <figure/>(viii) The daily residuals series of 753 values was converted into a weekly residuals series of 150 values by taking a sequence of five day non-interlapping sums in the series. Since there were several missing values and thus not a whole number of 'weeks' in the series, the final 3 values were ignored. The time series plot below shows the new residuals series. <figure/>The weekly residuals plot seems similar in character to the daily residuals series. Like the daily residuals series, the weekly residuals appear to be centred at a zero level and display some evidence of volatility. The section of the series near the end does not appear to be clearly centred at zero, but this is likely to be randomness due to the smaller number of observations being analysed. The histogram below gives an indication of the distribution of the residuals. This is quite similar to the one seen for the daily residuals series. The residuals are heavily peaked at the centre, with some indication of a weak negative skew and a number of very extreme values, although with the weekly residuals series these are mostly negative values rather than a fair number in each tail. The weekly residuals are slightly less negatively skewed with a skewness value of -0.12. In fact the kurtosis value of 1.77 seems to indicate that the weekly residuals are not as heavily peaked as the daily residuals series. Both residuals distributions are highly non-Normal, as would be expected from known behaviour of residual interest rate series, but the weekly residuals seem to be less extreme in their non-Normality. <figure/>The graph below is a Normal probability plot of the weekly residuals series. While this is not as dramatically non-Normal as the daily residuals series, there are significant deviations from the Normal distribution with too much data concentrated at the centre and a number of extreme values, although these are mostly found in the negative tail with the weekly residuals series compared to the daily series where they were clearly present in both tails. <figure/>The dependency of the series has not changed much with the weekly series. The graphs below show the autocorrelation functions of the residuals and their squares. As seen with the daily residuals series, there is some evidence of autocorrelation with both the residuals themselves and the squared residuals values before the autocorrelation dies away to randomness. Only the first couple of autocorrelation values appear to be significant in both, which suggests that there is both low order linear dependency and low order non-linear dependency. <figure/><figure/>There is not much difference between the dependency of the daily series of residuals and that of the weekly series. Whereas with the daily series between 5 and 10 lags appeared significant, here 1 to 2 lags appear significant, which is consistent due to the length of the week. Both series follow the stylized facts of interest rate series by showing some short-memory linear and non-linear dependence. The volatility of the two series also appears to be reasonably similar. The graphs below show a plot of the squared weekly residuals and a backwards exponentially smoothed version of the plot with optimum smoothing parameter 0.20. <figure/><figure/>There is some evidence of volatility and the peaks in the smoothed squared residuals graph suggests that the volatility in the weekly series is in roughly the same periods as the volatility in the daily series of residuals. An examination of potential conditional volatility yields a slightly different result to the plot of the daily series. While there are still peaks in the centre of the Lowess smoother line, the line is much less flat and does not appear to be symmetric. The volatility curve seems to suggest that high periods of volatility follow extreme high or low residual interest rate values. <figure/>Overall the weekly series of residuals is fairly similar to the daily series. Although the distribution of the residuals appears to be slightly more Normal, it is still heavily non-Normal with signs of skewness and slight kurtosis. The two series are very similar in terms of linear and non-linear dependency, both displaying short-memory linear and non-linear dependence. With a primitive approach to volatility the two series appear to have some evidence of volatility, both within the same periods during the series. However, the conditional volatility characteristic of the two series is different. Whereas the daily series indicated little conditional volatility, the weekly series has some strong evidence that periods of volatility follow strong negative residual interest rate values. This is generally as expected, since aggregating the data will remove the extreme responses in the series. 