(i) The graph below shows the daily exchange rate of the UK pound against the US dollar during the period from the 02/01/1990 to 31/12/1999, consisting of 2,539 values (days with no trading were excluded from the series). The data was derived from fx.sauder.ubc.ca and transferred into Minitab, being plotted with the date column. <figure/>The exchange rate series does not appear to have any clear deterministic trend, with the exchange rate generally returning to the same level, although there are some local trends over the course of the series. There does appear to be some stochastic behaviour in the series, with the series drifting over time. (ii) The percentage log returns were derived from the exchange rate values. The graph below is a time series plot of the percentage log returns of the exchange rate. Taking the log returns of the data appears to have removed the trend seen in the series fairly well. The series has been effectively de-trended, with the percentage log returns now being permanently centred at a zero level. There is also no drift in the series - it is fixed at that level. Visually, it appears that the percentage log returns series exhibits evidence of volatility, with clear signs of changing amplitude throughout the series. The first third of the series generally has a larger amplitude than the rest of the series, with several periods of prolonged high amplitude suggesting periods of volatility. <figure/>(iii) The marginal distribution of the log returns can be assessed with a variety of methods. A histogram of the log returns is given below. <figure/>The distribution of the log returns appears to be symmetric and seems as though it might conform to the Normal distribution. The data does not appear to be skewed, with a relatively low skewness statistic of 0.29. There is some suggestion that the data might be heavily peaked, and this is confirmed by the slightly higher than expected kurtosis value of 2.93. Further evidence suggesting that the log returns may not be Normally distributed is seen in the histogram - the log returns seem to have long tails, with a large number of extreme values and several clear outliers situated well away from the rest of the data. A histogram of the log returns seemed to suggest that the Normal distribution was not a good fit for the log return data, with slight signs of kurtosis being present and the distribution of the data having extremely long tails. This is confirmed further by a probability plot of the log returns against the Normal distribution. <figure/>The features of the histogram are again present in the probability plot. The log returns deviate slightly from the Normal distribution in the centre, with more data being situated here than expected. There is a high degree of non-Normality in the tails of the data, with long tails deviating strongly from the Normal distribution. This suggests that the log returns are not Normally distributed and another distribution possessing long tails would be a better fit for the log returns. A good choice of distribution for a long tailed distribution is often the t-distribution. The graph below shows a probability plot for the log returns against a t-distribution with 15 degrees of freedom. <figure/>The log returns seem to match a t-distribution pretty well, although not perfectly. The graph is almost a straight line, although there is a slight bend in the centre and there are still a few outlying observations. However, it seems as though the log returns fit a t-distribution well, although perhaps with a different value for the degrees of freedom. This analysis of the distribution of the log returns poses implications for modelling the data. The log returns do not appear to be Normally distribution, so a model using Gaussian noise is not an appropriate choice. It would be better to proceed with modelling based on noise following a t-distribution. (iv) The dependency of the log returns can be examined through the autocorrelations of the series. Linear and non-linear dependency is a key aspect in selecting a model for a series. With the log return series there is some clear indication of significance at lag 1, suggesting that the value of the log return does depend somewhat on the previous value. There are a few more results following this, suggesting that the ten or so previous values have some effect, but after this period the autocorrelation of the series dies away, with later significant values just being the effect of natural variation rather than a truly important result. <figure/>There appears to be some limited linear dependency in the series, but only short memory. A different picture is painted by an examination of the autocorrelation of the squares of the log returns. The autocorrelation graph shows that there is considerable dependency in the squared log returns, and that this dependency does not die out over the course of the series. <figure/><figure/>The partial autocorrelation function of the squares of the log returns confirms this picture to some degree. There still appears to be a high level of dependency in the series but this does appear to die out quite quickly. In summary, there is some very low-order linear dependence in the log returns, mainly on the previous (lag 1) value in the series. An examination of the non-linear dependency in the series gives a very clear indication that some is present. The dependency does not die out quickly, suggesting the possibility of very long memory dependence in the series. However, the evidence is not definitive - there may be long memory non-linear dependence or the high level of significance of the autocorrelations could be a result of a trend in the series which has not been removed by taking the log returns. The dependency of the series has some effect on the modelling process - the presence of only a little linear autocorrelation and dramatic non-linear autocorrelation could indicate that an ARCH(1) or similar model may be a suitable one for the log returns. (v) Volatility is another important aspect in selecting a model for a series. From the standard time series plot of the log returns, it seemed apparent that there was volatility present in the log returns from the changing amplitude throughout the series. A clearer picture of this can be given by plotting the absolute values of the log returns. This is slightly easier to interpret than just a simple examination of the amplitude of the log returns. <figure/>This seems to concur with the visual interpretation of the log returns. There are three or four peaks of high volatility within the series, with a succession extreme positive and negative log returns at these points. It also confirms that the amplitude does change throughout the series, with a period in the middle of the series of clear low amplitude log returns. A further examination of this can be offered by smoothing the above plot gives confirmation of the peaks of volatility in the series. <figure/>The presence of volatility is again confirmed by a further exploration with a volatility scatter plot and associated smoothed line. <figure/>The smoothed line is not flat and dips considerably in the centre of the scatter plot, indicating that there is volatility in the series. This indicates that the values following a return that is close to zero generally have a smaller amplitude than those found following extreme returns. This is particularly true for values following extreme positive returns - these typically have a much higher amplitude than returns found elsewhere, indicating that high positive returns are typically followed by periods of high volatility. It is possible that the extreme positive return is skewing this picture slightly but the curve still shows signs of curving upward even with the removal of this value. Both approaches to volatility indicate pretty clear that there is volatility present in the series. There are several periods of volatility and a structural volatility plot indicates that volatility usually follows extreme positive returns. With this in mind, a linear model for the series is not a good choice for the data - a linear model takes no account of volatility in the series, assuming that the variation is constant throughout. This has been demonstrated to not be the case here. Therefore proceeding to non-linear modelling seems to be the best choice, as a non-linear model should take into account the changing variation in the data. (vi) The log return series was imported into ITSM and adjusted for the mean of the series in preparation for modelling. All subsequent modelling activity in parts (vi), (vii) and (viii) was conducted on this mean adjusted log returns series. An ARCH(1) model might be initially considered for the series. The log returns have clear signs of volatility, so for the reasons described previously a linear model would not be an appropriate choice. An ARCH model should have no linear dependency and some brief non-linear dependency at the start of the series. The log returns showed some linear dependency, although there was not much. While it did show some clear non-linear dependency, this dependency persisted rather than being short memory as is the case with a theoretical ARCH model. Nonetheless, the ARCH(1) model seems a good starting point, with similar autocorrelation and volatility characteristics. Furthermore, an ARCH(1) model is a good starting point for GARCH modelling as it is the simplest in the series. Starting from here and adding additional terms as necessary will allow a parsimonious model to be produced rather than including unnecessary complex terms at the start. An ARCH(1) model was fitted to the data, first using the Gaussian assumption and the GARCH facility in ITSM.  FORMULA  This produced the model, which has an AICC value of 4419.9 :  FORMULA  However, this uses the Gaussian-assumption for the 'errors'. Since the distribution of the log returns seriously deviated from the Gaussian distribution and instead appeared to conform much better to the t-distribution, this is unlikely to produce a good model for the log returns. It would be preferable to instead model using the t-distribution for the noise. The model was rerun using ITSM's GARCH facility, this time with t-distributed noise and using the Gaussian-assumption model as a starting point.  FORMULA  The use of the t-distribution (which has been estimated to have 4.02 degrees of freedom) has result in a slightly changed model :  FORMULA  The AICC value of the model has also been improved, with a now lower value of 4155.2. This indicates that the use of the t-distribution assumption has improved the model. A graph showing the residuals from the fitted ARCH(1) model is given below. The residuals appear to be very similar to the original series, and there are several points of continuing strong volatility which could indicate that the residuals are not actually random. The residuals from the model should be i.i.d. thus extreme values should occur as individual spikes rather than having periods of high magnitude and low magnitude residuals as seen in the residuals plot, which suggests the residuals have non-constant variance. It is worth nothing that an ARCH model does not take into account the volatility of previous values in the series and the evidence of continued periods of volatility in the residuals may indicate that a GARCH model would be a better choice. <figure/>A better indication of the randomness of the residuals from the model is given by the various tests of randomness in ITSM. These analyse whether the residuals are independent.  FORMULA  There are several significant values among these tests. The Jarque-Bera statistic is irrelevant since this tests the fit of the residuals to a Normal distribution and in this case the t-distribution assumption has been used, so the residuals should be t-distributed and not conform to the Normal distribution. More worryingly, both the Ljung-Box and McLeod-Li statistics both register significant values. This appears to be evidence demonstrating that the residuals are not random and are thus not independent. The ARCH(1) model that has been fitted to the log returns does not appear to be a suitable model for the series. Several tests indicate that the residuals from the ARCH(1) modelling are not independent (an assumption that is required by the model) nor identically distributed, as the ARCH(1) model does not appear to have encompassed the continued volatility aspect of the log returns. Hence the ARCH(1) model is probably not the best choice and further modelling is required to select a more suitable model. (vii) The modelling process above was repeated, this time with a GARCH(1,1) model rather than simply an ARCH(1). Firstly, a GARCH(1,1) model was fitted to the mean-adjusted series using the Gaussian assumption and then used as a starting point to fit a GARCH(1,1) with the t-distribution assumption.  FORMULA  This produces the model :  FORMULA   FORMULA  The t-distribution has been estimated to have 4.71 degrees of freedom. The movement to the GARCH(1,1) model has further improved the fit of the model to the series, with a reduction in AICC to 3963.8. This would appear to indicate that this is a better choice of model in terms of fit than the ARCH(1) model. A simple time series plot of the residuals from the GARCH(1,1) model also suggests that the model is a much better fit than the ARCH(1) model. The residuals appear fairly random, having constant variance throughout the course of the series with individual extreme spikes rather than the extended periods of extreme values seen in the ARCH(1) residuals. <figure/>This improvement in fit is again seen by running the tests of randomness in ITSM on the residuals from the GARCH(1,1) model.  FORMULA  As with last time, the Jarque-Bera test can be ignored since we are not interested in the Normality of the residuals. The McLeod-Li statistic does not demonstrate the same high degree of significance as before, although the Ljung-Box statistic is still significant at the 5% level. Overall there is no clear evidence to dismiss the independence of the residuals from the GARCH(1,1) model, although it does appear that there may be some problems with the choice of model. The residuals seem to conform pretty well to the assumption that they are t-distributed, as displayed by the histogram (which demonstrates the long tails of the t-distribution) and the t-distribution Q-Q plot shown below. <figure/><figure/>Overall, the residuals seem to fit the t-distribution (with 4.71 degrees of freedom estimated) well, with only a few extreme values deviating from the straight line pattern. This is further evidence showing that the chosen GARCH(1,1) model is a good fit for the data, as the residuals fit the selected stochastic component for the model (in this case a t-distribution). While it seems that the residuals are identically t-distributed and the preliminary tests of randomness suggest they are independent, the dependency of the residuals must also be analysed by examining the autocorrelations of the residuals. As would be expected, since the log returns displayed little sign of linear dependency, there is not much sign of linear dependency in the GARCH(1,1) residuals. The first lag has a significant autocorrelation value but after this the autocorrelation series pretty much dies out. <figure/>In the original log return series, there was clear evidence of a high level of long memory non-linear dependency, so this is more likely to be a problem when looking at the independence of the GARCH(1,1) residuals. However, a plot of the autocorrelations of the squared residuals seems to indicate that there is no non-linear dependency in the residuals series at all. <figure/>This is mirrored by a plot of the autocorrelations of the absolute values of the residuals, which again show no significant values ('significant' values late in the series are most likely to result from randomness rather than any actual dependence). The GARCH(1,1) model seems to have explain the non-linear dependency in the log returns, with the long memory non-linear autocorrelation pattern having been eliminated by applying the model. This would seem to be a strong indication that the GARCH(1,1) model is a good fit for the data. <figure/>The ARCH(1) model did not appear to be a suitable one for the log returns series, with the residuals appearing to be neither identically (non-constant variance in a basic plot of the residuals) nor independently (tests of randomness show significant evidence of dependency) distributed. An autocorrelation plot also indicated that the ARCH(1) model did not explain the high degree of non-linear dependency in the log return series. It seemed as though the GARCH(1,1) model might be a better choice to take into account the continued periods of volatility evident in the log returns series. This has been backed up by the actual fitting of a GARCH(1,1) model. The residuals from the GARCH(1,1) model appear to be i.i.d. with the only slight problem being some linear dependency in the early lags. Generally the GARCH(1,1) model seems to be an extremely good choice of model and is certainly preferable to the ARCH(1) model fitted, both in terms of AICC and the quality of the fit. (viii) All the possible GARCH(p,q) models with p,q were fitted to the mean-adjusted log returns series using the previously described process (first fitting a Gaussian assumption model followed by a model using the t-distribution assumption). The AICC values of each model were recorded and are listed below, with the AICC given to 1 dp.  FORMULA  The AICC values indicate that the GARCH(1,2), GARCH(2,1) and GARCH(2,2) models all display a slight improvement over the GARCH(1,1) model, having a marginally lower AICC value. Of all the possible models, GARCH(2,2) displays the lowest AICC value although the values for all three of these models were very similar. The models that may be considered and are : <list><heading>GARCH(2,2) :</heading> FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA </list><list><heading>GARCH(1,2) :</heading> FORMULA  FORMULA </list><list><heading>GARCH(2,1) :</heading> FORMULA  FORMULA </list>The lower AICC values suggest that these models warrant further investigation as possible models for the log return series and may be considered as alternate models dependent on the quality of the fit of the different models. However, the GARCH(1,1) model that has been found is generally very satisfactory - it seems to explain a great deal of the variation of the log returns and the residuals show no real problems with the model. The GARCH(2,1), GARCH(1,2) and GARCH(2,2) models all display an improvement in terms of AICC value but this improvement is very small and all three models are quite a bit more complicated than the simple GARCH(1,1) model. If these models likewise have a good quality of fit they may be alternative models but do not necessarily present a major improvement over the GARCH(1,1) model, which is quite parsimonious. 