(i) The graph below shows the daily prices on the New York Stock Exchange of the General Electric common stock from December 1999 to December 2000. This time series consists of 253 values. <figure/>The series seems to fit pretty well the standard behaviour of a stock price series. The series appears to have a lot of local behaviour, with fluctuations around a local level and drift in level behaviour over the course of the series. While it appears that there might be a deterministic trend in the series with the stock price gradually rising over time, the graph seems more representative of a stochastic trend in the series. The path of the times series appears to drift gradually over time, returning to the basic level, which is behaviour associated with a stochastic trend. There is no clear evidence of a deterministic trend in the series - the level of the series does increase and decrease at points but returns to the general level. (ii) The graph below shows the returns on General Electric common stock from December 1999 to December 2000. <figure/>The graph seems to be representative of a standard returns series. The time series fluctuates about a zero level, with the series fixed at this level and no indication of drift. The amplitude of the time series changes slightly throughout the series, which ma be a slight indication that there is volatility present in the series. (iii) There does not appear to be a deterministic trend present in the plot of log returns. The log returns are fixed at a zero level with no evidence of a change in level in the series, so there can be no deterministic trend where the log returns are increasing or decreasing over time. There does not appear to be a stochastic trend present in the log returns series either, as there is no drift in the local level of the series. The reason there is no deterministic or stochastic trend in the series is because the log return of the values has been taken. By taking the return of the series you are removing the effect of the previous value in the time series on the current value. Therefore the stochastic trend of the series is removed as the process of taking log returns de-trends the series. (iv) The plot below shows a histogram of the log returns with a fitted Normal distribution curve. The daily log returns appear to be reasonably (but not perfectly) Normally distributed, although there is some evidence to suggest the returns are negatively skewed. <figure/>The Normal probability plot of the log returns below gives a much clearer indication of the distribution of the log returns than the histogram. Although there are a few outliers outside the 95% confidence interval, the vast majority of the log return values seem to fit a Normal distribution fairly well, with most values within the 95% confidence interval and the plot reasonably fitting a straight line. <figure/>The histogram and the Normal probability plot suggest that the log returns follow a Gaussian distribution. (v) The graphs below show the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation functions for the daily log returns. <figure/><figure/>In both the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation plots, there is significant evidence that the first lag autocorrelation is significant, after which the autocorrelation seems to die out and become random. The fifth lag also might be significant, although the low autocorrelation prior to that suggests that this significant value is probably more due to inherent randomness in the series. Overall, it appears there is some very low order linear dependence in the series. The graphs below show the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation functions for the squared log returns, to give an indication of the non-linear dependence present in the log return series. <figure/><figure/>While the first lag appears as though it might be marginally significant, the quadratic dependence of the series quickly dies out. There is no clear evidence that there is non-linear dependence present in the series. Overall it seems as though there is some very short memory linear dependence in the log returns and no real non-linear dependence. A Gaussian random walk model for the data is  FORMULA  If the log prices are a Gaussian random walk then X t = log(P t), where P t is the price at time t. Then the log prices are modeled by  FORMULA  and the prices are modeled by  FORMULA  Therefore taking the log return of the price series produces  FORMULA   FORMULA  Hence, if the log prices follow a Gaussian random walk, the log returns of the prices we have taken should be purely random 'white noise'. They should be Normally distributed and not show any evidence of linear or non-linear dependency at all. While the log returns do appear to be follow a Normal distribution, the linear dependency in the data suggests that a Gaussian random walk model for the log prices might not be the best choice for the data. The log returns should be purely random with no evidence of dependency. However, the evidence of dependency is not that strong and is only very short-term dependency, so a Gaussian random walk model for the log prices cannot be totally discounted. (vi) From the basic time series plot, there seems as though there might be a bit of volatility present in the data. While the amplitude of the data appears to be reasonably similar throughout the series, there are a couple of periods where the amplitude is slightly smaller or larger than elsewhere. <figure/>This can be seen again by taking the primitive approach to volatility and plotting the squared log returns as seen below. There is a period of low amplitude of squared log returns, which seems to indicate that there is volatility in the data. <figure/>The evidence of volatility is not all that clear, although the amplitude of the series is considerably smaller in the middle of the series than at the start. This weak evidence of volatility is again shown by the structural volatility curve of the log returns below. <figure/>The volatility in the log returns is not dramatic, but the Lowess smoother line suggests that there is some volatility following extreme high and low returns. The line is not smooth in the centre either, rising slightly, although this is removed by taking a lower Lowess smoothing parameter. The slight evidence of volatility is more evidence to suggest that a Gaussian random walk model is not suitable for the log prices. Since in that case the log returns should simply be random noise, they should have constant variance and exhibit no signs of volatility. The volatility present in the series seems to discount the possibility of the log prices being a Gaussian random walk. It also has an impact in terms of modeling the log returns themselves. The slight evidence of volatility casts into doubt that a linear model is the best choice for the series. Linear models assume constant variance throughout the series and do not represent volatility at all, so are suited for models with no sign of volatility. (vii) The table below gives the AICC values for all ARMA(p,q) models within the specified range (1≤p≤5, 0≤q≤5). The models were calculated by first calculating a preliminary estimate using ITSM and then conducting a maximum likelihood estimation for the model. All figures are given in 10 3 and starred models are based on an uncertain minimum. <table/>Rejecting those models with an uncertain minimum, the ARMA(1,1) model has the lowest AICC. This would suggest that an ARMA(1,1) model is the best choice for modelling the returns series. The ARMA(1,1) model calculated by maximum likelihood is :  FORMULA  The ARMA(1,1) model also seems to be a sensible choice on the basis of the autocorrelation patterns found in the log return data. The model has a theoretical partial autocorrelation switching value and decreasing in value, similar to the pattern seen in the partial autocorrelation of the original log returns. <figure/><figure/>(viii) If the model is an appropriate fit for the data, the residuals should be independent and Gaussian distributed. A histogram of the residuals from the fitted ARMA(1,1) model is shown below, along with fitted Normal curve. <figure/>The histogram demonstrates that the residuals seem to fit a Gaussian distribution pretty well, although there is a very slight indication that there may be negative skewness in the data. This assessment is confirmed by the Normal probability plot of the residuals shown below. <figure/>This confirms that the residuals do seem to fit a Gaussian distribution, with almost all the residuals being located inside the 95% confidence interval for the Normal distribution. In addition, the p-value for a Normal distribution fit is insignificant. Overall there is strong evidence to suggest that the residuals follow a Gaussian distribution. This would seem to indicate that the ARMA(1,1) model given above is a good model for the returns series, although other aspects of the residuals must be checked. In particular, the residuals should be uncorrelated, demonstrating no significant linear or partial autocorrelation. Linear autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation graphs of the residuals are shown below. <figure/><figure/>Although there are some significantly high autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation values for the series, these occur well after the autocorrelation series has died out, and are much more likely to be the result of randomness in the data than any real dependence. Since no significant autocorrelation and thus no dependence in the residuals has been found, it appears that the residuals are indeed independent. This would again appear to confirm that the selected ARMA(1,1) model is a suitable one for modelling the log return data. Similar results are found by considering the non-linear dependency of the data in the autocorrelation plots of the mean-adjusted square residuals below. <figure/><figure/>As with the linear autocorrelation analysis, the only significant values of non-linear autocorrelation occur after the autocorrelation series has seemingly died out. These results seem to arise more through randomness than actual non-linear dependence. Finally, it can be useful to consider the tests of randomness given by ITSM on a set of residuals. None of the tests give a significant result.  FORMULA  Overall, there is little evidence of the chosen ARMA(1,1) model's unsuitability for modelling the data. The residuals appear to be both independent and Gaussian distributed, suggesting that the ARMA(1,1) model is a good one. (ix) The Moving average term of the model could be left out, reducing the ARMA(1,1) model  FORMULA  to the AR(1) model  FORMULA  This new model has an AICC of 989.336 compared to the 985.676 of the ARMA(1,1) model. This would seem to indicate that removing the MA term has not made it a drastically worse choice of model based on the AICC criterion. The reduction in the model does not seem to have had much effect on the distribution of the residuals, with a Normal probability plot still revealing them to be fairly well Gaussian distributed. <figure/>Nor does the reduction in the model appear to have had any effect on the linear dependence of the residuals. Both autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation graphs of the residuals show no sign of significant dependence outside of standard randomness. <figure/><figure/>However, the autocorrelation graph of the mean adjusted squares of the new residuals shows that there is some short memory non-linear dependence present in the residuals. This would seem to indicate that the removal of the moving average term to change the ARMA(1,1) model into an AR(1) model has degraded the fit, since there is evidence that the residuals from the model are not independent. This would seem to suggest that the AR(1) model is not a suitable one for capturing the behaviour of the log returns series and the ARMA(1,1) model is a better fit. Similarly, an additional autoregressive term can be added to the model. The model can be expanded to produce an ARMA(2,1) model,  FORMULA  <figure/>A Normal probability plot of the new residuals again demonstrates that the expansion of the model has had little effect on the Gaussian fit of the residuals. Examining the linear and non-linear dependence of the residuals through autocorrelation plots produces similar results to those of the reduced model. <figure/><figure/>There is no evidence of linear dependence in the residuals but the residuals demonstrate some evidence of non-linear dependence, although not as dramatic as with the reduced model. This would again seem to indicate that the fit of the model has been degraded by adding in the additional term - the ARMA(1,1) appears to be the most suitable model for the data of the three models considered. There is a danger in adding in additional terms to the model without proper consideration. The best model will be one which is parsimonious - the model will include exactly enough terms to effectively describe the data but no more. Adding in unnecessary terms can make a model unnecessarily complex, describing the data itself rather than the underlying pattern. A model with a high number of parameters will automatically appear to explain a high proportion of the data but many of the terms will be irrelevant or insignificant and the model may actually be a bad fit for the data. (x) The ARMA(1,1) model which has been fitted to the data,  FORMULA  can be used to forecast sections of the series. The graph below shows a plot of the time series with a series of 10 predicted values working from the time 100, along with a confidence interval for the predictions. While the first two values predict the general pattern of a rise followed by a big fall, they are way out in terms of value, with the first value only just falling inside the 95% confidence interval for the predictions. Generally the forecast does not seem to have been that accurate, with the forecasted values dying out after the first 4 values or so. <figure/>A similar series of forecasts working from the time 200 shows a similar result. The initial forecasted values actually predict the series quite well before the forecasted values die out to remain at 0. However, several of the actual values of the series fall outside the 95% confidence interval of the forecasts. <figure/>The same process can again be applied to the end of the series, forecasting 10 values beyond the end point at time 252. This produces the same results again, with only the first three or four forecasts being any good before the forecasts remain at a 0 level, which is clearly not a good forecast for the data. Generally the forecasts based on the ARMA(1,1) model do not seem to be very good. <figure/>