In order to answer this question I have chosen to evaluate Amnesty International's Stop Violence Against Women campaign. This campaign aims to tackle violence against women in the family and in conflict/post conflict situations across the globe. However, for reasons of time and space I will focus on violence against women in the family in the British context. The material I engaged with includes selected writings found on the Amnesty International UK website ( URL  appendix 1) and an ICM report commissioned by Amnesty: Sexual Assault Research Summary Report (Appendix 2). Amnesty International as an organisation has the central aim of campaigning for human rights. An independent group, it aims to be free of specific political ideologies therefore its engagement with feminism must be primarily covert and implicit. To understand to what extent and in what ways Amnesty's Stop Violence Against Women campaign engages in feminist debate one must investigate its writings on the acceptance of violence in our society. This acceptance of violence includes blame culture, the invisibility of violence against women and the division of the public and private sphere. Therefore the way these topics are addressed by Amnesty will also be explored in this essay. Moreover Amnesty's writings on violence against women will be compared and contrasted with feminist literature on domestic violence and rape. Additionally the website literature will be evaluated for its inclusion or exclusion of other social divisions in its writings on violence against women. Therefore the Amnesty Stop Violence against Women campaign will be evaluated from a feminist perspective. Firstly one must explore the various definitions of violence against women. Amnesty's definition emphasises 'physical, psychological and sexual abuse' ( URL ) violence but also includes coercion and the deprivation of liberty. Thus amnesty definition broadly corresponds to and supports the feminist definition of violence against women. Amnesty acknowledges the importance of gender in this violence as it is 'directed against a woman because she is a woman' ( URL ) although it does not elaborate on why this so. The Amnesty definition is encompassing of different social divisions as it includes homophobic violence; 'abuse of lesbian and transgender women by their relatives' ( URL ) and abuse specific to certain ethic groups such as female genital mutilation. In a section called progressive interpretations acts of omission are included in the definition such as neglect and deprivation. Therefore amnesty provides a relatively broad, comprehensive definition of violence against women that supports the feminist definition as it widens the term to include emotional abuse not just bodily harm. Nonetheless the Amnesty definition cannot be said to fully complement the feminist definition of violence against women. 'Structural violence' ( URL ) is included in the amnesty definition; meaning harm resulting from the impact of the organization of the economy on women's lives. However, in the website it is kept separate as a progressive interpretation where as for feminist's especially Marxist feminists this would be central to any definition of violence against women. Moreover Amnesty does not elaborate on how the economic structures harm women; wider gender inequality is implied but not mentioned and patriarchal organization is also not discussed. Amnesty's emphasis on physical, sexual and psychological abuse therefore neglects the harm caused by wider structural inequality. Therefore in its definition of violence against women Amnesty is not explicitly feminist as it plays down the role of wider gender inequality. For feminists the control and domination of men over women is central to any definition of violence against women; as 'domestic abuse is... one of the major universal ways in which women are subjected to discrimination while men retain power' (Mullender 1996, p.28). Moreover, as Dobash and Dobash (1980, p. 10) argue 'husbands use physical force... as an expression of unequal status, authority and power of marital partners'. Therefore domestic violence is, for feminists, intrinsically interlinked with the unequal power relations between men and women. Thus although the Amnesty definition does to some extent support feminist definitions of violence against women; it neglects the central tenet of the feminist definition, that gender-based violence is an expression of the domination of men over women. Amnesty's definition may not correspond directly with feminist definitions; nonetheless it does engage with the important feminist debate surrounding the acceptance of violence against women. The feminist argument is that violence against women is accepted by wider society as it entrenched in our cultural values and social practices. Moreover it is to some extent condoned and even enforced by the state and social institutions. In order to explore this debate in the Amnesty writings I will explore how violence is accepted through blame culture, the invisibility of violence against women and the supposed public/private divide. The Amnesty campaign acknowledges both the state involvement with and cultural acceptance of violence against women. The campaign literature argues that laws must be adopted or abolished and that 'above all, attitudes, prejudices and social beliefs... must change' ( URL ). Therefore Amnesty is emphasizing the necessity to change cultural notions and out-dated laws as they foster and reinforce the acceptance of this violence. The campaign goals of the Stop Violence Against Women campaign are to hold governments to account and to challenge attitudes that 'provoke and sustain the normalization and acceptance of violence' ( URL ). Therefore Amnesty is directly engaging in the feminist debate that acceptance of violence against women is ingrained in our cultural beliefs, practices. Part of the Stop Violence Against women campaign is the "Problem? What Problem?" campaign that aims to confront 'the way we tolerate... justify... and ignore violence against women' ( URL ). Thus again Amnesty is addressing the normalization of violence against women using feminist concepts without explicit reference to feminism. More overt feminist language is used when discussing state enforcement: 'social and political institutions foster women's subservience' ( URL ). However, more explicit feminist concepts of misogyny, chauvinism, sexism and patriarchy are not used. The Amnesty website highlights 'historically unequal power relations' ( URL ) in exploring the causes of violence against women. Therefore this is using the language of liberal feminists as it references the historical tradition of gender inequality, a gendered social hierarchy and women as second class citizens. However, the language of radical feminists is not used as a society with unequal gender power relations is a patriarchal society nonetheless patriarchy is not mentioned. Amnesty states that 'violence against women is frequently used by men to reinforce their position of power' ( URL ) however this is included almost as an afterthought. For feminist writers violence against women is fundamentally caused by male supremacy; as Dobash and Dobash (1980, p.15) argue that the correct interpretation of violence against wives is as 'the extension of domination and control of husbands over their wives'. The other causes of violence against women given on the website are control of women's sexuality, cultural ideology and government inaction. All these causes use feminist theory to understand gender-based violence thus support feminism; however the website does not acknowledge its debt to feminism. It is staggering the extent feminist theory is covertly used and eluded to when the central feminist notions of patriarchy, structural and cultural gender inequality are not explicit. Thus Amnesty's Stop Violence Against Women campaign literature engages with feminism by implicitly using liberal feminist concepts and language; however, it never explicitly mentions feminism and does not address radical feminism. In order to compare and contrast the Amnesty discussion of violence against women with the feminist response to this social problem; one must look in greater detail at feminist writings. The basic premise of feminist literature on violence against women is that the 'reality of domination at the social level is the most crucial factor contributing to and maintaining wife abuse at the personal level' (Bograd 1990, p.13). Feminist writers Elizabeth Stanko and Jill Radford (in Hester et al 1996) argue that 'sexual violence is used by men as a way of securing and maintaining the relations of male dominance and female subordination' they locate this as central to the patriarchal social order. Thus for feminists violence against women and patriarchy are mutually interdependent. Patriarchy a central tenet of feminism is a society or social system where men have authority and govern over women. However, crucially the Amnesty literature on violence against women does not mention patriarchy thus its engagement with feminism is limited. Radical feminists such as Andrea Dworkin (1976) have broadened the definition of violence against women as she argues real rape is our patriarchal system and masculinist law. Dworkin (1976 p.29) equates marriage with rape as she argues it is the 'carnal ownership of women'. Therefore although the Amnesty campaign engages with liberal feminism it does not tackle the radical feminist argument that it is the very patriarchal foundation of our society that explains the pervasiveness of violence against women. However, the Amnesty website is not aimed at academics or students of feminism it is aimed at raising the awareness of the general public. Therefore its writings on violence against women cannot be highly theoretical polemics like those by radical feminist academics. Anne Edwards (in Hanmer and Maynard 1987, p.14) criticize early sociological analyses of violence against women as although they gave 'social factors more weight than individual psychopathy' they still 'failed to perceive the central importance of... broader structural dimensions of gender relations'. Similarly Amnesty can be criticized for giving precedence to social factors but not placing this in the context of patriarchal society. Therefore Amnesty with its aim to reach the general public has neglected the more theoretical issues that for feminists are central to understanding violence against women. In order to further explore Amnesty engagement with the debate surrounding the normalization of violence against women in wider society I will look at the concept of "blame culture". Feminists argue that the men are often excused and absolved and as such the blame is shifted to women this is also known as "blaming the victim". The Amnesty website exposes the myths surrounding domestic violence and rape thus supporting feminist arguments. For example 'women ask for it, they deserve what they get' ( URL ) this corresponds to the feminist argument that 'the idea nagging provokes or causes the violence... is very much part of our culture (Dobash and Dobash 1980, p.133). The myths cited on the website also address other social inequalities as a domestic violence myth cited is 'It only happens in poor families on council estates' ( URL ). Thus the Amnesty website material on blame culture addresses the stereotype that domestic violence is a working class problem. Blame culture is further investigated by Amnesty in their commissioning of the Sexual Assault Report (appendix 1); it found that a relatively large section of the population believe behavioral traits make women partially or totally responsible for being raped. For example the report found that 34% of people in the UK believe a woman is in part responsible for being raped if she has behaved in a flirtatious manner. However, there are limits to using quantitive research methods to understand the complex issue of attitudes to rape. Feminists argue to solve the problem of violence against women one must understand it and 'understanding cannot be achieved by compiling personal and family statistics' as 'what is required is in-depth information about violence itself... and an analysis of society' (Dobash and Dobash 1980, p.12). Therefore although the Amnesty commissioned report provides valuable data on attitudes to rape; feminists argue to truly understand blame culture intensive qualitative research is necessary. Feminists argue the acceptance of violence in our society cannot just be attributed to blame culture; it is also the result of the invisibility of violence against women. The Amnesty campaign engages with this debate as its central aim is to raise awareness of gender based violence. As part of the Stop Violence Against Women campaign, Amnesty asks the question 'Can you imagine a world without violence against women or girls?' ( URL ). This is intended to highlight the hidden and unthought-of ways in which violence negatively impacts on women; thus in raising awareness Amnesty is supporting feminist aims of placing violence against women in public discourse. Moreover Amnesty's poster for the "Problem? What Problem?" campaign (appendix 3) also aims to raise awareness it involves an advert for a concealer to cover bruises. The irony of the poster is effective showing a smiling model with a black eye as it catches attention thus raising interest in the often hidden issue of domestic violence. However, featuring an attractive young white woman may reinforce the belief that we should only care about violence against women if it happens to beautiful young innocents. Therefore feminists would praise Amnesty's attempts to stem the hidden nature of violence against women; nonetheless they would criticize the campaign for idealizing the victims of violence. The Amnesty campaign also engages with the invisibility of violence against women by highlighting that 'violence against women is characteristically under-reported' ( URL ). The reasons given for this include 'fear of scepticism' ( URL ) however, who is sceptical is not elaborated on. Therefore the Amnesty writings engage with the feminist debate of the invisibility of violence against women by discussing under-reporting. However, the feminist literature on the role of the state and culture in "silencing" women in their experiences of violence is neglected by Amnesty. The website argues a 'culture of silence, discourages women from seeking support from... the state or its agents (e.g. the judiciary and police)' ( URL ) thus it implicates the state in silencing women. Thus supporting feminist arguments that domestic violence is under-reported due to the 'negative views and low expectations women hold of the police' (Mullender 1996, p.33). Nonetheless Amnesty can be criticized for arguing the racial aspect of this under-reporting as Mama (1989 p. 145) argues black women are extra reluctant to contact police due to 'historical relations... (and) the present day police repression of black communities' (p.163). Another criticism of Amnesty's material on under-reporting is that it neglects that 'the patriarchal character of the law has not been fundamentally altered' (Mama 1989, p. 152). Thus women are silenced by the inherently patriarchal nature of the state and its social institutions. Moreover, feminists argue women are 'systematically encouraged, to minimize the violence that we experience from men' (Kelly and Radford in Hester et al 1996) thus patriarchal cultural notions also contribute to low rates of reporting to the police. Kelly and Radford (in Hester et al 1996) emphasis the importance of providing a language and discourse of violence against women thus would applaud Amnesty's raising awareness campaigns. However, they argue the fundamental necessity of 'locating men's abusive behaviour within a framework of women's oppression by, and resistance to, male power'; where as this issue is neglected by Amnesty and only covertly discussed. Therefore though Amnesty engages with the feminist debate on the invisibility of violence against women; it does not provide a detailed account of how violence against women is neglected by the state, police and legal system. Moreover the website literature neglects to situate the hidden nature of violence against women in the broader structure of patriarchal society. However, the Amnesty website does discuss the feminist notion of a false public/private divide; a contributory factor in the invisibility of violence against women. Thus the erroneous belief in a division between public and private spheres is acknowledged by Amnesty as part of the broader societal acceptance of this violence. A popular myth identified by the Amnesty website is that 'domestic violence is a private matter, you shouldn't get involved' ( URL ). The Amnesty website also identifies how 'the women's movement has struggled to make violence against women public and to classify it as a crime' ( URL ). The reference here is to the women's movement not feminism therefore again the engagement with feminism is covert. The feminist slogan the "personal is political" is implied in the Amnesty writings but never explicitly stated. Violence against women is often invisible and neglected as feminists argue that the many consider the 'idea of outside intervention in domestic affairs seem a needless violation of the sanctity and privacy of the home' (Dobash and Dobash 1980, p.7). Moreover this has contributed to under-reporting as 'vast majority of such (domestic violence) cases go unreported and unchallenged, often out of respect for the privacy of the family' (Mama 1989, p.152). Therefore Amnesty, in identifying the cultural doctrines of privacy supports the feminist argument that violence against women is often hidden. However, the Amnesty writings do not directly engage with the feminist movement's rallying cry that the personal is political. Throughout this essay there has been an evaluation of the extent to which feminism debate is present in the Amnesty literature. The Amnesty website engagement with feminism is almost exclusively covert and in is certainly not explicit. Early it was noted that this is because the highly academic theoretical nature of most feminist literature is not suitable to a website for the general public. However, arguably there must be a broader reason why feminism is not even mentioned. There are many references to the women's movement but not to the feminist movement; has feminism become a dirty word? Susan Faludi (1992) argues there has been a backlash against feminism and this idea of backlash can be used to explain the lack of overt feminism in the Amnesty campaign. Faludi (1992, p.2) argues that the erroneous view of women 'enslaved by their own liberation' and that feminism is the 'great experiment that failed' (p.3) is widespread in popular culture including newspapers, films and adverts. This mythical equality that we are supposed to have achieved has led to a powerful counterassault on women's rights. Faludi (1992) situates this backlash in the political shift to the right emanating from Reaganism and Thatcherism. In this climate of neo-conservative resistance to women's rights overt or explicit feminism is not possible or productive. Therefore the unpopularity of feminism in mainstream culture makes it impossible and ineffective for Amnesty to directly reference or acknowledge feminism. However, arguably Amnesty's writings on violence against women lose fundamental explanatory concepts by not explicit using the feminist language of male dominance, gender inequality and patriarchy. Moreover, the power and persuasiveness of Amnesty writings on violence against women is lessened due to lack of direct engagement with feminism. In conclusion, the Amnesty Stop Violence Against Women campaign engages implicitly with feminist debate by exploring the acceptance of this violence by wider society and the state. The Amnesty writings tackle the feminist issues of blame culture; the invisibility and under-reporting of violence against women and the cultural belief in a public/private divide. Moreover, Amnesty's campaign literature addresses other social divisions for example the psychological abuse of lesbian women and stereotypes of domestic violence as a working class problem. Therefore Amnesty comprehensively addresses social inequalities in reference to violence against women. However, it neglects to engage with overtly feminist theories and does not explicitly reference feminism. Gender inequality, gender roles and discrimination are discussed but not placed in the context of wider structural causes of inequality and the patriarchal values that are entrenched in our culture. For feminists, violence against women is the ultimate expression of male dominance and female subordination; however there is only limited discussion of male supremacy on the Amnesty website. The reasons for this are the apolitical nature of Amnesty as an organisation; the general public as the intended audience for the website and the political climate of backlash against feminism. The Amnesty campaign literature would arguably satisfy a liberal feminist with its focus on equality and raising awareness; however, more radical feminism would critique the timidity and passivity of the literature concerning the continued male domination of our society. 