<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This essay argues that Ken Booth's concept of 'utopian realism' is an unworkable compromise. My main argument is that the concept of 'utopian realism' is both theoretically unsound and practically unfeasible because it continuously struggles to make its utopian visions fit into the realist paradigm. I elucidate this struggle through a close examination of the four main propositions made by Booth's 'utopian realism'. After establishing the unfeasibility of the concept in the realist paradigm, I move on to examine if Booth's application of Nye's idea of "process-utopias" (Booth 1991, p. 536) could be used to catalyse a paradigm-shift required to make 'utopian realism' a feasible IR concept. Finally I conclude that while no paradigm-shift is possible, the concept of 'utopian realism' remains unfeasible and must therefore be abandoned. However I propose that though Booth's concept of 'utopian realism' cannot be accepted as a utopian corrective to the sterility of realism, his application of the idea of " process-utopias" could be used to meet this end. </abstract>Man has always attempted to negotiate between the ideal and the actual. Ken Booth's 'utopian realism' (Booth 1991) is yet another manifestation of this attempt. He defines 'utopian realism' as "an attitude of mind" that bases itself upon "normative" as well as "empirical" theories (Booth 1991, p.534). The reason for the failure of 'utopian realism', I argue, is its simultaneous acknowledgement and denial of the characteristics of the anarchic international system it needs to survive in. It is this self-contradictory nature of 'utopian realism' that undermines its potential to become a feasible IR concept. To elucidate my point of critique I shall examine four main propositions made by Booth's 'utopian realism'. First, 'utopian realism' proposes that if "security in anarchy" is being considered, "emancipation" should gain precedence over "the traditional realist themes of power and order" (Booth 1991, p.539). Booth argues that this is because the distribution of power is very unequal in the international system and so, a focus on power would imply the absolute power of one state and the impotence and insecurity of others. Thus, 'utopian realism' argues that if "security in anarchy" is the agenda the guiding principle cannot be the unjust one of "power and order" but the more egalitarian principle of "emancipation". However, in the conclusion to his essay 'Security in Anarchy: Utopian Realism in Theory and Practice', Booth also acknowledges that politics shall always translate into power politics (Booth 1991, p.545). If it is so, how can the preoccupation with "power and order" be replaced with the utopian concern for "emancipation"? In other words, when the realist paradigm prevails why would realist tenets be sacrificed for utopian objectives? Booth's argument provides no answer to this question, and I argue that the very assumption on which the first proposition of 'utopian realism' rests is too naïve, and therefore faulty. To further elucidate my argument I juxtapose this utopian realist proposition with a model for collaboration between "power"(realism) and "morality"(utopianism), that E.H.Carr proposes in The Twenty Years' Crisis (Carr 1946, pp.168-9). The latter's proposition presumes the existence of a hegemonic power, desirous of maintaining its hegemony over others in the international system. Carr argues that it is this very desire to remain all-powerful that induces the hegemonic power to "self-sacrifice"(Carr 1946, p. 168) in order to win the consent of those not benefiting as much from the existing power structure; for, wielding naked power could provoke rebellion in the long run. This is how peace is maintained in the international system. Thus, Carr makes it clear that in the realist paradigm, "emancipation" of the powerless cannot be the end but the means to the end of maintaining the existing power structure. This is precisely what Joseph Stiglitz implies in his book Globalisation and its Discontents and mentioning it here would help to root this argument in real facts. The book basically exposes how even 'impartial' international organisations, like the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the United Nations impose policies on powerless nations, ostensibly for the latter's emancipation. However, in actuality, these policies benefit powerful countries with veto power in these organisations, more than they benefit the needy countries they are supposed to target (Stiglitz 2002, p. xiv-xv); thereby proving that far from replacing "power and order" emancipation itself gets reduced to the sheer behind which powerful nations further their own ends. I therefore rest my case, vis-à-vis the first point of critique, by concluding that the above-mentioned proposition made by 'utopian realism' requires a paradigm-shift, as it is simply unfeasible in the realist paradigm. Emerging from the above-mentioned utopian realist proposition is Booth's second argument, that individuals rather than states should be the "primary referents for a satisfactory theory of security on a world scale" (Booth 1991, p. 540). He argues that states should only be the means and individuals the end. According to him this would translate into greater stability in the international system, than when states are treated as ends in themselves; for, power struggles would then reduce. Though I agree with Booth that states must only be the means, and the welfare of its people the end, I do not see how this shift can ensure greater stability in the international system. For all states are not at par. While the basic needs of individuals are almost the same across the globe, the providing states do not have the same amount of resources to meet these similar needs. Thus Booth's utopian realist vision of a state-system that is not quite a "war-system" (Booth 1991,p. 545), might not hold true even if the focus is shifted to individuals; for the struggle for power (resource power here) shall continue and war shall remain an imminent danger. Ken Booth's concept of 'utopian realism' developed as a reaction to the inability of existing theories and practices, of international politics, to question the existing status quo. He argues that instead of catalysing the reorganisation of human society, in a way that would be more just to all, theories of international politics simply explain the existing organisation of the international system. The theory of realism stands first in Booth's line of critique. Thus, in contrast to realism, 'utopian realism' offers an alternative model for the international order in the form of a community-in-anarchy (Booth 1991, p. 540). This community-in-anarchy aims at developing positive relations between states, based not only on "mutual self-interest" but also on "moral obligation" (Booth 1991, p.540). By making "moral obligations" one of the legs on which his concept of 'utopian realism' stands, Booth is likely to believe that he has achieved the fundamental task of proposing a more egalitarian world order; thereby rectifying the limitation of a theory that propounds self-interest as the sole guiding principle in international relations. However, my third point of critique is that despite its inclusion of "moral obligation", as one of it tenets, 'utopian realism' can promise no more justness and stability in international relations than realism could. This is because morality does not have a single definition. As Carr puts it, the powerful define and redefine morality as they find convenient, in order to justify their actions to the powerless (Carr 1946, p.79). England's colonisation of 'the East' on the pretext of spreading 'the light' and the US's war for oil in Iraq, cloaked as the "war against terrorism", evidence this point. Thus, it is established that 'utopian realism's' model of community-in-anarchy can promise no more justice-to-all, than realism could; thereby proving the failure of 'utopian realism' in the face of the fundamental challenge it had sought to meet. Finally, I argue that 'utopian realism' is an unworkable compromise indeed, because utopianism and realism "belong to two different planes which can never meet" (Carr 1946, p.93). Thus, any attempt at fusing the two would lead to one being inevitably sacrificed for the other. In the case of 'utopian realism', I argue, it is the realist perspective to international affairs that goes completely disregarded, while utopian thinking predominates. According to Hans Morgenthau, utopianism and realism represent two distinct types of "political morality" (Morgenthau 1952, p.988). And when 'utopian realism' is examined it echoes solely of utopianism's ideals of cooperation and interdependence and not at all of realism's idea of "political morality". To elucidate this I make the following comparison. On the one hand is 'utopian realism' which, like utopianism, would consider nation-states moral, if they made a conscious attempt to meet their ends, without putting the interests of other states at stake. But on the other hand is Hans Morgenthau's realism which argues against any moral obligations that create hindrance in achieving political success. This perspective considers the pursuit of national interest to be a moral principle in itself (Morgenthau 1952, p. 986). Thus it is established that the bent of 'utopian realism' is towards utopianism and away from realism. This is not surprising because Booth clearly states in the above-mentioned essay, the need to develop a case for restoring the reputation of utopianism. However, he himself makes it problematic when he propounds in the conclusion to his essay that the concept of 'utopian realism' does not rely on any assumptions of human nature as being perfectible (Booth 1991, p. 545). My question is, why does Booth deny the very tenet that underlies the theory of utopianism, the theory he builds a case for by propounding the concept of 'utopian realism'? The answer is that Booth himself realises that the concept of 'utopian realism' is simply idealistic. It can be feasible only in a world order where there is sufficient for all states and where each state takes only its fair share. However it is unthinkable in a realist paradigm where, resources are less, levels of disparity are high, and thus, power struggles between states are inevitable. It is this inability to make the idealism of 'utopian realism' fit the realist paradigm that makes Booth shift his position. In fact the fate of 'utopian realism' stands sealed when one examines Booth's concluding observations, that while politics shall always, in as sense, be synonymous with power politics, 'might is right' need not be the guiding principle; or that self-interest shall be the predominant concern of states but it need not translate into selfishness (Booth 1991, p. 545). All these statements simply reinstate that 'utopian realism' cannot be accepted as a sound IR concept due its continuous and futile struggle to make its utopian visions seem feasible in a realist world order. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Ken Booth's concept of 'utopian realism' draws heavily on E.H.Carr's The Twenty Years' Crisis. In his conclusion to the book, Carr delineates the "prospects of a new international order" (Carr 1946, pp. 224-39) and concludes that till power stays predominant in international relations, every other advantage shall be subordinated to the need for more and more military power; thereby intensifying the crisis. However, he continues, "once the issue of power is settled, and morality resumes its role", there is likely to be more hope (Carr 1946, p.238). It is important to notice here that Carr's model for an alternative international order, where morality shall be able to perform its role, presumes a shift from the bleak present to a hopeful future, much like Booth's 'utopian realism' presumes a paradigm-shift (as has been argued above). However while Carr does not explain how this shift is to take place, the way Booth uses Joseph Nye's idea of "process-utopias" seems to offer a solution to this very problem. Booth defines "process - utopias" as "benign and reformist steps calculated to make a better world somewhat more probable for future generations" (Booth 1991,p. 536). Carr argues in The Twenty Years' Crisis that utopianism is required as a corrective to the sterility of realism (Carr 1946, p.10). These "process-utopias" appear just such corrective steps towards realism, that utopianism takes. However, though "process-utopias" could catalyse changes at the national, and to an extent even the international level, as Booth elucidates in his essay, I am uncertain if these "process- utopias", these "benign" steps could create reforms big enough to catalyse the paradigm-shift required for 'utopian realism' to be acceptable as a feasible IR concept. 'Utopian realism' is a vast project for it combines the two theories that have remained predominant in the study of International Relations, ever since the conception of the discipline. It is this ambition of 'utopian realism' to incorporate the best tenets of both utopianism and realism, that renders it redundant. This is because the two theories offer two distinct and almost opposing approaches to human nature and international relations. I therefore argue that since the concept of 'utopian realism' is not only theoretically unsound but also practically unfeasible, it has to be abandoned. However, the idea of "process-utopias", as applied to international relations by Booth, could be retained. The reason behind this is that, even though "process- utopias" seem incapable of overhauling the ruthless realist paradigm, to make space for a concept like 'utopian realism', they surely have the potential to prove through small reforms, that change is possible in the sphere of international relations; something that realist theory has made students of International Relations hopeless about. 