In the conflict-ridden world of the new millennium, Private Military Companies are a reality. Despite their obvious engagement in global conflicts, the international legal community has been unable (or unwilling) to establish their legal status and their operating parameters. This brief will provide the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) with the necessary background information and suggested revisions for the concrete defining and regulation of Private Military Companies. It includes two sections: the first section will discuss the nature of Private Military Companies and why their current status reflects a deficiency in International Humanitarian Law (IHL). This deficiency will be illustrated with a brief case study of Bosnia-Herzegovina and an examination of the short-comings of the current international law and IHL that attempts to govern the conduct and status of Private Military Companies and their employees. The second section contains possible revisions for the ICRC to debate and discuss at the Second International Conference on Privatization of War. <heading>Section I: Background Information on the Operation of Private Military Companies</heading><heading>The Nature of Private Military Companies</heading>Private Military Companies (PMCs) are companies that sell military services. The debate over whether PMC employees are or should be considered mercenaries has persisted for decades. Global warfare in the new millennium is indicating, however, that PMCs are something very different from the traditional concept of a mercenary. <quote> "Prior to 1945, concerns to do with mercenaries were expressed largely through the development of the law of neutrality. A country that allowed its national territory to be used for the purpose of the recruitment or enlistment of mercenaries was deemed to be in support of a belligerent." </quote><fnote>Christopher Kinsey, Challenging International Law: a Dilemma of Private Security Companies (2005) 5.3 Conflict, Security & Development 269 at 271 </fnote>While the international community took some legal measures to prohibit the recruitment of mercenaries and to limit their activities, there was a relative indifference to the issue of mercenaries until the decolonization period of the 1960s and 1970s. Mercenary activity came under the radar when, "the use of mercenaries against national liberation movements fighting for independence in colonial territories was declared a criminal act by UN General Assembly Resolution 2465, thus designating mercenaries as outlaws." The quantity of PMCs dramatically escalated at the end of the cold war. Additionally, PMCs began to expand in the roles they were assuming. This expansion of roles was largely due to a shift in how war was fought. According to Mary Kaldor, "new war can be defined by three characteristics that also separate it from traditional war." The first characteristic is that the main actors are no longer exclusively states. The second characteristic is that new war is about guerrilla war and counter insurgency - two types of warfare generally fought by non-mainstream arms of the military, such as Special Forces groups. "PSCs are frequently well placed to conduct these types of operations, since if they go wrong, governments can deny having anything to do with them, or at the very least, minimize their involvement." The final characteristic of new war is concerned with economics as the root of the conflict, rather than politics. <fnote>Id, 273 </fnote><fnote>Ibid </fnote><fnote>Id, 276 </fnote><heading>The Dangers and Risks Present by PMCs Remaining Unregulated: The Case of Bosnia-Herzegovina</heading>Many question the need for regulation and a legal framework for PMCs. The answer is simple: PMCs present enormous risks and dangers if they are outside the scope of the law. This section will briefly explain some of these dangers and risks, and will present the case example of the criminal actions of some PMC employees in Bosnia-Herzegovina. If PMCs are not firmly encapsulated within IHL and a regulatory framework, issues of accountability will arise. In the same way that the ICRC detention monitoring programme forces state accountability for the well-being of their prisoners, some method of achieving accountability and transparency must be in place for PMCs. "Many private security companies in Iraq are operating within an unclear regulatory framework, in environments far from Western norms, where mistakes are less rigourously investigated." When so much of the work completed by PMCs is of a covert nature, there is an even greater need to ensure that the goals of the PMCs are being achieved in a fair and humane manner. <fnote>Kjell Bjork and Richard Jones, Overcoming Dilemmas Created by the 21st Century Mercenaries: conceptualising the use of private security companies in Iraq (2005) 26 Third World Quarterly 777 at 785 </fnote>The dangers and risks posed by PMCs operating outside of the law can be illustrated with recent events in Bosnia-Herzegovina ("Bosnia"), where a society struggling to rebuild clashed with criminal organizations that flourished in the wake of the weakened economy of Bosnia. Kathryn Bolkovac was hired by the UK division of DynCorp (the world's largest PMC) to investigate sexual abuse and prostitution in Bosnia. "She was fired by the British company [DynCorp Aerospace] after amassing evidence that UN police were taking part in the trafficking of young women from Eastern Europe as sex slaves." Ben Johnston, a mechanic for DynCorp Inc. was also terminated when he blew the whistle on a number of his colleagues in Bosnia and their criminal actions. In his wrongful termination suit against DynCorp, he alleged "that the corporation and its employees engaged in peonage and slavery, sexually exploiting children, dealing in obscene material and procuring fraudulent identification documents." These were not isolated incidents involving DynCorp employees. Internal memos, obtained by Johnston's lawyer in discovery, indicated a number of criminal incidents varying from illegal arms trading to participating in the trafficking and sexual slavery of women and children. Eight DynCorp employees have been terminated in the past ten years for links to sexual trafficking and organized crime, and many more have been sent back from Bosnia. To date, none have been prosecuted. In the wake of this situation, "a proposal prohibiting defence contractor involvement in human trafficking for forced prostitution and labor was drafted by the Pentagon last summer [2005] but five defence lobbying groups oppose key provisions and a final policy still appears to be months away, according to those involved and Defense Department records." <fnote>Antony Barnett and Solomon Hughes "British firm accused in UN "sex scandal": International police in Bosnia face prostitution claims" The Observer (29 July 2001) </fnote><fnote>Mary Alice Robbins "RICO Used in Wrongful Termination Suit" Texas Lawyer (2 April 2001) </fnote><fnote>Humantrafficking.org, News and Updates: U.S. Military and Trafficking, online </fnote>The abuses described above are said to be the tip of the iceberg. The human rights violations perpetrated at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq (in which two PMC employees were involved) have further illustrated the need for legal limitations and regulations governing the conduct of PMCs. <heading>Differentiating PMC Employees from Mercenaries</heading>Differentiating PMCs from mercenaries is an absolute necessity when discussing the regulation or legal definition of PMCs. This differentiation must be clarified "if individual persons are to be denied important legal rights because of falling into a particular category." The International legal definition for mercenary is found in Additional Protocol 1 (AP1) of the Geneva Convention. There are six criteria for meeting the definition of mercenary and all six must be met. The ability to include PMCs in this definition fails on with subsections b and c. Subsection b describes a mercenary as someone who "does, in fact, take part in the hostilities." PMC employees may or may not be directly participating in the hostilities - if they are acting in a logistical role, or gathering and supplying intelligence, it would likely be concluded that this did not classify as taking part in the hostilities. Subsection c states that a mercenary includes someone who is motivated to take part in the hostilities essentially by the desire for private gain and, in fact, by or on behalf of a Party to the conflict..." PMC employees are not in an employment relationship with the State party; their employment relationship is with the PMC. "Those who work for PMCs receive a salary from the security company for whom they work. Consequently, they are not profit-driven." As all subsections must be met, it seems unlikely that a PMC employee would be captured by the definition in its current form. <fnote>Supra, n 1, 277 </fnote><fnote>Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 8 June 1977, U.N.T.S. 1125 No. 17512 (entered into force 7 December 1979) [AP1] at article 47 </fnote><fnote>Ibid </fnote><fnote>Supra, n 1, 282 </fnote>While this definition has a number of failings, it is the current definition for a mercenary in both IHL and international law. This definition was drafted in a narrow manner, targeting specific groups and individuals. This is evidenced by the failure of the definition to include "those induced by ideology or religion, and those who may not participate directly in the hostilities." Additionally, the definition also fails to include those who train or advise state parties in an armed conflict. This definition, like much of IHL, was not drafted for "new war". <fnote>Supra, n 1, 278 </fnote>There is the added challenge that many PMCs, including the giant DynCorp Inc., are American or British companies. This presents a problem because, since the definition of mercenary would likely not apply to many of the PMC employees, as neither the United Kingdom nor the US has ratified AP1. It has been clearly illustrated in this section why PMCs and their employees cannot be classed as mercenaries. In their article discussing the privatization of war, the ICRC clearly illustrates that they feel that PMCs are outside of the definition of mercenary, but (arguably) within the IHL system: "in situations of armed conflict, IHL regulates both the activities of the staff of PMC/PSCs [Private Security Companies] and the responsibilities of the states that hire them." In the next section of this brief, the applicability of IHL to PMCs will be examined and debated. <fnote>International Committee of the Red Cross, Privatisation of War: the Outsourcing of Military Tasks, online: International Committee of the Red Cross </fnote><heading>International law, International Humanitarian Law and their Inability to Govern PMCs</heading>Currently, there are three international legal instruments that regulate or ban the activities of mercenaries. The 1907 Hague Convention included a provision that prohibited the recruitment of mercenaries within State parties' domestic borders. This prohibition, however, was "limited to countries policing their own national territory, and were not extended to include the prevention of nationals crossing over to another country to enlist in the army of a belligerent..." The issue of mercenaries is only mentioned in one section of the Geneva Conventions and that is section 47 of AP1. In 1989, the International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries was adopted. The Convention has not been considered a great success in controlling the activities of mercenaries, as illustrated by the 12 years passed that before it had acquired the necessary 20 ratifications for the Convention to enter into force. The Convention uses the definition of mercenary from AP1 and is limited by the scope of the definition. While these instruments attempt to regulate and hinder mercenary activity, they have not been interpreted as applying to PMCs. Therefore, there is no international law that specifically regulates the conduct of PMCs. <fnote>Supra, n 1, 273 </fnote><heading>Section II: Reviewing the Legal Status of PMCs</heading>PMCs represent a vast industry which cannot be governed by IHL alone. A number of countries have tried to create domestic regulations that could govern the PMCs incorporated in their national boundaries. While governing PMC conduct as business is certainly one way of controlling their conduct, it does not satisfy the separate issues that IHL presents. The main issues that must be review and answered by IHL are the following: the legal status of PMC employees in all of their roles, and how IHL will govern a non-state party such as a PMC. <heading>The Grey Area: The Status of PMC Employees Under IHL</heading>In terms of the Geneva Conventions, there has been significant debate about the status of PMC employees: are they combatants or civilians. The position of the ICRC remains that "unless they form a part of the armed forces of a state, the staff of PMCs/PSCs are civilians... However, if they carry out activities that amount to taking a direct part in the hostilities they lose this protection from attack... The status of the companies themselves is not regulated by IHL." While the ICRC has been consistent in supporting this position, the position itself needs clarification. It seems to suggest that the only time the Geneva Convention protections are iron-clad are when the PMC employees are determined to be civilians. This issue is complicated by the fact that while the ICRC states that PMC employees are considered civilians unless they directly participate in the hostilities, there has been little explanation of what "direct participation" consists of. PMC employees operate at all levels of military engagement, including planning military sorties and gathering intelligence. <fnote>International Committee of the Red Cross, Privatisation of War: the Outsourcing of Military Tasks, online: International Committee of the Red Cross </fnote>The can be no argument that if the ICRC wants IHL to keep pace with "new war", they will have to carefully define the status of PMC employees. The current position of the ICRC is not sufficiently clear to determine what rights employees have. One method would be to establish a job classification of sorts. If the predominant roles and tasks that PMC employees assume could be determined, the jobs they perform could be classed according to whether they would be the equivalent of a military task or a civilian. While this would not be a perfect method of establishing those acting as combatants and those acting as civilians, as there would be some overlap, it would seem to be the only coherent way of establishing their status. The criteria for determining the status of such individuals would have to be incorporated into the Geneva Conventions, much the same way the definition for a mercenary was incorporated into the Additional Protocol. <heading>How IHL Can Govern a Non-state Party </heading>The next issue that must be reviewed is how PMCs will be legally incorporated into IHL as they are a non-state actor. The ICRC has stated in their discourse on PMCs that, likely due to the lack of legal status of PMCs, "when a state out sources military and/or security functions, it remains responsible under IHL." This underscores the confusion on the status of PMCs and their employees. If states are required to be legally responsible for PMCs, the international legal community must take steps to enshrine this in IHL. <fnote>Ibid </fnote>There are two methods to assigning state responsibility. Firstly, states can be made responsible for PMCs that are incorporated within their borders. This would avoid the issue of the structural issues of IHL being unable to incorporated non-state actors into the legal system. However, it would only be a temporary solution, as different types of non-state actors are becoming more and more active in global conflicts. One problem with this method would be the likelihood that some PMCs would relocate to countries with weaker enforcement capabilities; much like some international maritime freight companies have relocated to certain developing countries to avoid environmental restrictions. A second method would be to create a governing body for all PMCs and to give that body legal status in the Geneva Conventions. No PMC would be permitted to operate without being regulated by the governing body. The draw-back to this method would be that it has the potential of pushing PMCs further underground, thereby reducing accountability and transparency even further. <heading>State Responsibility of PMCs: International Obligations to Implement and Enforce the Domestic Regulations of PMCs</heading>Another issue that must be reviewed follows on the proposal that states be held responsible for the actions of PMCs incorporated in their jurisdiction: should states be compelled by international humanitarian law to pass regulations governing the PMCs in their own domestic territories? Some countries have already begun designing legislation to govern PMCs in their national jurisdiction with the agenda of protecting the state's reputation and interests. If states were responsible for PMCs incorporated in their jurisdiction, "the lack of national legislation to control the sale of military services by PSCs could be construed as a failure by states to discharge their international obligation to preserve peace and security. While numerous countries have introduced legislation to stop their citizens becoming mercenaries, only two countries, South Africa and the US, have introduced legislation to control the activities of PSCs." While the passing of national legislation is not being proposed as an alternative to reviewing IHL and the status of PMCs, it is being put forward as a review that could provide complementary law to govern PMCs. It is interesting to note that the Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act of 2000 (the US Act enacted to govern the conduct of PMCs) governs only the conduct of those PMCs working for the US government. It appears that the US government extended regulation only so far as protecting the government's interests. <fnote>Supra, n 1, 286 </fnote>The South African legislation for regulating PMCs has attracted its own critiques, including that the definition for foreign military assistance was over broad, there are issues of accountability with the approval processes set out in the Act and weaknesses in its implementation and enforcement. The South African media reported a number of South African PMCs were operating in Iraq despite being prohibited under the Act. This fact "illustrates the problems of an ill-thought out piece of national legislation to tackle a global industry."  <fnote>Supra n 1, 290 </fnote>The United Kingdom has recently begun examining how to regulate the activities of PMCs and has published a Green Paper on the issue. "The publication of the Green Paper strongly suggests that the government increasingly recognizes that PMCs are new actors on the international stage. The Green Paper is also the first step towards regulating the activities of these new actors." However, it has now been five years since the publication of the Paper, and no new licensing regime is in place. Time will have to tell on whether the future regulations proposed by the British government provide a more adequate, efficient and transparent solution to the regulation of PMCs than has been seen to date. <fnote>Christopher Kinsey, Regulation and Control of Private Military Companies: The Legislative Dimension (2005) 26 Contemporary Security Policy 84 at 86 </fnote>It would seem that without international oversight of domestic regulations, states will not be able to regulate PMCs. However, much like trade laws, which have married domestic trade legislation and international trade law together, a complementary system of law is not inconceivable. IHL may be in the best position to provide this kind of oversight as all of the rights that require protection, of civilians and combatants, fall under the responsibility of IHL. <heading>Conclusion</heading>There is no doubt that the status of PMC employees will have to be reviewed and established in the near future. With the characteristics of new war rapidly changing conflict, and with it the type of "soldiers" needed to fight it, PMCs are going to continue to increase in their participation in global conflicts. For the protection of the PMC employee, of military members worldwide and of civilians in conflict zones, the ICRC and the global community must fit PMCs into the jigsaw puzzle of IHL - no matter how awkward and incompatible PMCs may seem. 