<quote>'We want a world where basic needs become basic rights and where poverty and all forms of violence are eliminated. Each person will have the opportunity to develop her or his full potential and creativity, and women's values of nurturance and solidarity will characterize human relationships. In such a world women's reproductive roles will be redefined: child care will be shared by men, women and society as a whole - We want a world where all institutions are open to participatory democratic processes, where women share in determining priorities and decisions'. (Sen and Grown, 1987: 80-1)</quote>As the above vision brought to light by DAWN (Development Alternatives for Women Network) clearly demonstrates, the development of the third world has long attracted specialist interest. In recent years this attention seems to have been centered on women's issues. As a result, increasing empowerment in the third world has become the key goal of many women's non-government agencies (NGOs). Through various projects these organisations seek to empower and improve the lives of a collection of third world women whose existence is 'conditioned and shaped by the struggles against neo-colonialism, imperialism, capitalism and gender subordination (Kempadoo and Doezema, 1998: Note 1: 24). However it is often difficult to determine the degree to which this goal has been accomplished. Although empowerment has become the new 'buzz word' over the past decade, there still appears to be some ambiguity over the actual meaning of this term. Thus after briefly tracing how concepts of women's NGOs and empowerment have been reviewed, the focus of this paper will then concentrate on answering three main questions. Firstly, in what ways do women's NGOs empower women? We must bear in mind that for many this process does not always support and benefit women. Furthermore it is crucial to consider that the route to empowerment needs to include both men and women if positive change is to occur. Secondly, what are the problems facing NGOs in this process? How could these obstacles be dealt with? In this it is important to consider the difficulties of measuring empowerment as well as the role which governments play. Lastly, what is the agenda of these NGOs and the facilitators who work for them? Empowerment as a concept, carry's the assumption that western women are themselves 'empowered' in that they are 'modern' and have 'freedom of choice'. It likewise presumes that third world women are 'victimized' and 'powerless'. In addition western agencies have a degree of 'power over' the women they wish to 'empower'. What are the impacts of these practicalities? All of this must be considered in turn before reaching a coherent conclusion about the extent to which NGOs empower third world women. <heading>Introduction to Women's NGOs and Empowerment</heading>Whilst women's NGOs have always had a place within the arena of development, it was not until the United Nations International Decade for Women in 1975 did they dramatically come into focus. During this period, and indeed in the years that followed, many of these organisations became increasingly resolute on empowering third world women. It was regarded that they seemed to be able to generate new concepts and strategies for gender justice, a task which State parties and their institutions seemed incapable of accomplishing. For Smillie and Hailey (2001: 173) women's NGOs offered, 'something new and important' in that they 'dreamed of things that never were and asked, "Why not?" And then made them happen'. Whilst Smillie and Hailey (2001) paint a somewhat idealistic picture of NGOs, many critics are skeptical of the true ethos of these organisations. Whilst there is no denying that they are a useful phenomenon, it has been argued that many are in fact simply an 'arm of government' (Nagar and Raju, 2003:3). Moreover, for the more radical they do not represent true alternative visions as they are in fact 'thoroughly domesticated to the ideologies and agendas of the mainstream development institutions, donors and their client states' (Townsend et al, 2004: 2). Bearing both view points in mind the important question now becomes, where does the truth lie? Throughout this paper it will be suggested that both arguments are in fact branches of the truth. Good NGO practices can aid women in their pursuit for a better life. However it is essential that we engage in a critical analysis of the philosophy of these organisations if we are to fully come to grips with the extent to which they are able to empower women 'on the ground'. With these thoughts in mind, a brief detour into explaining the notion of 'empowerment' seems necessary. For Townsend et al (2004) 'empowerment' is an extremely malleable word. For the most part it seems to be deeply ingrained within the 'governing culture' of western capitalism. It has solidified its place within this dominant sphere as it is central to personal achievement and individualism (Rowlands, 1998). It can be put forward that as a concept it is built around the philosophy of power. Indeed according to Sen (1997: 2) one can not begin to analyse 'empowerment' without acknowledging that it, 'first and foremost, about power'. In this reflection, the process of empowerment should in theory work to the advantage of those individuals, i.e. third world women, who traditionally have 'exercised very little power over their own lives'. Power is a word which has many hidden meanings with affect the direction of change: 'power over'; 'power to'; 'power with'; 'power within' (Rowlands, 1998). Thus it is important that agencies and organisations appreciate the complexity that each of these four strands bring to the process of empowerment. Certainly, Batliwala (1993 cited in Sen, 1997: 2) brings into focus this idea that before organisations embark on this course they must be aware that to truly empower women they will have to overcome what she terms the 'two central features' of power: 'control of resources' and 'control over ideology'. For the former she is referring to extrinsic capability i.e. 'physical, human, intellectual, financial and self power' whilst the latter describes intrinsic control of 'beliefs, values and attitudes'. One may perhaps reflect that both of these 'capabilities' are linked to each other; by controlling the power in the public world, it will lead to the strength of character required to combat domination in the private intrinsic world, or indeed visa versa. However as will be reviewed, the reality of situations for many third world women can not be so readily applied to the scripted theories of academics; a third world woman can not have power bestowed to her, she has to take it as an active agent. Thus in this sense there is no guarantee or indeed a visible or predictable outcome in this process; a pitfall familiar to many NGOs. <heading>Women's NGO Strategies </heading>Subsequently it is essential to review how women's NGOs operate. By analysing various projects and programmes we can begin to understand the degree to which third world women are empowered. According to Molyneux (1985 cited in Barrig, 1989: 132) in order for organisations to be successful they need to recognize and move towards resolving the problems created by strategic and practical gender. These two burdens are central to the lives of women. She defines strategic gender as the 'base of women's subjection', which can be broken down into three core parts: 'the sexual division of labour; sexual violence and the control of reproduction'. In addition to this, they face the struggles of practical gender, which she considers to be 'experiences which are affected by class'. Moser (1993) believes that this framework is important but unfortunately often bewilders planners, in that they fail to appreciate how the complexities of these two strands impact women in very different ways. In fact as Gianotten et al (1994:11) aptly point out, 'when gender differences are overlooked in the planning phase, projects are unlikely to respond to women's needs and may even have negative consequences for women'. In that the theme of this paper focuses on third world women's perceptions of empowerment and not western perceptions of what empowerment should be, it is important to address that whilst Molyneux's (1985 cited in Barrig, 1989: 132) interpretation of gender is significant, the concepts she uses must be modified to the desired collective. A way of explaining this further could be to take for example, women in a small Indian village who wish to empower themselves. It is essential that NGOs understand that this notion of empowerment is inextricably woven to these women's notions of self. It is almost like a village specific version of empowerment. Thus applying a universal characterization would not further the cause. True empowerment is a result of their very specific circumstances and experiences. Consequently, NGOs must allow for third world women to define themselves what they believe strategic and practical gender to be. The importance of this should not be underestimated. In recent years participatory and community driven development has seemed to be at the forefront of NGO planning. Schemes have been set up which allege "full participation" and "true empowerment" from the ground up. However, more often that not, they have failed to live up to the hype, with many turning out to be driven by male gendered interest, leaving 'the least powerful without voice or much in the way of choice' (Cornwall, 2003: 1325). Bosch (1998) puts forwards that even projects which have been set up with the best of intentions will run into problems if the at the planning stage, facilitators fail to take into account the situations of the women that they are trying to empower. Simple factors, like for example if the time of the meetings are not convenient for women will impact upon the success of any campaign. An apt example of this is Educacion y Tradbajo programme (Education and work) set up by the women's NGO, Centro de Investigacion y Desarrollo de la Educacion (CIDE) in Chile. This aimed to help train unskilled women and to assist their entrance into the labour market. This was achieved through personal development sessions combined with vocational training. However, whilst in the beginning women's enrolment increased, these rates began to drop across the first few months of the initial implementation period. The reasons behind this shift are simple. Bosch (1998:164) emphasised that the times of the classes 'conflicted with dinner hours or did not leave enough time for the women to attend to their children's needs'. This idea is supported by Cornwall (2003:1332) who argues that 'one barrier to women's participation is time'. She goes onto point out that by 'holding sessions at times that women suggest as convenient as least allows the option to participate'. As well as time, location of the meetings can also pose significant barriers when attempting to increase women's empowerment. Mosse's (1995 cited in Cornwall, 2003) analysis of the early planning stages of the Kribhco Indo-British Rainfed Farming Project (KRIBP) in India can help to explain the extent to which structural factors may exclude women. The KRIBP aimed to "open up" new opportunities for women by focussing on their perspectives in relation to farming systems and by appreciating the pivotal role that they play in natural resources management. However it failed to deliver in that the locality of the meetings made it hard for women to even attend let alone contribute. Mosse (1995 cited in Cornwall, 2003: 1322) concluded that planning 'tends to emphasise formal knowledge and activities and reinforce the invisibility of women's roles'. These two examples bring into focus the main obstacle towards empowering women; challenging gender roles which have been culturally ascribed. It is these gender roles which place women as second class citizens, and it is their second class status which impedes efforts by NGOs to improve their economic, social and political situation. With this in mind it can be argued that in order for support systems to successfully empower women facilitators must 'head behind the curtain' and enter the private sphere of the family. The way in which gender relations are created and sustained in the private sphere varies both in terms of geographic region as well as across time. Kabeer (1994) places emphasis on NGOs understanding the gender relations structures that exist in the haven of the home. She adds to this by arguing that these structures are both dynamic and ongoing and as a result must be examined carefully. Undeniably for many women, challenging patriarchal manifestations, which more often than not 'are fiercely defended and regarded as "natural" or "God-given" is problematical' (Mosedale, 2003:4). The difficulty faced by many NGOs is therefore to try and 'persuade' an already male orientated society that women's empowerment is a right which they are entitled to as part of the ideal of equality and democracy. In addition it is essential to point out that the basic beliefs of gender equality are actually sustained in the charter's of democratic states all across the globe, in for example, 'the Covenant on Human Rights (1976), the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and for some countries in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979)' (Nzomo, 1995: 134). It is pivotal that NGOs keep the above treaties in mind as many third world women attach great importance to these legal principles. To them, they are a continual reminder that situations may improve with time and participation (Nzomo, 1995: 134). So how can NGOs begin to disentangle this cultural framework which places women as second class citizens? For some organisations the answer seems to lie in assimilating men into empowerment programmes; inviting men to participate alongside women will help to generate new attitudes which will come to improve female status. A pertinent example which best illustrates this is the Educacion y Tradbajo programme which was discussed earlier. After the women voiced their reasons as to why they were unable to attend sessions, Bosch (1998: 164) describes how 'programme officials gradually began to pay heed' in that they 'rearranged class times so as to avoid conflict with family time'. In addition to this positive change, facilitators went a step further, when they started to incorporate men into the empowerment process. This has been deemed positive as if NGOs are 'gender blinkered' it results in minimal benefits for all parties (Scott, 1989). Certainly Rowlands (1998) acknowledges that the main problem of empowerment lies in the fact that men fear that they will loose control of the family. Encouraging men to take part in tasks and projects with female members of the group, in this case, brought them closer to appreciating that they need not oppose or in fact fear giving a voice to women. Whilst Bosch (1998: 164) does acknowledge that this did not necessarily, 'openly oppose patriarchal structures inside the household' it did make an important inroad into allowing other NGOs to pick up where this programme left off. Leading on from this, Hartsock (1985: 223) argues the extent to which NGOs will be successful in their pursuit to empower third world women will largely depend on their ability to exercise and reproduce what she terms group 'energy power'. Her thoughts are interesting in that they do not encompass the traditional idea of the domination of 'power over' which is so common in development thought. Instead she considers the idea that power is itself 'generative' and that this covers 'the power some people have of stimulating activity in others, and raising their morale'. From this standpoint it can then be put forward that women's NGOs should adopt this 'energy power' perspective. By focussing on raising third world women's sense of self as a collective and basing this process on the beliefs and morals these women hold, surely a fruitful outcome would be guaranteed. In addition, 'if leadership wish to see a group achieve what they are capable of, it is a form of power which can persuade or open up new possibilities' (Rowlands, 1998: 13). It can be argued that one of the best examples which the idea of group 'energy power' can be applied is that to the work done by SEWA (The Self Employed Women's Organisation) in India. This establishment aims to 'improve the lives of very poor women economically and socially and to make them self reliant' (Sen, 1997:10). Members of the NGO work at the grass root level and their main approach has been to build on the self worth of women through 'collective group empowerment'. Nanavaty (1994 cited in Sen, 1997:11) deems this to be more effective than individual empowerment, as 'with collective strength the woman is able to combat the outside exploitations and corrupt forces... also her respect in the family and community follows soon'. SEWA is a success story for many women's NGOs and in this way it would not be unfair to consider it more the 'exception than the rule' (Nanavaty 1994 cited in Sen, 1997:11). However the importance of the work carried out by SEWA does bring to light the positive impact that good NGO practice can bring to the lives of third world women. <heading>Women's NGOs: Problems and Proposed Solutions</heading>With the above in mind it now becomes necessary to conceptualise the problems that NGO face in their bid to empower third world women. As well as this, it is hoped that we shall come some way to presenting how these obstacles could be overcome. It has become clear that whilst academics, government officials and NGO facilitators have had their fare share of disputes in deciding the best route to empowering women, they all seem to unite under what they consider the main impediment to be: measuring empowerment. There are some who argue that 'empowerment lies beyond the sphere of what can be measured'. Others dispute this, and have put forward that, 'measurement must be undertaken for there can be little point in funding an activity if it is impossible to tell whether or not it has been successful' (Mosedale, 2003:4). Whilst the latter statement raises a fine point, it would be naïve to assume that this measurement is non-problematic. Certainly, if NGOs allow for women to determine themselves as a collective what they consider empowerment to be, and how they wish to go about changing their situation to allow for this, complexities arise. The issue for support agencies then becomes focussed on how to measure or indeed plan and chart for unknown projects and processes. This issue warrants further examination and Alsop and Heinsohn (2005: 10) have come some way to providing this. They have hypothesized that the degree of empowerment can be measured by assessing the following factors: 'whether an opportunity to make a choice exists (existence of choice); whether a person actually uses the opportunity to choose (use of choice); whether the choice resulted in the desired result (achievement of choice)'. By applying this theory to the practice of NGOs, an imperative point can be put forward. Whilst organisation can not have power over 'the use of choice' or indeed the 'achievement of choice', in order for them to successfully empower women, they will have to have control over the 'existence of choice'. For example, if a woman from Nairobi after successfully empowering herself through various programmes decided to take the next step and send her daughter to school; she would have exercised her 'use of choice'. If she then began to gather information and found that a suitable school existed, her option to the 'achievement of choice' would exist. However, if no suitable school existed, then 'neither would this option'. Thus, the extent to which NGOs can empower women to 'make choices' is heavily dependant on the geographical location of the individual. Furthermore if there is no option available for that woman to exercise her empowered right, then from the outset, even before the process of empowerment begins, a positive 'measurable outcome' is unlikely (Alsop and Heinsohn, 2005: 10). Indeed it would be logical to argue that the level of development is an important component in the process of empowering third world women. Tied to this, is of course, the extent to which governments are encouraging this progression. For example, as discussed above, would the introduction of accessible schools in areas aid women to exercise their empowered right? Would governments be supportive of this right? Evidence has shown than the extent to which NGOs can empower women is directly linked to the ethos and agenda of state institutions. For example, Nzomo (1995) traces the history of Kenyan women and their plight towards democracy. An important element of her argument lies in the philosophy and democratic principles of governments. She believes that NGOs stand a greater chance of empowering women, if on the ground women feel that their struggles are acknowledged and have central backing by those officials in positions of power. In relation to Kenya she puts forward that women 'are encouraged by the knowledge that their government has ratified the key international human rights conventions and hence can be called upon to honour its declared commitments' (Nzomo, 1995: 135) Without a doubt the link between governments, NGOs and women is one which should not be underestimated. Certainly Moser (1998 cited in Mosedale, 2003: 5) brings to light a key consideration in the planning of empowerment programmes. She deems that the success of any NGO project is inextricably related to 'the extent to which the agency itself is able to accommodate the empowerment of the women and to what extent such empowerment is actually threatening to the state'. An apt example of where empowerment programmes set up by NGOs can threaten state interests can be found in the study of Andhra Pradesh. Here, empowered women, who were weary of their drunken husbands and the abuse they received as a result of intoxication, decided to 'raid and pour away the alcohol, hijack delivery trucks and burn down shops'. These actions were documented and used as a case study in NGOs literacy empowerment programmes. The government's response to this; remove the story which was resulting in the 'humiliation' of men (Stein, 1997: 36). In accordance, Karam (2000: 73) highlights the challenges faced by NGOs in the Arab world. She argues that they have almost certainly been faced with government disapproval. Generally speaking, 'the freedom to set up such associations or organisations is legally curtailed by most of the Arab states'. This 'legal curtailing' takes on a variety of forms, from not being able to discuss 'political issues' to financial supervision, to any decision made having to be 'approved' by a government representative. As a result of this, it is not hard to see why some critics such as Nagar and Raju (2003: 3) are sceptical as to the 'extent to which the 'non' in non government is genuine'. It would seem logical to argue that a way of getting around unsupportive governments could be for women's NGOs to unite together in a supportive front. However, more often that not, half of the problems that NGOs face in their plight to empower women, are actually created and sustained by differences within organisation themselves. Karam (2000: 74) argues that spending too 'much time on bickering' is distracting. Instead they need to concentrate on 'filling this vacuum and performing a useful function in mobilizing public opinion and making women's issues visible'. For example in relation to Arab states, Karam (2000: 74) argues that one of the most common features which has been cited as a hindrance to the success of women's issues is the idea that within the political arena and indeed the politics of the NGOs 'no one listens to the other'. Moreover this 'lack of communication is seriously hampering a collaboration which could be fruitful for Arab women'. Furthermore, she points to evidence from Europe and South Africa to highlight how successful networking between women's NGOs and politicians is 'crucial to the successful institutionalisation of gender equality policies' (Karam, 2000: 74). Despite the importance of the issues discussed above it is not the main aim of this paper to present a solely negative view of NGO and government practice. In many cases which have been documented, supportive governments collaborating with NGOs have been highly successful in empowering and motivating women. One of the main ways in which this can be achieved is through Women's Movements. Sen (1997) illustrates the emphasis which was placed on women's movements in the Mahila Samakhya programme which operated in India in a bid to reduce gender inequalities in education. The unique feature of this programme is similar to Hartsocks (1985) 'energy power' in that it stressed and emphasised the imporantance of mobilizing women to enable them to collectively resist domination. The campaign has been highly successfully in raising social awareness of empowering women and in the words of Gowri (1996 cited in Sen, 1997: 16), <quote>'I am concluding with a sense of happiness and pride that now women are increasingly confident of tackling their issues independently. They do not wait for us to come here, but taken action and inform us after the action has been taken'.</quote>What this shows is that the extent to which NGO practices can empower women will in some cases depend on the organisations ability to work with and for women's movements as well as within government policies to exact positive change. If this is achieved then programme and projects may come some way to providing the 'missing link' for furthering women's empowerment (Ali, 2000: 54). <heading>Development: A Colonial Gaze? </heading>So having now evaluated the problems which NGOs face, attention can now be turned to one of the most important questions of all; what is the true agenda of women's NGOs? The power that these organisations hold is undeniable and criticism seems to occur when there appear to be efforts to import ideas of western empowerment to third world women. Accordingly, the success of empowerment programmes will heavily depend on the degree to which women's NGOs take into account the particular history, culture and class of individuals they wish to help. Too often, western NGOs are 'guilty of stirring up discontent among women in developing countries by applying inappropriate culturally specific notions of female liberation' (Mosedale, 2005: 245). Afshar (1993) illustrates how western facilitators frequently undervalue both Muslim and Hindu norms of modesty and dress; simply because these women choose to wear a veil or cover their heads and bodies does not mean that they are 'helpless' and 'incapable' and so must be 'saved' by western feminist ideology. For many of these women, reserved dressing is part of their culture and moreover is something which defines their sense of being. It would be patronising as well as morally wrong for western women's NGOs to assume that only 'lives like their own can be fruitful and empowered' (Mosedale, 2005: 245). In addition, Mosedale (2005: 245) goes on to point out, quite rightly, that these beliefs are 'irritating' as well as 'offensive' since 'western agencies often come from nations which have oppressed these countries in the past, and arguably continue to exploit them in the present'. With the above in mind, it can be put forward that the extent to which development agencies will have a positive impact can be directly linked to the type of training the facilitators who work at the grassroot level will have had. 'Facilitation, active listening, non directive questioning skills' are all crucial here (Rowlands, 1998: 26). Whilst it is likely to be the case that many 'change agents' will be 'outsiders', this should not prove to be a issue if these facilitators have 'self awareness'. By keeping their own biases, priorities and opinions in check it will ensure that they have a positive impact on the women with whom they are working (Rowlands, 1998: 26). As with all things it is often easy to sit on the sidelines and pass judgment on the practices of NGOs. Whilst critical analysis is essential to further the cause it is important that we maintain a level of respect for these organisations. The role they have to play is often a very delicate and highly complex one, which can be likened to an 'alliance'. Good NGOs are like allies in that they 'are not only supportive and in solidarity with you, but will also put their weight behind you in places where you need it, whilst leaving you in charge'. Furthermore, 'allies are interested in you meeting your goals, because in some fundamental way that enables them to meet their goals are well' (Rowlands, 1998: 27). This concept of an 'ally' sustains the key theme throughout this paper; in order for NGOs to empower third world women, they must leave these individuals in charge of the direction of change and merely provide support. However it is important not to romanticise this idea of the perfect 'alliance' between NGOs and the women they wish to empower. As is often the case, the reality of situations often dampens even the most well meaning intentions. NGOs face a 'dual burden' of their very own. On one hand they have to consider and take into account the women they wish to empower, whilst also 'complying with the requirements of their own accountability processes' (Rowland, 1998: 27). A suitable example of this can be found if we are to take a look at the funding of these organisations. The type of funding, long or short term can create obstacles for many NGOs. For example, funding attached to a 'short term mission', will be coupled with pressure for easy, rapid and most importantly, noticeable results. Yet as many planners and leaders of such organisations have argued, the process of empowering women is a 'long term goal'. Furthermore, as has been shown, it is debatable whether one would even be able to measure the level of empowerment as quantifiable data (Rowlands, 1998: 27). <heading>Conclusion - NGO's to Empowerment: Ally or Enemy? </heading>It seems overwhelming clear that the principal challenge which faces both women and NGOs alike is to continue to uphold and further the process of empowerment. We must bear in mind that just being gender conscious is not enough; these ideas and thoughts need to be transformed into strong state policies in order for women to gain the confidence to fight for their right to equality. As well as this, NGOs need to appreciate that third world women are not a homogenous group. Whilst there has to an element of universality in NGO planning for it to be realistic, there must also be aspects which differ in accordance to region, culture and religion of their participants. Without this consideration NGOs can not, and will not, reach third world women. Experience tells us that government and NGO collaboration must be encouraged; it is crucial if we are to discover improved ways to empower women. Furthermore, within the field of development all parties need to begin to trust in the other's actions. Empowerment has been described as an ongoing process. In this way the vision of women's NGOs projects need to be continuing. These organisations must expect to be involved for as long as they are needed by the women whom they are trying to empower; a quick fix solution is not acceptable. Furthermore such a solution will not stand the test of time. In addition NGOs need to take an 'inside out approach' in that they first must begin to break down patriarchal relations within the private sphere before they can attempt to empower women in the public arena. Thus there can be no denying that NGOs create favorable conditions which can lead to empowering women. Although true empowerment must come from within, organisations, like a catalyst, play a crucial role in this process. As well acknowledging this we must also be careful not to paint an idealistic picture which has no basis in reality. NGOs need to keep in mind the social and cultural framework in which third world women live their lives. Projects must be planned which take these factors into consideration, rather than simply deeming them to be 'backward'. It is essential that both scholars and planners alike appreciate that empowerment is not simply a process which is done 'to' women, or indeed, 'for' women to make them more 'developed'. Third world women are not undeveloped they merely need help in steering themselves in the right direction. Throughout this paper it is hoped that these issues have been adequately discussed. In terms of the future governments NGOs, women's groups and third world women themselves must continues on this long road to empowerment. These women must be supported and reassured that as their 'ally' we have every intention of helping them reach the empowerment that they wish for themselves. Only when this is achieved can third world women fully class themselves as first class citizens. This should be the main aim of all women's NGOs. Nothing less will do. 