<heading>Introduction </heading><quote>'Feminist dilemmas in fieldwork are as much ethical and personal as academic and political; they gnaw at our core, challenging our integrity, our work, and at times, the raison d'etre of our projects. Feminist dilemmas in fieldwork revolve around power, often displaying contradictory, difficult, and irreconcilable positions for the researcher' (Hale, 1991 cited in Wolf, 1996: 1). </quote>As Hale (1991) aptly identifies social research is often a complicated and bewildering task. On one hand researchers must consider the theoretical and conceptual frameworks of their chosen focus, whilst also placing importance on the practicalities of implementation as well as the role of ethics and power in this development. These layers are not always easy to separate and the interplay between design, process and practical issues is one which raises many questions of how best to represent, interpret and theorise the 'voices' of research participants. Those coming from a feminist perspective may often find this interaction problematic as they are not only trying to showcase the 'lived lives' of their respondents but are also aware that the highlighted issues need to be applied to a 'female sphere' which more often than not has been sidelined out of mainstream thought. In addition, as some female researchers 'are moved by commitments to women' as opposed to being motivated 'purely by their own careers' (Patai, 1991: 138) the struggles they face are considerably greater than the average researcher. Indeed, these contradictions can often thwart the most well meaning aspirations of many feminists. This 'crisis' is even more prevalent when "first world feminists" study women from the "third world" and the problems which arise from this need careful consideration. Thus after a brief detour into the background context of my chosen text, 'Nisa: The Life and Words of !Kung Woman', the focus of this paper will then concentrate on evaluating the following issues: research design, epistemologies, dilemmas and problems of difference, and power and ethics in feminist investigations. Marjorie Shostak's creation of the life and words of her pseudonym Nisa is widely regarded as a classic text in the field of anthropology. Although Shostak did not initially start out as an anthropologist, her move to the Dobe district of Africa with her husband in 1969 signified a change and she began to document the lives of women in the !Kung tribe. After learning the language she began conducting in depth interviews with women from various age groups with varying life experiences. Nisa was one such woman. From the start of the introductory account it becomes clear that Nisa impressed Shostak more than any of the other !Kung women. She had a 'gift as a storyteller; she chose her words carefully, infused her stories with drama, and covered a wide range of experience' (Shostak, 1990: 7). Nisa's emphatic technique led to her to being interviewed fifteen times by Shostak and the format and structure of these 'talks' enabled for an observation into the unique lives of an up till then entirely self-regulating community. It was these transcribed discussions, coupled with Shostak's own evaluations which constituted the bulk of her text. Accordingly, with the above in mind attention can now be turned to evaluating the research journey of Shostak and her personal memoir of Nisa. <heading>Research Design </heading>Researchers aim to frame their studies in three main ways: ontologically; epistemologically and methodologically. According to Creswell (1998: 21) the best research tends to be written from 'within one tradition' which he elaborates as being 'ethnography, phenomenology, biography, grounded theory and case study'. Although he does argue that too much 'purity' in research, i.e. disregarding the importance of other approaches is not advisable, he maintains that identifying one of the five research options is essential especially for novices in the field. His theory can be applied to Shostak, who herself was new to anthropological research. Consequently, as her research story unfolded it became clear that whilst she did adopt the main approach of ethnography she did touch on elements of other theoretical concepts. Shostak's rationale formed as a result of the lack of information available about the !Kung tribe despite other anthropologists studying their way of life previously, <quote>'No matter whom I talked to or what I read, I did not come away with a sense that I knew the !Kung: How did they feel about themselves, their childhood, their parents? Did spouses love one another; did they feel jealously; did love survive marriage? What were their dreams like and what did they make of them? Were they afraid of growing old? Of death? Most of all, I was interesting in !Kung women's lives. What was it like being a woman in a culture so outwardly different from my own? What were the universal, if any, and how much would I be able to identify with? (Shostak, 1990: 5). </quote>Her main aim was to thus discover the "lived realities" of the !Kung and what their experiences meant to them. Such a broad base allowed for her to examine in particular the identities of women and the meanings that they attach to their ways of life. It is important to add that Shostak's desire to research the relationships of !Kung women in fact stemmed from her own journey and interest of the varied realities of females across the world. Her fascination was therefore rooted in her own principles and the movements which were taking place in the west in which females were questioning their traditionally assumed roles; 'I hoped the field trip might help clarify some of the issues the movement has raised' (Shostak, 1990: 5). Thus in identifying the 'theory-research gap' which existed in western feminist literature (Probert, 2006: 3) she was hoping to reshape the ways in which women's studies was viewed in the developed world. Furthermore it can be argued that Shostak's research design itself was aligned with a feminist research perspective. The in-depth interviewing methods she used are praised by feminist scholars as highlighting the intuitive desire which female researchers have to place themselves within their studies. In addition Shostak's extended fieldwork in which she lived with and as a member of the !Kung community is significant as through this it enabled her to identify more intricate and interesting patterns of behaviour than she otherwise may have missed. Indeed feminist's in general regard such as inclusion to not only be a 'precious asset' but also a 'distinguishing element of their research' (Reinharz, 1992: 258). According to Reinharz (1992) an important element of any research design is planning for the eventual outcome, i.e. what happens once the fieldwork is over. What is significant about Shostak's text is that throughout the chapters she is aware of the responsibility she holds to Nisa and the !Kung tribe in general, <quote>'Perhaps the most important consideration was that after our work was completed we would leave. Then what?.. Later we acknowledged the responsibility we would continue to have after we left, a responsibility to work with the San in their struggles to determine their future' (Shostak, 1990: 27-28).</quote>As a result she speaks to Nisa about her plans to take the stories which she has been told, translate them into English, turn them into a book and give her and the community money from the royalties to help with schools, the well and other projects. She is upfront and honest with Nisa about her plans and constantly seeks to make sure her participant understands what this means. Wolf (1996) acknowledges that this is an important element of planning a good research design as from the outset it helps break down the "predatory nature" of fieldwork and research as by planning for, and engaging in reciprocity, it helps to counter some of the inequalities that are reproduced by ethnographic work. Undoubtedly such reciprocity keeps in mind the core foundation of feminist studies which is that what the researcher 'takes out' in terms of knowledge, they must 'put back' in other ways. This may take its form for example in book royalties, money, medicines, goods or gifts. However we must be careful when displaying such thoughts as they too, can be viewed as insensitive and condescending and can lead to forms of inequalities between the 'wealthy western researcher' and their poorer respondents. <heading>Feminist Epistemology, Reliability & Validity</heading>"Feminist epistemology" is a buzz word commonly used in academia. However despite this recognition, its inherent meaning is far from clear. Theorists have used the term as a way of explaining, "women's knowledge" and "women's ways of knowing" however this conceptual framework has itself come under scrutiny. Sceptics are critical of the sweeping generalisation that unites "women's experience" as one category and thus have put forward that such a universal account ignores the different realities of the "knowers" and the social contexts of their lives (Alcoff & Potter, 1993: 1). In addition to such ideas, one of the other main obstacles to feminist epistemology has been the prevailing assessment of positivism. In other words, one can take this to mean that whilst positivist science is perpetuated and reinforced by the belief that successful research should uncover replicable "truths" and "statistical facts", feminist research is driven by the importance of "lived experience". In this way it has been described by Nielson (1990: 6) as, 'contextual, inclusive, experiential, involved, socially relevant... complete but not replicable, inclusive of emotions and events as experienced'. However problems occur when this "lived experience" is taken to be true for all women without consideration of their differences. Shostak (1990: 350) acknowledged this reality throughout her fifteen interviews with Nisa. She often reported, <quote>'Nisa did not fairly represent the mainstream of !Kung life, either in her experiences or in her personality. None of the other women I interviewed had encountered such tragedy as Nisa, or had a comparable extravagance of personal style. Perhaps her story was too idiosyncratic an interpretation of !Kung life; perhaps it didn't generalise to other women... what concerned me that Nisa might have emphasised negative experiences to the point where her narrative portrayed an extreme view of her culture, one not shared by many others around her'. </quote>This concern of reliability is important for any researcher. The relationship between the 'knower' and the 'known' between the 'truth' and 'false experiences' is one which needs full consideration in any epistemological project. According to feminist standpoint theory (Hekman, 1997) a female researcher uses her position as a 'woman' to gain knowledge and familiarity so as to create a common bond with her female respondents. In a similar way, Hartsock (1987 cited in Wolf, 1996: 13) argues that due to 'women's universal position within the sexual division of labour and sexist oppression in general, they have greater insights as researchers into the lives of other women'. However this assumes that all women are subject to patriarchal domination and Shostak's (1990: 13) account of the !Kung tribe actually disputes this claim. <quote>'Women's status in the community is high and their influence is considerable. They are prominent in major family and band decisions, such as where and when to move and whom their children will marry. Many also share core leadership in a band and ownership of water holes and foraging areas.. in other words their influence may be greater that the !Kung - of either sex - like to admit'.</quote>This analysis mirrors the uneasy dilemma of 'working in the west and finding it difficult to relate the issues of feminist epistemology adopted by western feminists to women in post-colonial nations' (Thapar-Bjorkert, 1999: 66). Indeed, the point above is worthy of careful consideration which Shostak herself identified; whilst some traditions, through western eyes may seem to oppress women, they actually privilege women according to their specific experiences. Thus women's 'standpoint' will be different in non-western societies, post colonial nations and indigenous communities. With this in mind, Shostak's text has been praised by not only anthropologists but also by feminists for its illustration of a tribe where the power of women is widely recognised from their own standpoint and not from a traditional western feminist epistemological perspective. <heading>Dilemmas of Difference & Privilege </heading>When conducting ethnographic fieldwork it is important to remember that the researcher is usually the unknown outsider for whom the informant 'translates her culture' (Khan, 2005: 2022). It is this very exchange of knowledge which has been subject to controversy. As a result the following questions have been raised. What is the impact of difference between the researcher and the researched? To what extent does this affect data production and analysis? Do some differences such as language, race, age, nationality or sexuality matter more than others? All of the above needs careful consideration when evaluating the validity of any feminist studies. One of the main problems associated with ethnographic research is to do with the idea that researchers 'carry privilege' and therefore can not begin to understand the plight of third world women. This reaffirms Wolf's (1996: 13) belief that only 'those who are in similar situations can understand' and thus conduct research. However this can be, and has been disputed by many others who have argued that 'to assume that "insiders" automatically have a more sophisticated and appropriate approach to understanding social reality in 'their' society is to fall into the fallacy of Third Worldism' (Sidaway, 1992: 406). Furthermore sometimes those from a particular culture are unable, for various reasons to conduct research themselves. In this way having an 'outsider' live with them and review their experiences can be somewhat refreshing as it gives them to chance to speak of their ways of life. One can argue this is the case of Shostak's time with the !Kung community. Here she tried to bridge the gap by doing everything she could to understand their lives, <quote>'I learned the language, went on gathering expeditions, followed along on hunts, ate bush food exclusively, lived in grass huts, sat around fires and listened to discussion, arguments and stories. Through this I gained an invaluable perspective' (Shostak, 1990: 6).</quote>The impact was that Shostak then had as close to an 'insiders' viewpoint as she could. As a result this made the process of interviewing that much easier than if she had not participated in all these activities. In addition, she maintained this new found position within the community through presenting herself in a way which she felt the !Kung women would be able to relate to, despite their different realities. For example she drew on her role as a girl-woman who was recently married and was struggling with all the issues that come with rite of passage: work; sex; love and identity. Undeniably many other academics have used this approach to try and build a connection based on mutual experiences with their respondents. Hewitt (1998 cited in Scheyvens & Leslie, 2000: 123) when conducting research in Fiji stated, 'local people could relate to my "family" which was a very important part of their lives. It established a conversation point through which I was able to gain important information about their lives'. The other area of difference which impacted Shostak's fieldwork experience was the generation gap between her and Nisa. Age is significant in the !Kung community with elders gaining respect through their life experiences from the younger members of the tribe. One can see how Shostak recognised this when saying, 'I was young, and Nisa talked as if to guide me, as if she were talking to the woman I might become' (Shostak, 1990: 371). Certainly she described how she often felt like a small child when Nisa would say to her, 'Wait, I'm getting to that. Now, listen' (Nisa cited in Shostak, 1990: 40). This highlights the significance of age as an essential element in research as, 'ideas of respondents are shaped and influenced not only in terms of structural categories like race, but also through the mediation of culture and generation' (Thapar-Bjorkert, 1999: 63). <heading>Bridging the Difference? </heading>The ideas expressed above are important elements of fieldwork and should not be forgotten. However with reference to Shostak's unique experience with Nisa and the !Kung community as a whole, it can be argued that she did try and bridge the cultural distance which existed between her and her respondents. Perhaps the quote which best characterised this success is spoken by Nisa (cited in Shostak, 1990: 338) when she states, 'that is something that you, a woman, know about as well'. This follows a conversation she is having with Shostak about pregnancy and sexual activity in which she uncovers her unhappiness about her relationship with her husband Bo, and explains that she feels if she had married another man she may have gotten pregnant after she lost her last child. What the above sentence seems to capture is Nisa's recognition that she and Shostak do have a likeness and a common ground on which they can understand the other despite coming from different worlds. Furthermore it showcases that Nisa is not 'disempowered' in her relationship with Shostak. She is not just answering questions, but is recalling her story. In addition, it reveals a touching bond between the researcher and the researched. The statement shows Nisa's perceptiveness of Shostak's aim to unearth the collective experience of what it is 'to be a woman'. She not only appreciates that she is being asked to give details of her experience of living as a !Kung woman but takes it a step further by acknowledging that sometimes biological resemblances can create a connection which surpasses social, cultural and political differences. Thus it is this simple gesture which seems to illustrate the bond between Shostak and Nisa as well as demonstrating that some stories are the same for all women regardless of where those stories are culturally and geographically rooted. Whilst it is important to keep the above thought it mind, we must be careful not to over emphasise this as a common experience for all ethnographic researchers. More than that, despite the closeness between Shostak and Nisa, their relationship was also characterised by obstacles of difference which sought to separate them. For example, Shostak often described how she did not believe or understand some of Nisa's vivid accounts of her life, 'I accepted it as something I might not understand...the final interpretation of this story and of some of the others will probably always remain subject to speculation' (Shostak, 1990: 39). What this highlights is that for the researcher it is often hard to separate between the 'truths' of the stories and the fictional direction they may take when being spoken. As Thapar-Bjorkert (1999: 64) identified in her Pakistani research, 'I was faced with the dilemma of where to draw the boundary between the imaginary and real, the past and present, the conscious and the unconscious'. Certainly how the researcher chooses to interpret the account she is given by her respondents also poses problems to the validity of her write up. However perhaps we can put forward that all ethnographic accounts have an element of 'multiple truths' to them, and that a good researcher will do her best to find these truths from within imagined realities of her respondent's narratives. Hence having now discussed the elements of difference within research, attention can turn to the additional inequalities which accompany epistemological projects. <heading>Politics, Ethics & Immersion in Fieldwork</heading>The problems of politics and ethics are now commonplace in feminist research. Indeed research for women, as opposed to research on women can bring a whole new set of obligations which need to be fulfilled. Ethnographic methods which seek to improve the lives of individuals through the research process have been characterised as 'ideal' for women as they draw on traditional female strengths such as concern and empathy as well as 'a reciprocal relationship between the knower and the known' (Stacey, 1988: 21). However closer inspection reveals that such strategies can in fact subject the 'researched' to 'greater risks of exploitation, betrayal and abandonment' (Stacey, 1988: 21) as well as causing great feelings of guilt for the researcher. It is this exploitation which stems directly from the humanistic nature of ethnographic in depth studies which depend entirely upon a shared 'sisterhood' within which 'an ultimate empathy is assumed to reside' (Powell, 1996: 7). According to Oakley (1981: 57) 'a feminist interviewing another woman is by definition "inside"' the governing gender culture and this leads to 'minimising social distance'. Furthermore other academics have put forward that women are able to effectively engage in worthwhile discussions with other women due to their ability to 'translate' and 'fill in' thoughts which may not be verbalised (DeVault, 1990: 102). However this leads us onto an interesting terrain; to what extent can researchers 'fill in' the unspoken words of women, who may not only be distant to them in terms of geography but also culture? Certainly the assumption of a shared sisterhood is problematic not only for the respondents but also for the researcher. For example it can lead to a false sense of security coupled with unrealistic expectations of the interview process. Shostak herself found that in trying to find the perfect respondent with whom there was an instant rapport was difficult to say the least, 'I was no longer a sensitive interviewer, I wanted immediate understanding, immediate confidences' (Shostak, 1990: 37). This brings to the forefront another dilemma in ethnographic studies, the idea of 'immersion'. Anthropologists, for the most part, tend to use this technique when 'doing ethnography' (Wolf, 1996: 9). Such a strategy involves acculturating into the native culture and so requires the researcher to 'downplay her privilege' (Wolf, 1996:9). However this can lead to difficulties not only for the researcher but also for her participants. For example, Shostak found that in trying to live as a member of the !Kung community she felt emotionally and physically drained. Furthermore in the beginning it did not help her gain initial confidents within the community. She describes her loneliness and her incapability to 'exert the necessary effort to gain acceptance' (Shostak, 1990: 37). Clearly then whilst immersion does have its advantages in that in enables to 'view a culture from within' (Wolf, 1996: 10) it can be argued for the researcher it does pose some challenges. In reality after nineteen months of fieldwork Shostak (1990: 36) describes that, <quote>'The strain of having been away from home so long, the continual pressure of adapting to other people's ways, the hard work of collecting reliable information about their lives, and the demands of the physical environment had exhausted me. I wanted to be finished'. </quote>As well as these feelings of inadequacy for the researcher acculturation into another's culture for the purpose of research poses significant inequalities for the respondents who may feel abandoned once the project has come to a close. Whilst one cannot, and should not belittle the emotional rollercoaster of emotions which Shostak would have been subject too, perhaps it can be argued that Nisa may have been left feeling far worse off. Upon Shostak's return to the village four years later, Nisa turned to her and questioned, 'But now you have come back though you are clearly the one who has forgotten me' (Nisa cited in Shostak, 1990: 360). Although one must be careful when drawing assumption of the relationship between Shostak and Nisa, as clearly the bond they shared was special, the above statement does highlight a key consideration in conducting ethnographic research; although the researcher is a part of the field, she unlike her participants, has the 'privilege' to leave once her work is completed. Thus it can be argued that this 'privilege' can never really be hidden despite the 'immersion' which may take place and so power inequalities will constantly reproduce themselves even through the most well meaning of intentions (Wolf, 1996). <heading>'Friendship' or 'Friendliness': Where to draw the line? </heading>Attempts to deal with power and friendship is yet another 'contradiction in terms' (Oakley, 1981) which feminist researchers face. Ethnographic studies in particular emphasises the primary 'instrument' which women hold and through this methodology female researchers are expected to use their resources of friendliness, empathy and concern to reach their respondents on a personal level (Stacey, 1988: 22). However according to Cotterill (1992: 597) this can have a potentially damaging effect as such a technique unethically 'encourages friendship in order to focus on very private and personal aspects of people's lives'. Furthermore, Acker et al (1996: 141) have gone a step further by arguing that, 'given that the power differences between the researcher and researched cannot be completely eliminated, attempting to create a more equal relationship can paradoxically become exploitation and use'. With this in mind the question now becomes, did Shostak encourage a 'friendship' with Nisa in order to gain more detailed insight into the life of a !Kung woman?. By reviewing the text it would seem that this was not the case. Shostak did not attempt to foster a 'friendship-like' relationship with Nisa, or indeed with any of her respondents. She did not talk about herself, and her life back at home, nor did Nisa ever ask about either, <quote>'Although there were moving moments for both of us - an extension, so it seemed, of the intensity of our conversations.. I did not become Nisa's "best friend", nor did she become mine. She rarely asked much about me, nor did she seem particularly interested in my life' (Shostak, 1990: 42).</quote>What this shows us is that Shostak did have a bond with Nisa which seemed to overcome ethical barriers which some researchers undoubtedly face. Indeed, one may go as far to argue that Nisa and the !Kung tribe in fact maintained a significant level of power throughout her interviews, despite the view that ethical research is not possible between western researchers and third world women (Patai, 1991). Shostak (1990: 28) refers repeatedly throughout her account of the tobacco which she and her husband would hand out to the community in return for their research help. She states that, 'the !Kung demanded a relationship on their terms, not ours.. eventually we accepted'. Whilst of course one must acknowledge that this 'business exchange' of monetary goods for interviews is in itself a form of power inequality, it would seem for the most part that both the researcher and the researched accepted this as 'one of the rules of the game' (Shostak, 1990: 39). The active power which Nisa seemed to command in her interviews with Shostak is not surprising to some academics. Kondo (1986: 80) disputes Patai's (1991) view by arguing that her respondents tended on the whole to 'affirm their power over her, the researcher'. Certainly her ideas can be likened to Nisa, who would often end her talks with Shostak by simply declaring, <quote>'That is finished, is it not. Let's talk about another now.. the wind has taken that away. I'll tell you another now. I'll break open the story and tell you what is there. Then, like the others that have fallen out onto the sand, I will finish with it, and the wind will take it away' (Nisa cited in Shostak, 1990: 40). </quote>Whilst the fact that Nisa was that much older than Shostak, and as a result the years may have had added to her confidence, the idea that it is the research respondents who hold the power to direct and contour the researcher and the research encounter is a significant element of in depth research and must not be forgotten (Kirsch, 2005). In fact Shostak (1990: 356) herself states that, <quote>'Whilst I explained that I hoped we would review everything that had happened to her, for the next hour, she talked about lovers, mostly of the past. No matter how I tried to lead to discussion elsewhere, I met with little success'. </quote>Thus it would seem by using a 'speaker-centred approach' (Patai, 1988 cited in Wolf, 1996: 25) Shostak gave Nisa the ability to identify and examine issues which were important to her as opposed to those which the she as the researcher may have been more interested in. With this is mind one can argue that the role of a researcher requires not only a respect for her respondents but also acknowledgment of their feelings. It must be remembered that even though the issues that participant's may wish to discuss may be alien or indeed may seem insignificant, attempts must be made to listen, interact and record them in a professional manner. It is only with this consideration that inroads can be made into advancing academic understanding of feminist investigations. <heading>Final Thoughts </heading><quote>'After you leave, I will continue to live. I will see things around me and think about them, as you've asked me to do. When I see something interesting, I'll say, 'Eh, this is something Marjorie and I have talked about. Its very heart is here. Now, there is more about this to tell here. 'I will remember it and carry it around with me. When I see something else, I'll carry that, too. I'll carry all the things I have yet to see, and when you come back, I'll give them to you' (Nisa cited in Shostak, 1990: 41). </quote>From reading Shostak's text it becomes apparent that it was as much about her personal journey as an anthropologist, as it was about documenting the life and words of Nisa. What can be enjoyed is an honest account of her fieldwork experience, in which she openly discusses both the high and lows of her time living amongst the !Kung community. Her descriptions are engaging and thoughtful in which she constantly examines who has gained the most from her research. Her research design seems hard to fault, and the in depth interviews she conducted do successfully transmit Nisa's words and her lived reality without little intervention from her as the researcher. Perhaps the success of Shostak's text is rooted in her apparent respect for Nisa. She continually makes references throughout the chapters to 'Nisa story'. Certainly she states in the epilogue, 'whilst it was my work, certainly, and she has given what could be called informed consent to it; it was her story' (Shostak, 1990: 351). In addition, it is poignant that Nisa herself chose the name Nisa as her pseudonym for publication and indeed purchased animals with the book royalties she was given. Such was the bond between researcher and the researched; it continued long after Shostak left Africa and perhaps continues to this day despite Shostak's death. Finally it would not seem unfair to argue that whilst the impact Shostak may have made on Nisa's life, although positive, was on the whole fairly minimal, what Shostak took away with her was far greater. Her text presented the story of a women who she viewed as a 'distant sister' and whose way of life coloured and changed the face of women's studies in the western world. 