The extracts from the poems Binsey Poplars by Gerard Manley Hopkins, and The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock by T. S. Eliot share a common theme which is that of cities. In the case of the poem Binsey Poplars, the city of Oxford. Whilst Hopkins 'laments the felling of poplars in the village of Binsey outside Oxford' (Spiro, handout), T. S. Eliot visualises a situation in an unknown city where fog dashes around the houses like a cat. In addition to the common elements of a rather negative description of a city and its happenings, both extracts from the much longer poems have some stylistic features in common, but at the same time are different in some instances of their use of sounds, words, figurative language, sentence structure and shapes and patterns. The extract from Binsey Poplars consists of one stanza, written in the indicative and simple past as well as present perfect, which is comprised of eight lines following an irregular rhyme scheme - a b a c d a c c - with several internal rhymes between the words quelled and felled, dandled and sandaled, and the half rhyme between shadow and meadow. Furthermore, the poem consists of iambic and trochaic feet, but there is no clear stress pattern which structures the whole poem. The alliteration of the initial sounds such as [kw] in quelled and quenched, the lateral [l] in leaves and leaping, the fricatives [f] in felled, following and folded and [s] in sandalled, swam and sank and the approximant [w] in wind-wandering weed-winding as well as the assonance in leaves and leaping and in followed and folded show that the poem is characterised by its outstanding use of alliteration and assonance. The choice of these sounds has an effect on the poem, since the fricatives are linked with 'friction, hissing [and] scratching' (Carter, 2001, p54), which supports the ire of the poet as he sees the felled trees as well as the approximant [w] which can be regarded as a 'continuous [flowing] sound' (Carter, 2001, p54), representing the wind and the water mentioned at the end of the poem. Hopkins's choice of words is based upon frequent alliteration and also upon his repetition of words such as quelled, felled and all. He even uses a repetition of a whole sentence pattern in line three and line five, giving the reader the feeling of an outcry and exclamatory emphasis. The change of semantics of the word wind in line eight is remarkable. Hopkins alters the word by adding  - ing to it when it occurs for a second time. Therefore the meaning, although the word winding reminds one strongly of the word wind, becomes different. An unusual word collocation can be found among line six and seven where Hopkins used an enjambment between the words sandalled and shadow. Whereas sandalled is normally linked with shoes and therefore with a person, it is now connected with shadow. In this, together with the use of dear in relation to my aspens, the poem shows an personification of nature and a metaphorical language. Hopkins's metaphorical language is complemented by antonyms such as swam and sank or fresh and felled - pairs which interestingly consist of the same fricative sounds. This reveals how well structured and how elaborate the poem Binsey Poplars is, although it only consists of two complex sentences. The fragment of The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock is composed of one stanza, written in the imperative, simple present, present continuous and simple past, offering a rather mystical view of an unknown city. The extract from the poem consists of eight lines in which only line six and line eight rhyme with each other. Metrically, only line one and two, due to their parallel structure, are equal, whereas the following lines have no continuous stress pattern. Alliteration can be found for the fricative sounds [f] in falls from, [s] in soot, slipped, sudden, seeing and soft as well as [รฐ] in the and that and in the lateral [l] at the beginning of line three, four and five. As mentioned before, fricatives are regarded to cause 'friction' (Carter, 2001, p54), which the fog and smoke actually do in line one and two by rubbing their backs or muzzles against the window-panes. In addition to alliteration Eliot uses assonance in words such as leap and  asleep. Eliot's choice of words is characterised by the repetition of words such as back, upon and the different forms of the verb to fall. This repetition of individual words is complemented by the method of parallelism used in line one and two. According to Short (1996, p14), the 'interesting [thing] about parallel structures, in addition to their perceptual prominence, is that they invite the reader to search for meaning connections between the parallel structures, in particular in terms of parts which are varied.' By analysing the first two lines of this poem with regard to this statement, one recognises that they are the only ones written in the simple present with a simple sentence structure and that within these lines only the nouns fog and back differ from smoke and muzzle. The very same words, together with several other words in this poem such as the combination of the words fog or smoke with rubs and tongue or the phrase corner of the evening, offer unusual collocations. Fog has no back, and smoke has no muzzle or tongue and neither of them can rub against window-panes. Eliot's choice of such central nouns in the poem offers, along with his remarkable selection of verbs such as curled, licked or seeing, a second dimension to the poem. Throughout the poem the reader has the feeling that the fog and smoke are behaving in the manner of a cat. This is extremely metaphorical language, where one cannot be sure if 'the fog has turned into a cat, or [if] the cat has turned into the fog' (Spiro, 2004, p63), which makes use of the method of personification, or perhaps "animalisation" in this case. The word corner is normally used in conjunction with a building, shape, room or road and not, as the poem uses it, in the unusual collocation the corner of the evening, with a specific part of the day. Even the colour yellow which is normally seen as positive and can be connected with flowers or the sun, is attached to negative words such as fog and smoke. With this change to the usual semantics and Eliot's playfulness with words in general, he emphasises the extraordinary events in this unknown city, where the cat seems to symbolise something positive in contrast to the rather negative fog and smoke. By comparing both poems to each other, one has to recognise that, although they are from different authors and were written at a different time, they are quite similar. Both poets make an extensive use of alliteration, assonance, metaphors and repetition, and share an extraordinary point of view of a city. Whereas Hopkins laments the deforestation of trees near Oxford, T. S. Eliot let us experience a city through the eyes of smoke, fog and a cat. Beside these similarities, each poem has its special features. Binsey Poplars has enjambments, internal rhymes and antonyms while The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock offers a parallelism and an extraordinary use of verbs. 