Modernist literature had been developing for some time when the Great War began in 1914. It took a fresh outlook on the world and embraced change, its characteristics include a rejection of religion, an appreciation of science and psychoanalysis, a recognition of the inconsistencies and incoherencies in life and new writing styles and structures. It has been debated whether the war actually initiated the beginning of true modernism, but the war certainly contributed to its development. It offered a new angle for modernism, providing an insight into the depths of depravity to which humanity could sink - killing on a massive and brutal scale. It seems important that the Great War is presented in an unforgettable way, and yet such depravity is seemingly unrepresentable. Language is formed through relating something to experiences we already know, but the Great War seemed to be incomparable. For some, it took a long time to be able to write directly about it, but writers felt a duty to document the event, to eliminate the euphemisms and clichés (Daniel Lea 2004) and to find a way to represent the unrepresentable. Poets and novelists attempted to achieve this seemingly impossible goal in various ways, but this essay attempts to show the basic underlying similarities used in both. Siegfried Sassoon famously denounced the continuation of war. His poetry attacked the people that were responsible for its prolongation and those who didn't want to hear or accept its true ghastliness. He used satire to present an experience he may have found too painful to write about otherwise.  The General is a typical poem of Sassoon's, combining jovial, colloquial language with the grim reality of death. The final line 'But he did for them both by his plan of attack' puts the blame on those responsible for sending young men into apparently senseless battle. A similar up-beat rhyming scheme (a,b,a,b) is used in both The General and Suicide in the Trenches use, working as an ironic contrast to their content. The latter poemuses shock tactics rather than satire. 'He put a bullet through his brain, no one spoke of him again' is an effective way of shocking the reader into realising the brutality of war. Once again Sassoon uses the final lines to attack his readers, 'You smug-faced crowds', provoking them into accepting their role in the war, cheering the soldiers on to death. The unrepresentable is made more comprehensible by Sassoon and others in different forms of literature, such as R.C.Sherriff, the playwright in Journeys End, by the use of colloquialisms. Sassoon slips these into his poems to highlight how out of touch those in power are with the reality of the common soldier: 'the jolly old rain' appears in Counter-Attack, following a harrowing description of men fighting on a bed of corpses. Clichés are used to good effect too, exampled in his poem Survivors. The first line 'No doubt they'll soon get well' contrasts the false hope of supporters of the war with the real fate of the soldiers. The flippant remark 'Of course they're longing to go out again' shows how those at home were disassociated with the reality of war ( URL  2004). Sassoon ridicules them, using the words 'glorious war' alongside descriptions of haunting nightmares. He ends the poem on a similar note to Suicide in the Trenches, forcing his readers to take responsibility for the soldiers' pain with his concluding line 'with eyes that hate you'. Bernard Bergonzi in Heroes' Twilight claims that Sassoon is limited in his style, employing a 'hard, clear, sharply defined' language, rather than something more suggestive (1965 p105). But Sassoon's strategy for representing the unrepresentable is a style particular to him and he is capable of painting a vivid picture of war and the feelings of soldiers in passages such as this from Counter-Attack: <quote>'He crouched and flinched, dizzy with galloping fear,  Sick for escape, loathing the strangled horror  And butchered, frantic gestures of the dead' </quote>The diverse recording of the Great War means that it is important to look at different writers in order to get an overall picture. Sassoon befriended the poet Wilfred Owen, who chose to present the war from another angle. Claiming that 'Above all I am not concerned with poetry... My subject is war and the pity of war' (Bernard Bergonzi 1965 p124), he sought to present the sufferings of war in such a way that they would never be forgotten and thus serve as a warning to future generations. Owen represented the unrepresentable by absorbing himself in the emotions of war, and from this his poetic style developed. In such poems as Strange Meeting he uses assonant endings (Dominic Hibberd 1981 p61): 'Now men will go content with what we spoiled. Or discontent, boil bloody, and be spilled' to give an oppressive quality which enhances the emotion the poem contains. One of his most effective poems Disabled uses a simple a,b,a,b rhyme scheme and presents the situation of a soldier returning as an amputee. Like Sassoon, he uses the poem to show the difficulty that people at home had in accepting what happened in the trenches, the cheerful rhyme scheme perhaps implying the falsity of their welcome. Neither the rhyme scheme nor the people accept the reality that the poem really portrays and it is those at home who are as much 'disabled' as the wounded men they greet (Daniel Lea 2004). Owen uses irony to portray the needlessness of such loss, implied in the line 'before he threw away his knees'. The irony continues as the soldier remembers how he enlisted after a football match, flattered by girls telling him he would look like a 'god in kilts'. Now he feels bitter that they will only look at him in a maternal manner. He is emasculated, knowing women will now be the ones to put him to bed whilst before the war he could have expected to take them to bed ( URL  2004). When he says that blood 'spurted from his thigh' he parodies sexual ejaculation, but the irony is in the fact that this equals a loss of life rather than the creation of one. Owen employs a subtle yet interesting use of colour. Things are 'dark' and 'grey' and his subject sits in the 'shade', implying that there will no longer be any colour in his life. Indeed, Owen writes 'He's lost his colour very far from here', showing that the war sucked his life out of him. Erich Maria Remarque's book All Quiet on the Western Front, like much of Owen's work, has been described as an anti-war document (Christine R. Barker and R.W.Last 1979, p38). Unforgettable for many of its readers, it highlights the main, disturbing elements of war. Death encompasses everything, causing fear of the future and alienation from the past. The importance of endurance and friendship is emphasised, along with animalistic behaviour and the horror of the fact that the war was begun and continued by a supposedly compassionate human race. Everything that is written in the book is recorded for a reason, and it goes a long way to representing the unrepresentable. Remarque implies that the point at which we stop being human is reached when we lose our autonomy (Daniel Lea 2004). As soldiers have no control over their lives they resort to animalistic behaviour in an attempt to survive. The soldier's priorities change, as they become obsessed with food - fighting over it, hoarding it and gorging on it. Close attention is paid to bowel activity; a healthy digestive system is vital to survival and soldiers cling to anything that resembles a routine, whether it be their meal times or bowel movements. These accounts met some criticism when it was first published (1979 p36), but theywere necessary in order to give a vivid and truthful account of war, showing just how far the soldiers are forced to strip back to basics. The inability of soldiers to readjust to an apparently meaningless world is a difficult idea to portray. Remarque does it by exploring the way soldiers lose sense of their own humanity, no longer able to connect the present to their past. Christine R.Barker and R.W.Last (1979 p54) explain how the author displays this when the soldiers joke about their education and its irrelevance to their lives in battle, asking questions that used to seem important, such as 'How many inhabitants has Melbourne?' (p82). Once the soldiers enter the army their priorities have to change as they realise that there is no longer a meaningful distinction between good and bad. Good people are unjustly killed and existence is always due to chance (1979 p57). When Baumer stabs Duval the reader knows that it is not something he would do in normal circumstances, but it is simply his animal instinct taking hold to ensure survival. Baumer makes promises to the dying soldier that he will never be able to fulfil, as Remarque portrays the agony Baumer goes through in coming to terms with the 'person' he has become, War literature stresses the importance of friendship and camaraderie, and All Quiet on the Western Front is no different. Many soldiers, like Baumer, found they could no longer relate to the family and friends at home who couldn't understand the trauma that they had been through. They became each others mothers and lovers because fellow soldiers were the only ones who understood. A soldier particularly special to Baumer is Kat. He represents safety and warmth, 'Kat stands before me, his giant shadow bent over me like home' (p91). Friends were needed as a distraction from distressing thoughts and Remarque cleverly exhibits this when Baumer becomes trapped in a shell hole with a man he has just stabbed. The longer Baumer is there with the dying man, the more desperate he becomes as he is forced to be alone with his thoughts 'But every gasp strips my heart bare. The dying man is the master of these hours, he has an invisible dagger to stab me with: the dagger of time and my own thoughts' (p156). When he is reunited with his friends he is comforted, 'feeling better because of their presence' (p161). Friendship could work as a distraction for the soldiers, aiding them in the repression of their troubled memories. This is a theme that often occurs in war literature, and it is represented in a variety of ways. In Pat Barker's Regeneration patients are shown to repress their fears and opinions thorugh physical defects, such as mutism and paralysis, and in Rebecca West's Return of the Soldier there is a complex theme of repression, most obvious in the soldier wholoses his memory - erasing recollection of the horrific war. Representing the imminence of death can only be achieved by bringing the reader face to face with it. Remarque surrounds his characters with death as they live with it day by day, even hiding in the graves of dead soldiers to avoid death themselves. Friendship becomes the symbol of life for Baumer, but as his friends die one by one, life slips away. Remarque tracks the path of death with a pair of boots - as they are passed on to each soldier we know that they are doomed (1979 p51). The penultimate death comes with Kat, coinciding with the death of Baumer's mother. To the perceptive reader this signals the end for him, with no future any longer in war or at home. Once a soldier realises the universal futility of war he can no longer have a meaningful future. The episode with Duval points to an end for Baumer as it gives a face to the opposition. Infrequent in war literature, it is insightful as it shows a soldier being forced to come to terms with the fact that he is not just fighting against death, but another human being. It obliges him to consider the consequences of the atrocities he is forced to commit. The style of language Remarque employs is deliberate, and the ending's impact is increased by the use of the present tense and staccato sentences. The stripping down of language reflects the limited, automatic thought process 'I stand up. I am very calm' as he becomes dissociated with his body (Daniel Lea 2004). The short sentences are interspersed with longer ones which help to highlight the words and give them a greater meaning. It might appear that All Quiet on the Western Front has no purposeful plot, yet Remarque has employed many of the elements of modernist writing to good effect. As well as the fragmentary style he uses anger, and a sense of being lost after the inevitable rejection of religion. The idea of events building to a climax in the mind reflect the psychoanalytical ideas that were emerging and the animalistic references could elude to Darwin's recent'survival of the fittest' thesis. Like Dr Rivers in Pat Barker's Regeneration, Remarque believes that it is not always one horrific event that pushes a soldier over the edge, but a series of incidents that build to a climax in the mind. Happy and tragic episodes are alternated with increasing intensity (1979 p80) and the contrasts enhance the power of each scene. Emotions become more fraught and as each chapter ends with either a departure or return the story builds up to Baumer's ultimate departure - death. Events, such as moving up and down the line, are repeated throughout the story to give a sense of the treadmill of war which wears the soldiers down (1979 p61). Alienation is enhanced by a growing sense of 'them' and 'us', as the soldiers feel that those running the war don't care about what happens to them. This is personified in the scenes with Himmelstoss, who deliberately makes their lives a misery. This can also be seen in work such as Sassoon's, as he too is bitter towards the authorities that continue the war. Their revenge on Himmelstoss is a form of revenge against the invisible powers that force them to fight a war they no longer believe in. War is truly a physical experience. It impacts on all the senses - sight, smell and touch - and if it seems too much for the reader to take in, we must imagine what it was like for the people that actually experienced it. Poets and novelists like Sassoon and Remarque uses an array of tactics to hammer home their unrepresentable message. Colloquialism, cliché, irony and shock all play their part. As a novelist, Remarque mixes documentary and autobiographical styles (Daniel Lea 2004), giving his book a sense of authenticity and empathy for the lead character. Its autobiographical quality is a clever trick because although the events in the book point towards Baumer's death, the reader is led to believe he may have a future beyond the war. The shock we feel when he dies is the greater because of this and gives us a sense of what Baumer must have felt every time he lost a friend, all contributing to Remarque's way of representing the unrepresentable. The ambiguity of Baumer's death shows that it could have been any soldier, increasing the universality of his experience. It represents an ambiguity for the future as well as for the identity of all soldiers (Daniel Lea 2004). The title All Quiet on the Western Front also represents the insignificance of just one death in war. Although we cannot assume that the war was the same for everybody, the war poets like Sassoon and Owen and novelists like Remarque lead us to understand that death is the ultimate unrepresentable experience that everybody has to experience, and we must ultimately have to face it alone. 