Henrik Ibsen wrote the play 'Ghosts' in the middle of the Victorian era in 1881. He was at the forefront of the modernist movement, directing a revolution in writing. For this reason, Ghosts contains many of the main elements of modernism, which can be identified in this extract. The play was designed to shock the audience/reader and make them reconsider society's rules and values. Indeed, the extract begins with Pastor Manders praising the "illusion" that Mrs Alving has created of an ideal, respectable family. This immediately provides us with the modernist idea that the appearance of the perfect Victorian life might not be everything it seems. Ibsen believed in asking questions to break down boundaries, and this is what Mrs Alving does by suggesting that she should tell the truth about the family's secret, no matter how dire it sounds. She goes on to shock Manders by alluding to the idea of condoning an incestuous relationship, and claims that it certainly wouldn't be "unheard-of". As well as questioning the sanctity of marriage, she defends free love and proposes that a woman has the right to leave her husband. She even questions God, by pointing out that, according to religion, we all descended from incestuous-like relationships. Her criticisms of religion are enhanced by the revelation that she and Manders almost entered into a clandestine affair. Mrs Alving has the idea that we are all haunted by 'ghosts' lodged in our minds, which determine the way we feel and the decisions we make. These ghosts come in many forms - not just our parents, but old theories, events in history and society's moral codes. She is afraid that they restrict her from doing what is right and that they have or could damage the people she cares about. All of these ideas reflect the modernist way of thinking. Society was entering into a period of ontological insecurity, questioning who and where we are. The authority of science was growing and people had problems in deciding what to believe. Karl Marx's Communist manifesto had created a sense of unease with the idea that nothing is stead-fast and certain. They suggested that religion 'drugged' people, and blinded them from the truth. Mrs Alving certainly felt this way, as she claims that Manders' apparent victory over himself when he resisted going against God and acting out his true feelings for her wasn't a good thing, and only worked to hurt them. She said it was a "crime against us both". The fact that she dismisses much of what the pastor says reflects the gradual dismissal of religion in society at the time. Mrs Alving just wants people to be happy, but at the same time believes that things shouldn't be hidden in secrets. Her suggestion of incest reflects the modernist revelation that feelings aren't always as straight-forward as the Victorians would like them to be, and the pastor's predicament shows that no one can escape from this, no matter how 'holy' they are. Like Mrs Alving, the modernists thought a lot about the way history determines our lives, especially our parents. In Ghosts, Captain Alving is a hidden character from the past, yet he dictates almost everything that happens to his family in the future. They felt we needed to break free from our ancestor's boundaries, as well as society's. For them, the focus was on the individual, and there was the feeling that we should create our own moral codes and beliefs. It seems that Oswald may not have just inherited the mistakes of his father, but hereditary syphilis too. To allude to sexually transmitted diseases would have been very shocking at that time. Not only would it have had a profound effect on the audience, but it contributes to the theme of things going rotten in the play, destroying the family and contradicting values. There was a great deal of rebellion and anger felt in the modernist period, and we get a sense of this in the extract. Mrs Alving is angry with herself for being afraid of the 'ghosts', and with the fact that she is forced into sacrificing her feelings gor the sake of "duty" and "obligations". The extract briefly implies that some change in thought has begun, as Manders refers to some books that Mrs Alving has been reading which he has previously described as "disgusting, free-thinking pamphlets". He thinks that these have generated her modern insights into society, and spoilt her respectability. Mrs Alving does admit that they help her to think more confidently, but claims that it is her own experiences that have made her look at life differently. Mrs Alving is a modern character in that she is a strong, determined woman who isn't afraid to stand up for what she believes in. She is willing to sacrifice her respectability and place in society for the sake of the truth. It is likely that she is meant to represent the beginnings of modernism. You can tell that it is just emerging, as she is still held back by Victorian concepts. She is trying to live up to the Victorian values that she has grown up with, so in many ways she remains constrained in her thinking. She claims that she is a coward because she is scared of the 'ghosts' that surround her, and wishes that she could break free from them. If Mrs Alving represents modernism, then Pastor Manders is the voice of Victorian values. He tries to uphold his faith and is loyal to tradition. He attempts to distance himself from Mrs Alving's radical ideas by claiming "I simply don't understand you", but with persuasion he does admit that family life isn't always "as pure as it ought to be". This possibly reflects the faltering in religious belief. The fact that in this instance it is a woman, who's educating a man, shows another modernist shift in society, with a reversal in gender roles. Many of these elements are followed through in the use of language. The way in which they address each other with their titles demonstrates the remaining Victorian formality in their relationship. It is a furtive conversation, showing that the subject matter is sensitive and shocking. Manders uses the language of a pastor to enforce his role, identified in; "do there we see the fruits of your reading. And a nice harvest it is". When he stutters he shows the shock that the people of Victorian society would have felt. Mrs Alving often sounds quite wry and cynical, typically modern. For example, when Manders talks of his "victory" over his feelings, she likens it more to a "pitiful defeat". The fact that Manders sees the situation in this light just goes to show how deeply lodged the 'ghosts' are in his mind. These details fulfil Ibsen's desire to employ language that is natural to the characters, with obvious distinctions between them. He wanted to create a play that makes the audience feel as though they are eavesdropping on something from real life. As well as these techniques, Ibsen gives Mrs Alving the use of metaphors, such as "ghosts" and describes the "fabric" of Manders' beliefs as simply being "tacked" together. By doing this, Ibsen perhaps puts her on a higher plain to the other characters, showing that she has a special message to deliver. Metaphors also contribute to the modernist ideas of ambiguity and double-meaning, as Freud casts doubt in people's minds by claiming that the "possibility always remains that the dream may yet have another meaning". These double-meanings are important to Ibsen as he says that life is full of symbolism, so he therefore wants his plays to be full of it. The main symbol in Ghosts is the ghosts themselves. As Mrs Alving says, they represent the influence of family and old ideas. The dark and misty place in which the play is set portrays a hiding place for these ghosts, so that they can linger on in the characters, "abysmally afraid of the light". The stage description is important to the play, as the doors and windows are influential, creating varying senses of entrapment. The heavy mists pressing against the house symbolise the pressures of society closing in. Despite the strict insistence on the stage settings, there are few stage directions, especially in this extract. This suggests that the words of the play are more important than the actions. This could well be true as Ibsen may not have wanted to distract the audience from the message he was trying to put across. After the popularity of his play 'Doll's House', Ghosts was greatly anticipated by the public, so he may well have seen it as an opportunity to shake up Victorian society. He had little faith in the resources of the theatre, so it is likely that Ghosts was written as much for the reader as the audience. Skills of drama are employed in Ghosts, especially in the way intrigue and suspense is built up. This is noticeable in this extract as the tale begins to fully unfold, as Mrs Alving makes her speech and the relationship between them is finally revealed. Manders especially, jumps around the subjects, alluding to his feelings as "the hardest struggle of my life". There is often a moment of realisation in modern texts, and Ghosts is no exception. In this case, it is Mrs Alving's explanation of her fear that supplies the epiphany, and it provides the main theme to the story - the idea that we are all haunted by 'ghosts'. Another feature of modern texts is the refusal to keep to the linear. This extract refers to moments from the past, present and future, contributing to the mixed up feelings of the characters and adding to the uneasiness in the play. This is also highlighted in the large number of questions asked in this extract, as it shows how uncomfortable they are with the new ideas and revelations. It is difficult to ascertain the genre of Ghosts. I think that if anything, it is a tragedy, as it does contain a character that experiences a downfall due to a fault in their nature. However, this is not exclusive to just one person. They all experience downfalls in one way or another, and this isn't just due to personal faults, but those inherited from the ghosts that Mrs Alving speaks of. Perhaps modernist tragedy is meant to be more passive and ambiguous, highlighting the fact that everything isn't always straight forward and that things can happen to people through no obvious fault of their own. Reading this extract is very useful in the search to identify themes of modernism, as it contains so many of its typical elements. We see criticisms of religion, family, history, ancestors, and even society as a whole. Despite the fact that we can still recognise some of the fundamentals of Victorian writing, this play would have been revolutionary at the time, and it marks the starting point for a whole new phase in literature. 