For this essay I have chosen to examine the representation of women in modernist texts. There is conflict over the idea of how much a part women played in the modernist movemement. Some people have considered women to be marginalised in modernism, claiming that they had little influence over literature of the time, and pointing out that very few modernist female writers are remembered compared to the many male authors. They argue that male writing excluded the thoughts of women and continued with the phallogentrism that was typical of the nineteenth century. However, this idea has been countered with the argument that women were actually the cause of modernism. The early twentieth century witnessed great legal, educational and economic changes for females, along with a higher visibility of women in public life, especially in the cities. This was considered to be the cause of a new icon - the 'new woman'. This was a self-defined woman, who was autonomous and so no longer reliant on the support of men. Previous to this, women had mostly been excluded from literary culture. Their attempt to express themselves appropriated a modernist innovation, providing the voice that modernism had been looking for. The disagreement over their influence is reflected in modernist writings, especially in the way in which they are represented. I shall examine this through a selection of texts. Henrick Ibsen reflects many of the changes that were occurring in the world of women in his play 'Ghosts'. The leading character, Mrs Alving, typically occupies the private sphere in her secluded home in a small town in Norway. She is desperate to live up to Victorian ideals by keeping her son and husband happy, and presenting the image of a perfect, stable family life to the public. These elements of the character show the influence of nineteenth century ideas on the role of women. Within the play there are references to doors and windows and heavy mists pressing against the house. This represents the pressures of public morality and expectations influencing and restricting Mrs Alving. However, this is contradicted as she takes on the role of the 'new woman'. She demonstrates strength and independence as she takes control of the events that have previously shaped her son's life, as well as her own. By revealing the truth she takes on an innovative and unfeminine role, contradicting the idea of women as meek and fearful. This character also introduces other modernist ideas about women. It represents women as the central figure in the home, as opposed to the husband. It develops the idea of women as sexual beings within themselves through the relationship between Mrs Alving and the pastor, as she attempts to justify their feelings for each other, resolutely claiming that to keep them a secret was a "crime against us both". There is also mention of new, possibly modernist writings that she enjoys reading. These contain revolutionary ideas about society and spirituality, and it is interesting to see a woman taking these in and advocating them. Joseph Conrad presents subtle yet important ideas about the role of women in his novel 'Heart of darkness'. At first glance, Conrad appears to consider the role of women as unimportant, as they are barely mentioned in the story. However, a closer, perhaps feminist reading of the text may consider that it shows women to symbolise and indeed, maintain civilisation. As they are not present in the jungle to regulate behaviour, the rampant masculinity leads to inevitable chaos. The obvious difference between the two key women in the play represents the duality of womanhood at the time. Kurz's black mistress could represent the heart of the jungle, a primal, passionate figure that is an intrinsic part of nature. She is described as "savage and superb, wild-eyed and magnificent; there was something ominous and stately in her deliberate progress". This woman is referred to as 'she', which could be a refernce to 'she - the one who must be obeyed', creating an idea that women are all-important. Her opposite, Kurz's wife, is white and spiritualised, intent on maintaining the 'ideal' of her husband even after death, "who was not his friend who had heard him speak once?". She portrays the old Victorian image of femininity and a deep spirituality, "the sound of her low voice seemed to have the accompaniment of all other sounds, full of mystery, desolation and sorrow", whilst the mistress shows a new aspect. The female characters are not given names which gives the impression of them being strictly in the background and unimportant to the men, but it is interesting to note that it is a woman who puts the whole story in motion as Marlow's aunt is the person to recommend him for the trip. This story could be interpreted as representing the conflicting thoughts about women at the time, as their importance in society begins to be considered and acknowledged. D.H. Lawrence felt that it was important for the novel to always be tackling new propositions and evoking fresh feelings. He was intrigued by the human subconscious and the primal instincts of possession and killing. He also had specific views on sexuality and women, on how they should dress and conduct themselves. His novella, 'The Fox' explores the thinking of two females, as he wishes to understand the workings of their minds. He presents the idea of two women living alone together as unusual. They intend to run a poultry farm together but it is altogether unsuccessful and he implies that this is because a man is not there to help them. This could possibly be a criticism of lesbianism as he insinuates that that type of relationship has no possibility of working out. His female characters do not appear to have a great deal of strength, despite their determination. Banford is physically weak and her jealousy and manipulative tendencies only work against her and make her seem like a stereotypically petty female. Although March is described as being "the man about the place" and "more robust", she still cannot kill the fox and easily falls prey to Henry's charms. The way in which she cannot control herself emotionally when it comes to desire and the need to be with a man portrays women as emotionally weak and dependant on men. D.H Lawrence is insistent that a woman looks at her most femine when she is in a dress, even though a shirt tucked into trousers would show off the female form most effectively. By making March change costume he implies that she has succumbed to the requirements of man. The women in the novella stick to the typical orientations, as they are mostly associated with being indoors in the domestic area, whilst Henry spends most of his time outside. D.H. Lawrence recognised the liberation of women and felt that it had been fully achieved. He also felt that it was beginning to be taken too far and claimed that they would soon hold tyranny over men. Perhaps by writing the 'The Fox' he is trying to show that the ultimate primary relationship should be between a man and a woman, and that any other type of relationship is unnatural and impossible to maintain. These three texts demonstrate the ways in which women were beginning to be understood during the modernist period. Whether or not they were the sole voice of modernism is debatable, but they prove that there was a new awareness of women and the roles that they play which influenced female representation in writing. 