Graphologically it appears that the passage is a poem as it takes the form of one unrhymed stanza. Amalgamating assorted structural principles without establishing a single consistent pattern suggests that it is free verse as it lacks metrical, syllabic and rhythmic regularity. Phonologically, declarative syntactic structures create a colloquial, prosaic tone that is forfeited by using the past tense and enumerated instances of reported speech. Repeatedly using the third person singular pronoun 'he,'(l.1) produces both ambivalence and distance, as we never discover who 'he' is. This barrier is sustained through problematic reporting clauses such as 'this man said,'(l.11) as the demonstrative article 'this,' generates a sense of specificity that is instantly eroded by the ambiguity of referring to him only as 'man.' Speculation regarding the nature of 'his' character, history and actions therefore becomes unavoidable. The visual image; 'All bent their heads,'(l.22) implies a sense of loss and mourning that suggests the occurrence of a death. Predominantly monosyllabic words in the final three lines reinforce this by creating a slow, sombre pace. Allusions to 'Carthage'(l.13) and 'Genghis Kahn'(l.19) provide historical register and collocations relating to 'guns'(l.16) and 'death,'(l.21) evoke images of battles and war which may imply that 'he' is a military leader, accountable for sending others to death. Alternatively; 'he was smart with his elbows, then used his fists'(l.7), coupled with allusions to 'conquered'(l.13) and 'blood'(l.24) suggest that 'he' is a victorious guilt-ridden boxer, possibly responsible for unintentionally killing his opponent. Such culturally encoded deductions are highly dependent on the individual's contextual knowledge, but certain intimations and evocations have led me to adopt the latter interpretation in my analysis. The voice of an external narrator pervades the verse, possibly a boxing commentator, who is established as wise and astute through knowing truths such as; 'But of course there are things you can't wash off.'(l.5) This statement initiates the protagonist's seeming submergence in self-reproach by conjuring an image of Lady Macbeth's repeated hand washing in Macbeth. The metaphor; 'the ant-swarm of the transistors crawled through his ears,'(l.9-10) can be read as a figurative representation of the problematic erasure of guilt. Fricative sibilant /s/ sounds in 'transistors' generates a sinister hissing that may mirror the consistent reverberation of remorse through his mind. The accompanying blunt and harsh dental plosive /t/ sounds demonstrates the impossibility of silencing these echoes. Eliding the words 'ant-swarm' creates a compound noun that juxtaposes the diminutive and substantial properties of each word in order to depict how minor pricks of guilt can escalate. Sound symbolism creates aural interest in the absence of conventional rhyming patterns. The mimetic phoneme properties of the long vowel / /sound in 'crawled,' aurally and visually enacts the ability of shame and horror to creep relentlessly through the mind. <fnote>Having blood on one's hands is a traditional indicator of guilt, but the image of Lady Macbeth is dependent on the reader's inter-textual knowledge and may not be open to all. In the play's final act, she is overcome by remorse regarding her role in King Duncan's murder, descending into a state of frenzied paranoia unable to forget her crime, stating; 'What will these hands ne'er be clean.' (V.1, 42 p.125) Her words ironically mock her previous certainty that 'a little water clears us of this deed.' (II.2, 68, p.77) and indirectly echo the narrator's words in poem. </fnote>Personifying the air by imbuing it with sight in; 'the seeing air was stunned'(l.9) engenders a palpable aura of paranoia. Depicting a boundless, ubiquitous force continually watching him conveys a sense of inescapability from his actions, making the weight of culpability an oppressive and ominous force. The stative verb 'stunned' effectively utilizes the past tense to underline the irreversibility of what has happened as it lacks potential for change. It simultaneously implies something far more dramatic than the loss of 'a little blood,'(l.11) fortifying the insinuations of inadvertent death that permeate the poem. The pre-modifying adjective 'little' hedges the usual violent properties associated with 'blood' making his reversion to continually repeating; 'a little blood' a method of soothing his conscience by down playing what 'he' has done, an effect fortified by the vague and colloquial properties of; 'more or less.'(l.1) Alliterative consonance and repetition in; 'strong, so strong'(l.2) augments his vigour, but unexpectedly juxtaposing it against the parallel opposite 'weakness'(l.3) implies a façade that intimates that he is not 'great and strong'(l.2) but vulnerable. Structural parallelism provides the poem's most arresting yet frustrating feature. A litany of progressively outrageous similes beginning; 'Clean as the,'(l.14-18,20-21) force the reader to search for the semantic connections between the divergent images depicted. The accumulation of markedly more contradictory, antithetical concepts makes the poem appear designed to confuse. This allows us a sense of shared understanding with the poem's otherwise disconnected protagonist; he too appears engulfed by bewilderment, struggling like the reader to comprehend what is happening and being said. 'When he spoke he guzzled the words of others,'(l.8) becomes an abnormal paradigm suggestive of disorientation as speech is normally an outward projection. This paradox and the unexpected active verb; 'guzzled' depicts him struggling to take things in, possibly reeling from the weight of his actions trying to gain clarity and balance, making him appear overwhelmed and shocked. 'Pure as the sperm of Genghis Kahn'(l.19) interrupts the established pattern through internal lexical deviation, generating further destabilization to reinforce the thematic centrality of confusion. 'Clean as the conscience of a gun'(l.16) is a problematic, incongruous personification as guns are inextricably linked to death, something tainted not clean. De-familiarising meaning through ironic perversions of the customary affirmative associations connected to 'clean,' may be demonstrative of how an innocent sport can become deadly, destructing goodness and promise through injury and death. Half-rhyme plosive sound parallelism arising from forceful bi-labial 'p' sounds in 'spore'(l.20) and 'sperm,'(l.19) draw our attention the semantic connection between them. Both have unyielding capacity for growth, but connecting the spore to the menace of 'anthrax,'(l.20) corrupts it with infectious poisonous properties, continuing the motif of shattered potential. Placing the adjective 'unnecessary'(l.14) before 'battle'(l.14) fortifies this suggesting wasted lives, blood and energies, making the poem a possible attack on the dangers of boxing. Referring to 'tampons'(l.23) conveys how 'a little blood'(l.24) can have huge significance by alluding to the menstrual cycle, an event that like an untimely death is associated with the end of innocence. Enjambment and indentation creates a graphological space that becomes a stressed silence forcing us to pause on 'wept,'(l.25) as placing it alone makes us question why it is foregrounded. As a transitive dynamic verb it animates movement, creating a visual image of blood dripping down in a tear-like manner while possibly mirroring the boxer's opponent's fall. 'Wept'(l.25) has powerful emotive nuances that evoke a sense of overwhelming pain enabling it to act in a modal capacity as an intensifier that contradicts the preceding adjective 'little.'(l.24) Small letters begin the final two lines creating external deviation; refusing to adhere to the expected pattern reflects the abandonment of order to feeling, a compositional fragmentation that replicates the boxer's inferred emotional disintegration. Closing with an end stop provides an illusive sense of structural completion but fails to remove the reader's lingering sense of confusion as 'his' identity and action is never actually disclosed. 