I have elected to compare Linda France's poem and Agard's 'Listen Mr Oxford Don' as they display a contrast in register and code. The first is written in Standard English, whereas Agard uses colloquial spellings and language to question and challenge what is defined as Standard English. Recurrent music analogies foreground the importance of rhythm in France's poem. Amalgamating differing syllabic lengths generates an air of unpredictability and excitement that capture the poet's initially optimistic attitude towards love. The innate reverberation within fricative /z/ phonemes, echo throughout the first stanza in order to produce a highly animate impression of restlessness and exhilaration. This atmospheric buoyancy is fortified by polysyllabic neologisms such as; 'razzamatazz,'(l.3) which incorporate a deliberate novelty in order to convey her hopeful anticipation. The dynamic verb 'dazzled,'(l.2) creates the impression of a blinding gleam that illustrates how her aspirations prevent her from seeing the banal reality of love. The poem exposes the divergence between idealism and actuality by using structural parallelism to establish a familiar configuration that is suddenly disrupted by the sixth stanza. It operates through a series of metaphors where the first five stanzas follow a strict pattern; each is comprised of three lines beginning; 'If love was,' with the second line commencing 'I.' The form then disintegrates into two-lines, changing the poem's rhythm in order to mirror the poet's shift in viewpoint. This enables the reader to share her surprise and confusion as the poem, like love, refuses to conform to an established expectation. The volatility connoted to 'flame,'(l.4) suggests a craving for danger and metaphoric desire to burn with love. The verb 'melt' in the simile; 'I'd melt in its brassy flame/ like wax,'(l.4-5) conveys her yearning to submit to an overwhelming force; to become flexible and elastic like jazz, free from control and direction. Enjambment fortifies this by creating a sense of inexorable continuation. 'I'd feel its slow/ slide,'(l.11-12) utilizes the sound symbolism of alliterative repeated fricative sibilant /s/ sounds and liquid /l/'s to create an impression of surrender, as the tongue coils around the word in a languid, sensual manner. This reinforces the image of liquefying and succumbing to the influence of a powerful force such as love or music. Structural deviation occurs in the eighth stanza where end-stopping is suddenly employed. This creates a staccato rhythm that jars with the previous fluidity, foregrounding the change to a more cold and realistic tone and attitude; 'But love isn't jazz./ It's an organ recital.'(l.21-2) When juxtaposed against the poem's electrifying depiction of jazz, the recital appears dull and conventional. The poetic form fortifies this impression; culminating in quatrains and adopting a more traditional 'abcb' rhyme scheme can be read as demonstrative of the predictable, routine reality of love. Incorporating an additional line may be indicative of the poet's augmented wisdom but 'Eminently worthy,' drips with a cynicism that suggests they would rather revert to their previous naive optimism. 'If love was jazz,/ I'd always want more,'(l.25-6) lays bare her disillusioned abandonment of fantasist ideals, leaving the reader with an impression of jaded loneliness that stems from her apparent exclusion from the excitement and hedonism found on the; 'smoky dance-floor.'(l.28) Agard also employs differing verse lengths, but here they represent the multiplicity of English language varieties. Substituting 'I' with the stereotypically Caribbean colloquialism 'Me,' in; 'Me not no Oxford don,'(l.1) uses grammatical deviation to compose a new type of syntactic structure that accurately captures Agard's unique accent and culture. Afro-Caribbean register such as; 'de'(l.23), 'dem'(l.22) and 'ent'(l.10) when coupled with Creole dialect forces the reader adopt a different voice, as certain phonetic spellings alter pronunciation. 'mih,'(l.30) forces emphasis on the aspirate /h/ to create a breathy, drawn-out sound that elongates elocution, allowing Agard to autographically inscribe his voice in the poem. The ellipsis of certain expected prepositions such as 'to' in; 'dem want me serve time,'(l.25) enables him to realistically impart his sociolect. Manifold first person pronouns such as 'me'(l.1) and 'I,'(l.5) generate a confident, unapologetic and defiant tone that foregrounds the thematic centrality of manifesting one's identity in an authentic and unimpeded manner. Integrating Creolised idiolect and Standard English implies a sense of conflict that reflects Agard's battle to prove his language is equal and valuable. Contrastive opposites such as the contrary status of 'don'(l.1) and 'immigrant,'(l.2) uses a perceived lesser counterpart to demonstrate society's tendency to look down on non-standard forms of English. This impression is fortified by the repeated juxtaposition of 'Oxford'(l.1), (often seen as a seat of learning, language and tradition) against the multicultural, ramshackle associations connoted to 'Clapham Common.'(l.3) Allusions to violent armaments such as 'gun'(l.10) and 'knife,'(l.11) reflects the threat that many feel immigrants pose to British language and nationality. Language is essentially vulnerable; amalgamating differing rhyme schemes such as couplets and half rhymes helps capture its fluid instability. By manipulating language and making it his own, Agard is seen to violate English; 'mugging de Queen's English/ is the story of my life.'(l.12-13) But, dismantling and reconstructing language enables those outside the dominant discourse to articulate their 'story'(l.13) with credibility and authenticity. Language is depicted as an evolutionary medium. 'I don't need no hammer/ to mash up yu grammar,'(l.15-6) utilizes the active verb 'mash' to demonstrate how vital linguistic assimilation and variation is, as without change, language cannot advance. Agard attempts to prove this is something positive to embrace and not be threatened by; 'I only armed wit mih human breath.'(l.30) He needs no weapons, as language itself is more influential than violence. Being made to adopt Standard English allows Agard to identify with those who feel their language is in danger, making irony a powerful tool in the poem. The word 'armed' suggests that he too feels his language and individuality is under threat and in need of protection. 'I ent serving no jail sentence/ I slashing suffixes in self-defence,'(l.34-5) uses enjambment to highlight the importance of being able to speak in a free and unconstrained voice, suggesting that you become imprisoned when denied the ability to express yourself. The opening impression of determination and resistance that pervades the poem, is fortified by the powerful force of coupling re-current dental plosive /t/ sounds with bi-label plosive /b/ and /p/ phonemes in; 'I bashing future wit present tense.'(l.36) The proliferation of monosyllabic words in sentences such as; 'I'm a man on de run,'(l.7) drive the poem's aggressive, adamant beat by generating a pounding rhythm. Active, dynamic verbs in the concluding stanza capture the energy of his rebellion against enforced colonial discourse, while using the progressive present tense emphasizes the poem's insistence on advancement. 