The vagueness of the words "some of us" not only demands enquiry into who, specifically, is/are "trying to find identities besides the centralised "I"", but is a key indicator of the nature of postmodern texts. To expand, postmodernism usually features ambiguity of the meaning, and indeed credibility of the "I" in a text. The "I" can be the author of, characters in, or even the audience of the text, because, like with all other facets of postmodern literature, the boundaries of "I" no longer exist. The loss of traditional notions of "I", or of the subject, is one symptom of the postmodern condition. Others include the rejection of the possibility of any absolute truth, because everything is relative to time, place, and the individual. This entails the rejection of all meta-narratives - because it renders the meta-, or 'outside, absolute' position impossible. One aspect of postmodernism is the erosion of the distinction between high and low art, or culture. The above technological advances and mass consumerism have eradicated the elitism of modernist high art, making it availible to the masses. Although this seems liberatory and positive, to the critic Frederic Jameson, (on page 165 of Modernism/Postmodernism), it "is perhaps the most distressing development of all from an academic standpoint, which has traditionally had a vested interest in preserving a realm of high or elite culture against the surrounding environment of philistinism, of schlock and kitsch, of TV series and Reader's Digest culture". Another important aspect of postmodernism, which is central to idea of the self ("I"), is the 'Shrinking World Syndrome'. The internet (cyberspace), interactive television, mobile phones, world-wide companies like Ikea and MacDonalds make the world feel like a 'Global Village' - easily accessible and uniform. This mass consumerism and globalisation has a homogenising effect on the individual 'self' as everybody, from all classes, age, nationality etc., has access to every type of product. The self is lost as it plugs itself into a cyberspace node and becomes part of a hyper-reality, fantasy world where anything is possible. As Peter Brooker says on page 21/22 of his introduction to Modernism/Postmodernism, "This faceless expansion of the global market and the accompanying development of electronic media has penetrated all levels of existence, says Jameson, producing a massively coded world of relentless commodification and dramatically altered social and psychic conditions." An aspect of postmodern which really shapes the way writers create characters in their texts is "what is generally called the 'death of the subject' or, to say it in more conventional language, the end of individualism as such" (Jameson, page 167 of Modernism/Postmodernism). Jameson offers two standpoints on the death of the individual - the first, that in the old, "classic age of competitive capitalism" the subject existed, but is now extinct. The second is that the subject never actually existed, that it was yet another meta-narrative, constructed to comfort people with the idea that they "possessed this unique personal identity." Hence, postmodern writers strive to replicate the post-modern mind in their characters; a real, human mind which must be baffled by the complexity of this postmodern age but, according to theorists, has no individuality. In The Wasp Factory, Iain Banks presents us with the unlikely, but perfect victim of postmodern media - the main channel of influence on the nation. Frank is unlikely, because, located on a remote peninsula in the North of Scotland, one assumes he escapes most contact with the (post-) modern world. However, this only reinforces the idea of the all-pervasive, unavoidable nature of postmodernism. He is the perfect victim because he lacks virtually all touchstones of real-life and 'normality', and is like an empty vessel for media influence. In Wise Children, Angela Carter presents us with character identities which avoid the "centralised "I"" in many ways, but mainly by mixing-up and therefore transcending high and low art boundaries. Shakespeare plays such a central role - he inspires and governs the Hazard 'dynasty', but is woven into the text so deeply - their address, 49 Bard rd; their shared birthday (Dora, Nora, Melchior and Shakespeare), King Lear's/Melchior's crown, the 'What! You Will?' play, to mention but a few examples, that he becomes comic and equal to the supposed low culture of the Chances song-and-dance acts. Shakespeare is just one example of the text's rich intertextuality: on page 295 of Flesh and the Mirror, Kate Webb lists more canonical names - "Milton, Sterne, Wordsworth... Dickens, Lewis Carroll making an appearance as a purveyor of 'kiddiporn' [another postmodern reduction of the sublime to the ridiculous], Samuel Butler, Shaw, Dostoevsky... Henry James and Tennessee Williams...are just a random selection." In Ondaatje's The Collected Works of Billy the Kid, the reader is offered no kind of "centralised "I". The text's eclectic style, range of narrative voices and point-blank refusal to give any absolute 'truths' makes it impossible to discern any "centralised "I" at all. The range of voices and absence of any guiding, omniscient narrator accords with Roland Barthes' theory of 'The Death of the Author'. In his essay 'The Death of the Author', Barthes criticises the way that "The explanation of a work is always sought in the man or woman who produced it, as if it were always in the end, through the more or less transparent allegory of the fiction, the voice of a single person, the author 'confiding' in us." As his text's title suggests, Ondaatje renounced his role as what Barthes called "Author-God", opening it up to a collection of voices (including his own), as a more adequate way of painting Billy's picture. This technique drastically increases the role of the reader - when the text isn't "centred on the author, his person, his life, his tastes, his passions" (Barthes The Death of the Author (class handout, page number unknown)), the reader has a chance to project his or her own meaning onto the text. In Pat Garrett, we find an absorbing counter-part and opponent to Billy the Kid; a character who actually destroyed his own "centralised "I"" and remoulded it himself. Garrett and Billy, originally partners in crime, split and followed two completely contrasting paths, which are fascinating to examine as two different ways of finding "identities besides the centralised "I"". Billy remained wild, lost, an outlaw who roamed the country: <quote> "Two years ago Charlie Bowdre and I criss-crossed the Canadian border. Ten miles north of it ten miles south. Our horses stepped from country to country, across low rivers, through different colours of tree green." (page 20)</quote>Although just criss-crossing the one border, this passage could symbolise all of Billy's journeys "from country to country" and from a psychoanalytical viewpoint, crossing borders could symbolise the boundaries Billy breaks in order to lose, or find himself. Observing the "different colours of tree green", almost sounds like a navigational device and suggests at the natural, wild life Billy has chosen. Pat Garrett, on the other hand, rejecting the outlawed life, forced himself into alcoholism. Upon reaching complete oblivion; the point where anyone else would breakdown, Garrett stayed in control: <quote> "In the first three months he forced himself to disintegrate in his mind. He would vomit everywhere. In a year he could drink two bottles a day and not vomit." (page 28)</quote>After complete self-destruction, we witness the descent into madness and loathing of nature - <quote> "He became frightened of flowers because they grew so slowly that he couldn't tell what they planned to do. His mind learned to be superior because of the excessive mistakes of those around him." (page 28)</quote>Hence begins obssessive controlling of all things natural. Garrett's self de- and reconstruction is symbolised perfectly by his hobby of collecting stuffed birds. The killing, and removal of the insides of the bird, and then artificial stuffing, reflects what he did to himself, and what allows him to be cold-blooded killer, or as Ondaatje puts it, a "sane assass in sane assass in sane..." (page 29). Therefore, Ondaatje has shown us Billy's external, and Garrett's internal, introverted quest "to find identities besides the centralised "I"". Garrett's fragmented, de- "centralised" identity links to that of Frank in The Wasp Factory. The difference is that Frank constructed his own, fundamentally flawed identity (i.e. absent penis) from what he has learnt from television. Thus as Thom Nairn puts it on page 128 of The Scottish Novel Since the Seventies, Frank grows up "in a society where machismo is paramount... As a result, he is the meanest of the mean, typifying Bank's pervasive interest in quasi-feral anti-heroes." Frank, like Garrett hates women and all things 'natural', particularly the sea: <quote> "My greatest enemies are Women and the Sea. These things I hate. Women because they are weak and stupid and live in the shadow of men and are nothing compared to them, and the Sea because it has always frustrated me" (page 50).</quote>Frank's obvious reasons for hatred of women aside for a moment, we can gather from Garrett and Frank's characters that the unpredictability and inevitability of nature is the biggest threat to their artificially created personalities because it is everything they are not: natural. However, to go back to Frank's early development, according to the theory of Jacque Lacan's 'Mirror Phase' and the 'Symbolic Order', it is evident that the isolation of the island, with nearly no contact with other children, severely affected Frank's sense of self. In Lacan, Malcolm Bowie explains Lacan's theories: "The imaginary is the order of mirror-images, identifications and reciprocities. It is the dimension of experience in which the individual seeks not only to placate the Other but to dissolve his otherness by becoming his counterpart... Lacan's 'Imaginary' thus creates a bridge between inner-directed and outer-directed mental acts" (page 92). Having nothing else to identify with, Frank could not "dissolve his otherness" or establish that crucial bridge "between inner-directed and outer-directed acts": thus couldn't connect his inner, fragmented "I" with his mirror-image, ideal "I". Furthermore, this means Frank cannot place himself in Lacan's 'Symbolic Order'. Hence, he has only himself, and his lack of the ultimate symbol of masculinity, to focus on. Therefore he surrounds himself with a mass of compensatory phallic symbols - the island in itself is one, so are "the Sacrifice Poles", and he also enacts male domination - "disrupted watercourses, ruptured dams" (Nairn on page 128 of The Scottish Novel Since the Seventies). Contrary to this essay's title quotation, in Wise Children, Dora and Nora Chance desperately seek their father's love in a quest to find their "centralised "I"s". Indeed, most of the action of the book is motivated by their attempts to claim a place in their father's heart: <quote> "more than anything else in the world, I longed and longed to push through the glass doors and feast my eyes on the sight of my father... Perhaps...he might let us touch his hand, even allow us to kiss his cheek...and we might be permitted, just the once, to say the word we'd never used in all our lives: 'Father.' / Father!" (page 71)</quote>This desperate neediness and adoration of a man who has neglected them so much, appears to undermine the fact that Carter "recognised herself as a feminist" (Lorna Sage, on page 11 of Flesh and the Mirror). However, because Dora and Nora, <quote>"on the left-hand side, the side the tourist rarely sees, the bastard side of Old Father Thames" (page 1)</quote>have taken in "the old, the orphaned, the abandoned and the handicapped, be they stepmums or cats", they are, in reality much better off, and have formed much more of a 'family' without their run-away fathers North of the river. Indeed, Dora's narrative "is not one of victimhood or martyrdom" at all because she and Nora enjoy great "freedoms for which their legitimate twin sisters, Imogen and Saskia could never hope" (Kate Webb, The Flesh and the Mirror, page 281). She tells the audience not to <quote> "run away with the idea that it was a squalid, furtive, miserable thing, to make love for the first time on a cold night in a back alley with a married man with strong drink on his breath... She had a passion to know about Life, all its dirty corners, and this is how she started..." (page 81)</quote>Hence, as Webb continues on page 282, "Wise Children, then, not only challenges legitimacy, it is also a celebration of the vitality of otherness." Hence the absence of a father provides the twins with the perfect opportunity "to find identities besides the centralised "I"" by allowing them to develop and explore themselves fully, and, in effect, to have their own sexual revolution! In relation to Lacan's 'Mirror Phase', and "the moment at which the child seems suddenly to have a discovery to celebrate, and to be able to formulate, however roughly, the propositions 'I am that' and 'That is me'", Dora and Nora's relationship as twins becomes very important. Growing up so close, and being part of a life-long double act; <quote> "Identical birds... By ourselves, neither of us was much but put us together, people blinked" (page 60)</quote>made them entirely dependent on each other - for one was literally the 'Mirror Image' of the other: they are like two halves of "the centralised "I"". They draw strength from one another, even share the same man (who can't tell that he's sleeping with the wrong one), and Nora explains how it feels when they're separated: <quote> "They say, if you get your leg cut off, you don't notice it, until you try to put your weight on it. Then you fall down. It was like that with me and Nora." (pages 102/103)</quote>Thus, however much Dora and Nora think they need Melchior, Carter shows us that it is the women who are with you throughout your so-called deserted, illegitimate life, who really make you who you are, your "centralised "I"". This essay has focused on the different ways The Collected Works of Billy the Kid, Wise Children and The Wasp Factory show how "some of us" either are, or aren't "trying to find identities besides the centralised "I"". Ondaatje's work is the most direct example of an "I" that is strongly decentralised, and unfixed; leaving the meaning open to be interpreted by the individual reader. Page 19 gives us a real clue as to the impossibility of forming a "centralised "I"", when Paulita Maxwell denounces a photograph of Billy: <quote> "The picture makes him look rough and uncouth. / The expression on his face was really boyish and pleasant... I never liked the picture. I don't think it does Billy justice." (page 19)</quote>The message is the photograph, like writing, is unreliable and unrepresentative, and to try and decipher someone's personality by looking at a single snapshot of one second in somebody's life, or just listening to one person's account, can be entirely misleading. Hence Ondaatje's choice to blend different voices, literary styles, and to mix visuals with writing; which is a very postmodern style. Banks' complicated protagonist Frank comes from a very different angle: in desperately seeking his "centralised "I", he creates a mish-mash of a personality from what he has seen on television, which is yet another postmodern phenomenon. Finally, Carter challenges the idea of a "centralised "I"" in a much subtler way - by presenting women and children seeking men and fathers, but showing their lives to be more complete and happy without them, an ultimately feminist position. 