<heading>1.0 Introduction</heading>Increasing competition within the hospitality industry is only one of a wide variety of reasons to internationalise (Kotler and Armstrong 1993:477). The Lakeside Group is faced to consider new strategies on how to remain competitive and profitable in future. Peters (1978:16) stated that <quote>"..., hotelmen and investors realise that pre-opening marketing analysis can be a critical ingredient in determining the ultimate success of a lodging facility". </quote>This report hence is going to investigate the viability of an expansion into the hotel and restaurant market in Kenya. To ensure success (Kotler & Armstrong 1993:478), the Group's marketing department has been asked to examine whether or not the Group is able to cope with the new environment and the competition it will face. Furthermore, the new culture and customer behaviour in have to be investigated in order being able to formulate a successful entry strategy. <heading>1.1 'The Lakeside Group' and its Market Sector</heading>The Group is a luxury chain founded in the UK with properties in ten countries within Western Europe. With its foundation in 1977 the owner believed having discovered a market niche. This reflected the highly fragmented hospitality sector where larger firms focused on well defined market niches (Roberts, 2003:3). The Group however failed to notice the shift in the 1980's towards a wider focus across multiple sectors. Although being able to successfully rely on its loyal customers, the Group now has to expand in order to improve the currently deficient financial situation. The Group's focus always has been on the four and five star hotel market while offering additional services such as fine dining facilities, spa, well-being and health- care programmes. Individual service as well as customer loyalty is of utmost importance to the Group. Maslow (1970:17) stated that needs, once satisfied, will be followed by other (and higher) needs. The aim of the Lakeside Group is to identify those needs and to satisfy and better exceed the expectations through provision of consistent high quality standards and highly individualised services. Customers are attracted from local as well as inbound markets. Business people as well as couples from the upper class are targeted by various marketing channels in order to promote the Group's hotels and restaurants. More detailed information about the Group and its mission statement can be found in Appendix A. Excellent and reliable service in line with effective marketing strategies however, solely will not guarantee any more the Group to remain competitive in future. Expansion and internationalisation on a global scale shall help the Group to remain competitive and prevent from being overtaken by another organisation. The management therefore first intends to expand into Africa in order to gain experience and not to run too high financial risks. The continent has been found to have only a small number of hotel rooms, about 5% of the world's hotel stock, and only few brands are already represented yet (Roberts, 2003:5). Kenya has been chosen as the first country to get a foot into the door of the African market. The reasons and background to this decision will be discussed in the forthcoming text. <heading>1.2 Kenya</heading>Kenya is the most developed country in Eastern Africa (Boniface and Cooper, 2001:246). Kenya too, is a strongly affiliated partner of the United Kingdom due to heavy trading and investments (Ang'awa, 2002 and UK Country Review, 2003); however, it is also a country which is somehow different to the UK in many aspects. Not only its geographic position, which favours a tropical climate (Bowen, date unknown) but also it's political and economical differences will have an impact on the Group's entry strategy. These differences and characteristics therefore have to be evaluated and assessed first (see also Appendix B). <heading>2.0 Evaluation of the Business Environment</heading>In order to secure successful transactions with customers, organisations have to examine its micro and macro environment (Kotler, Bowens and Makens, 1999:104). A PESTE analysis has helped to identify characteristics and forces which will have an impact on the organisation's strategy. The following passages will discuss the main issues. For details please refer to Appendix B and Carpenteral. (2004). The UK in general is stable and peaceful, however momentarily the country is a bit churned, due to the coalition in the war in Middle East. Political stability in Kenya is seen to be threatened by ethnic tensions, terrorism, poverty and corruption (UK Country Review: 2003). Somehow contrary, Kenya being a democratic country, is perceived by some authors as an island of economic and political stability in a sea of political turmoil surrounded by countries, which have to deal with long ongoing conflicts, high tension, diseases and poverty (Akama & Ondimu, 2001 and Country Review, 2003). Kenya's economy performs lower than the British (CIA, 2004a/b). Britain having one of the strongest economies in Europe has considerable lower unemployment rates (CIA, 2004a/b) than Kenya. However, in both countries the service sector makes for the majority of GDP (61.8% for Kenya and 72.6% for UK (CIA, 2004a/b)). The UK does not differentiate between domestic and international investments (Index of Economic Freedom, 2004). Kenya supports joint enterprise arrangements while taxing direct foreign investors at higher rates (McGee, 1994). Both, the UK and Kenya use English as their official language which eases business interactions. The UK is a multicultural and multi religious country which has been confirmed by Blair saying that: "We celebrate the diversity in our country, get strength from the cultures and the races that go to make up Britain today." (as seen in WJS, date unknown). A problem identified by Boniface and Cooper is that Western tourists in Kenya often offend the Muslim society by their dress styles and behaviour, which has to be taken care of (2001:247). Infrastructure and technology in Kenya are not as developed as in the UK, but are rapidly developing (Nationmaster, date unknown). There are however fairly good connections between the major cities Nairobi and Mombassa. This includes paved roads as well as train and air connections (McGee, 1994 and CIA, 2004b). Furthermore, airlines such as BA, Lufthansa, and Air France amongst others fly into Kenya on a regular basis. Distribution channels in Kenya are free press, television and radio; when having unfavourable views, however, are sometimes harassed by the government (BBC, 2004c). Internet use is limited due to costs and access issues (BBC, 2004c). Kenya therefore can be seen as a country which has a fairly good basis to build on in the view of tourism development. In terms of environmental attractiveness, Kenya does not have to hide in comparison with the UK. There lot of sights and attractions as stated earlier. Problems though are waste, pollution, natural damage and water shortage. Kenya however attempts to implement new policies and regulations (ILO, 2001). In general Kenya can be seen from two angles. On one side there is the attractive environment which will favour tourism, an infrastructure which is not very developed but allows business at some locations and a government supporting investments especially when collaboration with locals is sought. On the other side there is the threat from past instability, corruption, terrorism, poverty and lack of modern technology and infrastructure. An organisation entering the country needs to be aware of the situation and needs to incorporate the conditions into its strategy. Setting up the business at the right location therefore is imperative in order to successfully operate the entity. In Addition Kenya faces competition from other countries in Africa, such as South Africa or Tanzania, which increased their marketing efforts, hence form a general threat to tourism in Kenya (Chakava, 2003). To gain a competitive edge the Kenyan government in line with the Tourist Board (KTB) and private organisations have to design a market strategy which differentiates Kenya from its competitor countries. See below for some first attempts made by the KTB. <heading>3.0 Demand Factors in Kenya</heading>Various factors reflect the demand for tourism in Kenya. The author uses Middleton and Clarke's drivers of demand which are common to all countries (2001:54): <list><list><heading>a) Economic factors and comparative prices:</heading>- strong economy in the UK and Europe in contrast to low economy in Kenya (Carpenter et al, 2004)- increase in real income over the last two decades has increased spending in tourism and travel (Middleton and Clarke, 2001)- UK and many other European countries are in the top ten of the world's tourism spenders (WTO, 1999:15)- price level difference - Kenya is cheaper than UK and Europe (CIA, 2004a,b and  Country Watch, 2002)- UK is on of the largest contributors to international arrivals in Kenya (Akama, 1996) and its outbound tourism continues to grow (Boniface & Cooper, 2001:84)</list><list><heading>b) Demographic:</heading>- Educational standards in UK are high (CIA, 2004a) which favours tourism - in UK large number of high income households (CIA, 2004a)- ageing population (Middleton and Clarke, 2001) will further increase travel</list><list><heading>c) Geographic:</heading>- tropical and hot climate favours Kenya as a holiday destination (Travel & Tourism Intelligence, 2002 and Carpenter et al, 2004)- Kenya's game parks, wildlife and beaches attract visitors (Carpenter et al., 2004)</list><list><heading>d) Socio-cultural attitudes to tourism:</heading>- the belief in Europe of a 'right' of holiday and the therapeutic value is an important driver of tourism demand (Middleton and Clarke, 2001:60)- increasing demand for sustainable tourism (Middleton and Clarke, 2001 and Boniface & Cooper, 2001:246)</list><list><heading>e) Mobility:</heading>- low car ownership is expected to rise in low-income countries as soon as countries become more prosperous (Button et al., 1992)- relatively good transportation services between major Kenyan cities as Nairobi and Mombassa facilitate travelling within the country (Carpenter et al., 2004)- increasing mobility and various airlines flying into Kenya (McGee, 1994 and Akama, 1999) facilitates travelling to far destinations</list><list><heading>f) Government/ regulatory:</heading>- Visas for European citizens can be obtained easily at the border to Kenya (Auswaehrtiges Amt Deutschland, 2004b)</list><list><heading>g) Media communications:</heading>- most people rely on mass media as a major source of information (Negrine, 1989)</list><list><heading>h) Information and communications technology: </heading>- high number of households with TV, radio and internet connections in UK and Europe facilitate information gathering of tourism destinations like Kenya (Carpenter et al., 2004)</list></list>Having seen all the factors it appears that there is a large demand for tourism in Kenya. This is especially true for upper market sectors, which can easily compete with other countries due to low economy and low price level in Kenya. The use of Butler's concept of tourist area life cycle shows a somehow contradictory picture to his findings stating that tourist areas are dynamic (1980:5). The figure in Appendix C shows the number of arrivals divided into UK, Europe and total tourists. It can be seen that from the early 90's until 2002 there is a steady flow of tourist arrivals, which does not seem to reflect past impacts of terrorism, political instability or health diseases. A slight increase in total numbers has instead been identified. Due to the findings above, the author presumes that luxury domestic tourism demand is only marginal until now. However, with an enhancement of economy in Kenya, some demand will arise from the cities of Nairobi and Mombassa. A similar picture has been identified for the business market. Although there is already some demand (about 10%; Travel and Tourism Intelligence, 2002:17), one has to recognise that the location of the property and its facilities will not necessarily attract large numbers of business travellers. <heading>4.0 Supply Factors in Kenya</heading>Formulating a sustainable strategy always encompass integration of the organisation's environment (Porter, 1980:3). Porter further emphasises that firm's not only have to identify the forces which affect the business. They also have to understand the underlying sources which provide a clear picture of the strengths and weaknesses of a firm which then provides the basis for successful positioning and differentiation. Porter's five forces model (1980:5 see Appendix F) reflects that competition goes beyond the established players with the strongest force to be imperative for strategy design. The five forces will therefore be discussed. The threat of new entrants into the luxury hospitality market in Kenya is seen as twofold. Due to barriers, such as large capital requirement, economies of scale, technological knowledge and access to distribution channels, the threat from new entrants originating from local Kenyan businesses is seen as low although in some circumstances support from government is available (McGee, 1994). Entries from international organisations, however is seen as a real threat. Due to their financial position, size and knowledge these organisations have, entry into the Kenyan luxury market would not be difficult. Hospitality products and services are easily replicable, which demands for differentiation from existing firms in order to remain competitive. The Kenyan government generally admits foreign companies to enter the market, yet this can change due to remaining political instability and corruption. Direct competitors have been identified in Appendix D. The five closest competitors are all located in the same area within Malindi. They differ, however because of different prices and product offers they provide. Differentiation for the Lakeside Group therefore is imperative as well as positioning (see Appendix E for positioning map). The hospitality industry has a high fixed cost structure (Harris and Hazzard, 1992) with perishable products (Korczynski, 2002) which forces organisations to fill their capacity and hence often leads to price instability (Porter, 1980). This is especially true for Kenya, where occupancy in the last years has been rather low (Travel & Tourism Intelligence, 2002:21). Hence, competitive pricing is important. In contrast one can say that the position of the Lakeside Group is rather good, due to its large loyal customer base and its good distribution channels (see also Appendix A). The ease of customers to switch yet should not be under estimated. In contrast to a low entry barrier, there is the problem of exit barriers which in case of low business or political or economical problems in Kenya will force the company to accept substantial losses. The threat of substitutes has to be monitored too. Although rooms and the need for sleep can not be replaced, services and attractions can. Adapting to new trends and observing customers' needs will decrease this threat. Bargaining power of buyers is seen rather minimal to the Group. This is because the main target market exists mainly of individual, wealthy customers who are less price-sensitive and have no added power due to large volume purchases. International suppliers can be controlled to some extent by the Group in general, due to its size. Local suppliers on the other side may exercise some power on the firm. Food for example has to be delivered fresh on a daily basis. Employees, the main asset of a hospitality organisation (Storey and Sisson (1993:1) have to be cared of. It is therefore important for the unit to build a good relationship with the local community, employees and suppliers as stated in its mission statement. Having identified the five forces, the author applied a rating (see Appendix F) according to the extent of impact each of the forces is expected to have on the organisation. Direct competition and threat of new entrants is seen as most threatening, hence a strategy has to be designed accordingly in order to retain competitiveness and future success. <heading>5.0 Market Attractiveness</heading>Tourism for Kenya is as for many other Third World countries an important revenue source (Akama, 1999:7 and Boniface & Cooper, 2001). Furthermore, based on the business environment as seen before, one has to recognize that the KTB supports private sectors (Boniface & Cooper, 2001:246). The authors further state that the KTB attempts to diversify the tourism product and to attract high-income, low-level tourism. The modern resort developments at Malindi with the gateway city Mombassa close by attract increasing number of sun package holiday tourists while visits to wildlife parks are in decline (2001:246). Some of the political and cultural problems identified earlier can be reduced by involving local community in the business where possible, hence transmitting some benefits derived from tourism. Interviews with marketing executives of travel agencies (as seen in Chakava, 2003) reflect the findings above. Additionally they believe that Kenya is misrepresented in the media. Although they admit problems i.e. with security and political instability, they believe that media, especially in Britain "blow things out of proportion" (Nyangali, 2003 as seen in Chakava, 2003:76). They believe that Kenya is a highly attractive market due to its assets which it has to offer. Better marketing in general in the media therefore should enhance Kenya's image and attractiveness. Kenya is a tourism market with huge capacity to grow (Boniface and Cooper, 2001) meaning its life-cycle is still in the developing phase (Butler, 1980). In first instance a joint venture is advisable accepting several drawbacks as identified by Kotler (1997:142). This is in order being able to better deal with the above named constraints and to minimize the financial risk for the Lakeside Group, as for example to overcome exit barriers as seen before. A joint venture also would include the incorporation of a local owner and local staff. Doing this, financial support and easier approval from Kenyan government and local authorities are sought (McGee, 1994). Top management, however, has to come from the home country in order to ensure that the high levels of service quality and standards are constantly provided. Because of the fact that the Group is an asset driven organisation (see Appendix A) future ownership of the property is desired. <heading>6.0 The Lakeside Group's Key Target Markets </heading>Long journeys of six or more hours are becoming more affordable (Middleton and Clarke, 2001:59), hence global travel and tourism is increasing heavily. According to Levitt (1983), markets will no longer have regional or national differences; organisations have to understand that the world will be one large market. Chisnall (1985) in contrast identified, that people are different in their tastes, needs and wants, mind-sets, lifestyles, family size and composition. The author therefore stated that: <quote>"It is a deliberate policy of maximizing market demand by directing marketing efforts at significant sub-groups of customers or consumers" (1985:264).</quote>Plog (1974) differentiates between two types of psychographic groups: psychocentric and allocentric. Psychocentric travellers prefer the familiarity of travel destinations with sophisticated hotel facilities. Allocentrics on the other hand prefer non-tourist areas, enjoy discovery of new areas with a high activity level. The Lakeside Group nevertheless focus on the following customer segments. A small proportion of its customers market is drawn from the host country. This is mainly business people who have the mobility and the funds to enjoy a short break at the Group's hotel. The main segment, however, is the home country market as well as the Anglo-Saxon countries who share cultural affinities (Hofstede, 2001 and Usunier, 2000). The Group's focus is on mid-centric customers (Plog 1974) or on 'incipient mass tourists' as called in Smith's typology of tourists (1978). The main target market is the upper leisure segment which requires the facilities and the location the property offers. Economic wealth of the European society, the desire to travel and the transportation facilities in line with a competitive offer will generate a substantial demand for future success of the hotel. The Group's existing customer base, business travellers as well as leisure tourists build a thorough base to market its new property in Kenya. These customers aim to endeavour local culture and traditions while not waiving expected standards in service and technology as provided at home. A taste of local food for example should be available while familiar cuisine must be dominant. <heading>7.0 The Strategic Orientation </heading>Global competition forces organisations to adopt suitable strategies in order to sustain competitive advantage (Roperal. 1997:199). Roper et al. suggest that centricity is one of the factors influencing organisational decision-making and its effective implementation. There are four strategic perspectives: ethnocentric, geocentric, regiocentric and polycentric (see also Appendix H). The authors assert that levels and perspectives of centricity can vary across functional policies and processes (1997:202). Furthermore, the notion of centricity appears to be very complex demonstrating a tough challenge for organisations when combining local autonomy with global strategy (Roper et al., 2001:31). Although British-owned organisations have been called to adapt a more polycentric approach (Roper et al, 1997:202), the Lakeside Group generally adopts an ethnocentric strategic approach. This is because the management believes that standardisation is imperative in order to deliver constant high quality service which confirms Levitt's (1983) view of profitable management. The drivers outlined by Roperal. (1997:203) are achievement of economies of scale, consistency in the service encounter and efficient global usage of marketing ideas. Furthermore the Group's existing market within the European Union supports an ethnocentric and standardised approach due to the integration of all member countries. As it is the first time for the Group to embark into a new continent and therefore different culture, the management aims to avoid any risk of implementing new approaches. This is especially the case for Kenya, which as seen before had to deal with terrorism, corruption and political instability. Existing knowledge and expertise which proved to be successful will be transferred to the host country. The extent to which a geocentric approach can be implemented in practice is questioned (Roper et al., 2001:15). Therefore the Group limits the risks of failure in adopting an ethnocentric strategy. In future however, when expansion into Kenya has shown to be viable, the Group will consider to what extent it is practicable to change its strategy into a geocentric approach which is seen by Calof and Beamish (1994, as seen in Roper et al., 1997:209) as a more successful approach in theory and in practice. The converging needs of the core targeted market, too, demand for a standardised and hence ethnocentric strategy. Neither a regiocentric nor a polycentric approach seems to be applicable for the Group for two main reasons. First of all, as stated earlier the risk factor is aimed to be held at a minimal level. Second, the host-country and regional customers will not form a major market of the organisation due to limited funds available. Therefore the Group's joint venture contract will base its marketing activities on home-country approaches, nevertheless, expertise of the local partner will be considered while designing strategies. Hence one might argue that this form of collaboration could be seen as a geocentric approach. Ethnocentricity, however will still be predominant but some variations as identified by Roperal. (1997:202) will be incorporated. <heading>8.0 Positioning and Brand Image</heading>Positioning is defined by Kotler et al. as "the place the product occupies in the consumer's minds relative to the competition" (1999:257) while Blois believes that "it provides a link between the target marketing strategy and the marketing mix that is developed" (2000:401). These two statements reflect the aim of the Lakeside Group to design and offer products and services which differentiate the Group from its competitors and where not possible, to create a perceived difference for customers. The key of positioning, hence, is to 'tangibilise' the intangible nature of the hospitality service while identifying and hence satisfying the aims of the target market on a consistent basis (Harsha, 1998). The Lakeside Group hence identified a niche, with low competitive density (see Appendix E). Located at a premium spot at Malindi beach, it positioned itself close to its strongest competitor the Hemmingways Resort, however with a somewhat better service offer at slightly lower prices. This is possible due to the Group's size and knowledge which cuts resources and costs. Generally the Group aims to project its brand as a symbol for a global consumer culture where customers identify themselves as being modern and cosmopolitan (Kotabe & Helsen, 2004:225) which is mirrored in research findings of Barsky & Nash (2002) showing that within the luxury sector customers want to be spoiled, modern and stylish. Applying an ethnocentric approach to branding, the Group's focus is on one brand in order to increase brand awareness and prestige using a brand name (The Lakeside Hotel Group) which already allows customers to identify parts of its offers and standards. Finally one can say that on Connell's continuum of soft versus hard brands (1992), the Group portraits a harder brand being as consistent as possible in its products and service delivery which will be confirmed again within the next question of standardisation and adaptation. <heading>9.0 Marketing Mix/ Standardisation and Adaptation Decisions</heading>There has been a discussion about adaptation or standardisation for many decades (Ryans et al., 2003:589 and Whitelock 1987:32) and it is still a "perennial issue" (Solberg, 2002:1). According to Chung (2003:49) there are two types of marketing strategy standardisation: home-host and intermarket. The focus in this report is on the transfer from standardised strategies from the home to the host country. Although Cooper and Kleinschmidt (1985:41) stated, that organisations which adapt their export products according to their targeted customers and host country will perform better than those which do not, the Lakeside Group is generally adopting Levitt's (1983) idea of a standardised marketing strategy for multiple reasons. First of all, a standardised approach will help to ensure a continuing high quality service standard. Secondly, more efficient control and planning processes facilitate marketing of overseas units (Whitelock 1987). Thirdly, lager firms tend to choose a standardised strategy in order to better compete directly with their competitors divergent to smaller organisations which often operate in niche markets (Chung, 2003:69 & 74). See also Appendix G for an overview of standardized and adapted features. The target market of the Lakeside Group as stated above requires a constant high and exclusive service. The Group ensures this through standardised processes and quality checks throughout the service process. The organisation, however, adapts to its host countries and regional settings within some few areas. First of all additional services or attractions certainly have to be offered according to the local settings. Second, buildings and especially rooms reflect the local culture and traditions. In Kenya there are the cottages and beach lodges furnished with African style furniture and fine art from local artists which forms one part of local community support as stated in the Group's mission statement. Altogether, one can say that there are only few adapted elements which always will be planned by the head office in order to ensure consistent quality and consensus with customers' needs. See also Appendix D for more attributes and products offered. The Group follows a marketing oriented approach of pricing which considers costs, competition, elasticity of demand and product positioning (Kotler et al., 1999 and Kasper et al, 1999). Furthermore, differential pricing is widespread in the hospitality industry. In hotels, yield management is implemented to achieve high revenue (Kimes, 1989) Competitors' prices for the cheapest double room range from EUR 50 up to EUR 120 (see Appendix D). As the organisation adopted an ethnocentric strategy, its focus is on a stable price level throughout its units in order not to outperform one against another. Prices are always stated in Euro in order to overcome the problem of inflation and exchange rate. However, due to competitors' prices which start very low (see limitations), the Group has to adapt and set their price level slightly lower than in other countries. This, however, is not seen as a large problem due to the distance to Europe and the UK and due to lower costs for the company within Kenya. The Group therefore decided to sell its cheapest double rooms from about EUR 110. In general, however there are different price rates for different segments and time of booking (Concept of Yield Management). Sales departments yet obtain standardised manuals and training on how to open and close price categories. The right choice of location is imperative for organisational success (Middleton and Clarke, 2001:59). The Group's hotel will be close to the town of Malindi, about 110km far from Mombassa, the next 'gateway' city providing good access to Kenya (see also Appendix A for criteria). As the hotel competes in the luxury sector, a premium beach location is sought, preferably near its competitors because these locations already seem to be good and in order to attract some of their customers into the Group's facilities such as the fine dining restaurant or spa, which are not provided by all players (see Appendix D). The Group also has to ensure customers' safety which is easier in corporation with or close to other facilities. Lastly, tax reduction offered by the government in rural areas is to consider (see Appendix B). Given the financial situation of the Group, it focuses on low cost channels to market its products and therefore cannot afford a central reservation system. European markets will be attracted by already existing means explained in Appendix A. Tour operators are used in shoulder seasons, when general demand is lower. Domestic customers will be attracted through local travel agencies as well as advertising in local press and radio and to a limited extent through its homepage. The Group is a well-known brand in the European market and offers a fairly standardized product. It therefore can standardize its marketing communications and focus on reminding and reinforcing its existence (Pae et al., 2002:178) for the European target market. In Kenya the Group has to be more creative due to the market's unawareness of the brand. Local culture and practices therefore have to be considered and channels available used (see Appendix B). Adaptation for local marketing communications is needed to a certain extent. Although there are similarities, as identified earlier, the Group is faced with dissimilarities compared with Europe and the UK. To conclude, however, one can say that there is no single solution, neither standardisation nor adaptation, for ultimate business success (Roper and Brookes, 1996), the choice of the right approach will more depend on the environmental circumstances a firm competes in at a certain time (Theodosiou & Leonidou, 2003) and on the strategic orientation a firm has chosen (Roper, 2004). <heading>10.0 Limitations</heading>There are a number of limitations to this report which result of limited time available for the research as well as limited accessibility to quantitative data. This is especially true for competition and domestic demand within Kenya. Furthermore, the author admits that some of the references are dated to some extent (i.e. McGee, 1994). Nevertheless the author believes that these sources are still of relevance either because of their seminal contribution to tourism research (i.e. Plog, 1974) or due to a lack of up to date research. A further problem stems from identified prices of competitors. The author has consistently taken the lowest prices for a double room available on the web, although they seem to be somehow unrealistic. This had to be done due to limited access to a full price range of each competitor. Change of pricing policy might result with more in-depth research. <heading>10.1 Conclusion</heading>Kenya is a country which has a lot to offer for tourists and hospitality organisations. Its socio-cultural and environmental attractiveness, however, is contrasted by a political and economical difficult environment which partly can be handled by collaborating in form of a joint venture and incorporating local community. Poor technology and global threats of terrorism and war are severe drawbacks. These, however have to be managed by competitors, too. With a location at the south-east of the country, the Group is not only at a relatively secure place, away from the boarders of other more instable countries and near to a gateway city, but also at a very attractive destination from a consumer perspective. This is true for the attractions near by and its accessibility by plane, train and ship. The author believes that there can be large demand generated of the Groups target market as well as there will be future potential for domestic market as soon as Kenyan economy further improves. Threat of new entrants and of existing competition will be a main issue to care about. However, through consistent standards and service delivery, monitoring customers and competitors the Group will successfully enter the Kenyan market. Hence, in general a market entry into Kenya is seen as suitable and viable especially for a large organisation with high knowledge and resources to draw from. 