<heading>1.0 Introduction</heading>Internationalizing and expanding has become an integral part of multinational organisations with many implications on their strategies. Businesses strive for survival, growth and profitability (Zhao & Merna, 1992). This is also true for the Lakeside Group (see Appendix A) which, expanding into the Kenyan market, developed a market entry strategy (Guethling, 2004 and Appendix B) focusing on an ethnocentric approach with high levels of standardisation throughout the Group. Its first unit in Africa will be a hotel at the Malindi beach in Kenya targeting its loyal wealthy European customer base. High individual service and luxurious facilities shall exceed customers' expectations while these discover the Kenyan culture (see Appendix I for positioning on Lashley's model of service offer). Under consideration of the Group's origin and the business environment in Kenya, the management has to design a HR strategy which ensures a consistent level of quality in order to highly satisfy customers and the Groups financial goals. People are the key assets in service industries (Storey and Sisson, 1993:1) while often providing a competitive edge (Lashley & McGoldrick, 1994:25). Within the hospitality industry organisations have to tackle problems which are somehow different compared to other branches (Mullins, 1995) due to services and products which frequently are intangible, perishable, heterogenic, simultaneously produced and consumed, and inseparable (Korczynski, 2002:5, and Mullins, 1995:7). It is therefore imperative that a strategy is going to be developed which not only ensures organisational success but also satisfies employees' and customers' needs. The following report thus reviews the business environment under consideration of geo-graphical and cultural factors influencing people management approaches. Subsequent recommendations and justifications of appropriate people management strategies are outlined including a strategic orientation as well as procedures and policies for resourcing, rewarding, training and equal opportunities and diversity issues. <heading>2.0 The Business Environment</heading>Managers often have neglected the external business environment a business operates in focusing only on internal functions (Go et al, 1992). The industry is vulnerable to a variety of economic, ecological, geopolitical and meteorological factors, and over-reliance on it can be dangerous for a country. Events of this kind represent the extremes of a recurrent uncertainty in an industry which is characterized by the seasonal nature of many of its activities and by important fluctuations even during normal periods (ILO, 2001b). The following text will examine Kenya's business environment regarding the development of suitable HR strategies. <heading>2.1 Political and Legal environment</heading>Kenya's political stability improved within the last decade which increasingly attracts foreign investors (Akama & Ondimu, 2001). In contrast bureaucracy and corruption are still major problems when dealing with Kenyan agencies and local authorities. Hence obtainment of work permits for expatriates can be difficult. Success here can be increased when proof of benefit for Kenyan community can be established and when foreign exchange remains within the country (McGee, 1994). The judicial system however is overloaded and inefficient as well as corrupt which brings some level of instability for the business' legal environment (The Wall Street Journal, 2004). Kenya's approach to equal opportunities is somehow marginal compared to the UK where businesses have to respect several directives such as the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 among others (HCIMA, 1999). Generally one can say that Hofstede's (1984:271) believe that more feminine countries have a more developed legislation favouring socially and economically weak members is not applicable for Kenya, having few directives, and the UK in contrast being more masculine while having a large labour legislation (Torrington et al., 2002:367), although Cassell (1996:53) believes that the UK's legislation is not effective. <heading>2.2 Cultural behaviour and approaches to work</heading><quote>"Culture is a lens through which we perceive the world surrounding us; it is a sense-making process, a frame of reference that guides our actions and thoughts". (Olie, 1990:210)</quote>Culture hence influences people in their behaviour not only at workplace (Nyambegera, 2000:641 and Hodgetts & Luthans, 2003:109) but also influences managerial decision making (Pizam et al., 1997). Organisations hence have to carefully identify a country's norms and values in order not to risk failures. Hofstede (2001) in his research within IBM defined four dimensions describing people's behaviour: power distance (PD), uncertainty avoidance (UA), individualism/ collectivism (IC) and masculinity/ feminism (MF). A comparative graph of the UK and Kenya is shown in Appendix D. One has to consider however, that due to a lack of primary data, Kenya has been pooled with other East African countries and hence been judged as a region showing similar behaviour. Hofstede therefore has been criticized by authors such as Pizamal. (1997) who argue that cultural consistency will not be apparent where different national or ethnic cultures exist. Kenya is reported to score higher on the PD compared to the UK (64:35) (Hofstede, 2001:87). Hence people in Kenya consent to hierarchies. They accept that power holders are entitled to privileges and expect to be told what to do. In comparison, people in the UK value relations between employer and employees as more pragmatic, bargaining is dominant and flat organizational structures are pre-dominant. Simons (1995:3) stated that 'command and control' strategies are not useful anymore. Given the cultural background, however, expatriates have to exercise the power given to them directing Kenyan subordinates to ensure success. There is however a tendency of Kenya's present generation to ask for some form of empowerment in order being able to question some practices without fear of intimidation (Nyambegera, 2000:656). Uncertainty avoidance is "the extent to which members of a culture feel threatened by uncertain or unknown situations" (Hofstede, 2001:161). The UK has a UA index of 35 while Kenya is at 52; hence both are in the lower medium range. People in Kenya tend to be more loyal to employers, consequently less likely to change working place. They also ask for more rules and regulations in order to reduce uncertainty. Organisations therefore will find lower employee turnover rates and likely will experience less difficulty of employees accepting rules and procedures which ensure a more consistent service delivery. The individualism/ collectivism index differentiates between cultures where on one side "ties between people are loose" and on the other side where "people ... are integrated into strong, cohesive groups" (Hofstede, 1994:51). Implications for organisations are that in countries with a high individualism index such as the UK (89), employees need to have time for their family while at workplace they need a challenging job which leaves them enough room for own decision-making. Empowerment for example would be a good management approach. Kenya conversely is a high collectivist culture where people value good physical conditions and training in order to improve their skills. Generally, Hofstede believes, that individualism is correlated with national wealth. Poor countries such as Kenya tend to be collectivist (1994). Managers have to carefully recruit while keeping in mind the existing workforce because best results are achieved in harmonious groups. Masculinity/ femininity index describe the extent to which a culture supports the traditional masculine model of male achievement, control, and power. Countries with high masculinity emphasize gender differentiation while countries such as Kenya having a low masculinity index male and female are more equally treated. Kenya, having a low masculinity index (41) provides a competitive advantage for service industries as identified by Hofstede (2001:318). Although there are differences in the cultures of Kenya and the UK, there is still a strong affiliation between the countries (Ang'awa, 2002) due to the colonial history. Expatriates will therefore have fewer problems to adapt to the Kenyan culture, if at all, as stated by D'Annunzio-Green who believes that expatriates in general adapt very well (1997:207). Furthermore, criticism on Hofstede's assumptions exists. Cray & Mallory (1997) believe that one cannot apply national data on an individual where variances in adherence may exist. Nyambegera (2000:642) reminds that Hofstede's sample might not be valid for work related issues discussed in this text. <heading>2.3 The labour market and demographic trends</heading>Trade unionism in the UK hospitality industry traditionally has been low compared to manufacturing (Lucas, 1996:269, Hoque, 2000:44) adopting a unitary approach of people management (Fox, 1966). Increasing trade union representation in Kenya (see Appendix F) momentarily leaves employers the freedom to communicate with employees directly without pressure from collective bargaining, too. This might change however in future due to recent developments (see Chune, 2003). Although Kenya's culture is seen by Hofstede (2001) as highly collectivist, the high PD index implies that employees will accept rules and regulations set up by the organisation. Firms hence will not face to much opposition regarding employment parameters. Within the last decade there has been a huge shift from the formal to the informal sector, in 2000 representing 70% of the working population (Manda, 2002) earning lower wages while suffering higher risks to get redundant. The author also reports that about 15% of children within the age of 6 - 14 years are involved in child labour which is not surprising referring to Hofstede's work where he identified a high PD index (2001:107) hence children being expected to work hard and to start at an early age. It is further stated that about half a million people join the labour market annually with an unemployment rate of about 40% in 2001 partly explaining high poverty rate of over 50% in 2000 (Chune, 2003 and CIA, 2004b). Kenya has a large and relatively young (majority between 15 and 40 years) labour market available (IPC, 2004 and see Appendix F) with an unemployment rate at currently 23% (Chune, 2003) and a literacy rate of 85% for men and 79% for women (CIA, 2004b). Before Independence in 1963, black Africans in Kenya were excluded from academic studies and were limited to rural and industrial manual education. At the time of independence, black Africans then rapidly started to receive academic and higher technology education and training which supposedly should help to establish a better life (McLeanand & Kamau, 1999). The authors though report that several reforms have been introduced by the government since then, however universities didn't manage to apply a vocational curriculum which involved a human resource development for the private industry. To sum up, Kerre stated that "no amount of education and training will be sufficient to provide gainful employment without specific government policies aimed at creating an enabling environment for business and industry to expand" (1995:no page given). First steps towards a brighter future are made by the government (The Wall Street Journal, 2004), which hopefully enhances people's skills and knowledge. In the meantime organisations have to step in with training and support activities. Adopting the British 'Investors in People' standard would definitely satisfy employees and customers, hence providing organisations with a competitive edge which 70% of firms in the UK already have achieved (DTI, 2004). <heading>2.4 Social Issues</heading>HIV is an important factor to consider in Kenya. Although a slight decrease in HIV prevalence has been observed, in 2000 there were still 10.2% infected by the disease (CBS, 2003). As there are risks for employees as well as for the organisations, Adam-Smith & Goss (1993) suggest that training and continuous observation by management are crucial in order to allay worries and doubts. Companies also should set up health and safety policies and inform staff on how to handle HIV issues, and to point out responsibilities in order to increase productivity and employee morale (ILO, 2001b). In general one can say that Kenya is a country with large poverty and people have to cope with threats such as HIV, Malaria and corruption. Until the country gains in stability and sets off to improve the current situation, foreign organisations have to carefully design strategies using experience and technology while incorporating locals and their knowledge in order to secure success. For further issues and a weighted environmental business environment refer to Appendix F. <heading>3.0 Application of people management approaches and strategy definition</heading>Kenya is seen as a tourism country with 5.6% of GDP derived from a fast growing (10.9% in 2000) tourism industry (ILO, 2001b:10) which demands for a human resource strategy which considers a most likely increase in staff needs in future. This and the factors seen above shape the structure of the tourism labour force, subsequently making it difficult to maintain high permanent staffing levels. There is a generic tendency to operate on the basis of a core staff and to employ the labour needed for day-to-day operations under atypical contractual arrangements (ILO, 2001b). The design of an ideal strategy to perform effectively hence is "a daunting task" (Langton et al, 1992:31) and needs to be controlled and monitored continuously in order to stay ahead of environmental changes. Furthermore, it is important to incorporate local community as much as possible so that locals have a positive view of tourism and in order to gain their support (ILO, 2001b) even though this might create difficulties and obstacles (Kibicho, 2003). This will be done as stated in the Group's mission statement. <heading>3.1 Nature of Hospitality industry and requirements on human resources</heading>Although Levitt (1973:2) believes that there is no real difference between manufacturing and service industry, one has to acknowledge some differences, which make services unique (Baum & Nickson 1998:75, Korczynski 2002:2 and Mullins 1995). Service has been defined by Grönroos as: <quote>"an activity or series of activities of a more or less intangible nature that normally, but not necessarily, take place in interactions between the customer and service employees". (1990:27)</quote>Intangibility and the degree of customization hence are important factors to consider when designing HR strategies. Employees, the main assets of an organisation (Storey and Sisson, 1993:1) therefore need different levels of training for different types of service business as identified by various authors (i.e. Lashley, 1998:25, and Rafiq & Ahmed, 1998:689-90). Appendix I shows the Lakeside Group's location on Lashley's model of different service offers. As stated in Appendix A the Group operates within a highly customized service which needs full utilization of labour resources and extensive training in order to ensure consistent high quality service delivery. A strategy reflecting these circumstances hence has to be developed. <heading>3.2 Strategic Orientation of people management in Kenya</heading>Organisations have three choices with respect to staffing questions. These are based on HR concerns, strategic concerns related to the firm's flexibility to make strategic changes and on keeping a global perspective vs local needs (Scullion 1995:357). As seen in Guethling (2004) the Lakeside Group adopts an ethnocentric approach (see Appendix C for comparison of centricities). This is generally true for the human resource strategy, too. Not only is it common for organisations at early stages of internationalization to follow an ethnocentric approach (Dowling et al., 1999), but also when a lack of qualified HCN's is apparent and when there is a need to maintain good links (communication, control, coordination) to the parent company. This is especially true for the Lakeside Group, offering luxury products and services to a wealthy, loyal, and demanding customer market, which need to be monitored and kept at a high standard. However, the long term focus of the organisation is to train and educate HCN's, so they can run the unit within the next five years. A move from an ethnocentric towards the 'ideal' (D'Annunzio-Green, 1997:201) geocentric approach is intended in order to take advantage of the best resources and to ensure consistent procedures and standards within all units of the brand (Roper, 1997). This change is also needed due to high costs and risks of failure of up to 40% (Wasson, 2004:16), when expatriates are used. Research identified that multinational organisations in Kenya are not as effective as in their home countries (Nyambegera, 2000:640). D'Annunzio-Green reminds us of several problems related to a geocentric approach such as constant availability of managers as well as enough resources to plan and prepare these exchanges (1997:201). The Lakeside Group is aware of these issues and faces them with long term strategies and efficient and recurrent managerial training i.e. compulsory field trips and graduate training programmes. Additionally, there is evidence that in practice there is no single used orientation in a global environment. Organisations rather have to adapt to local needs and circumstances in order to ensure business success (D'Annunzio-Green, 1997). A polycentric approach would not fit due to the high standards the organisation aims to deliver and due to a lack of skills and knowledge of HCN'S although it would reduce costs and increase continuity in foreign subsidiaries (Dowling et al., 1999). <heading>3.3 People management approaches</heading>Within the last decades there has been a shift from Personnel Management (PM) towards Human Resource Management (HRM) as a reaction to increasing national and international competition, pressure to deliver higher quality services, the need for decentralisation and a performance related organisation culture (Salamon, 1998:236, Sisson, 1994:8, and Schuler, 2000). Guest (1987:504) as well as Storey (1995:5) further believe that effective use of employees will provide organisations a competitive edge. Storey developed 27 differences between PM and HRM (1992:35, see Appendix J) where PM broadly can be described as managing the contract of employment while HRM is the management of employee performance (Torrington, Hall and Taylor, 2002:4). Storey (1989) further differentiates between 'hard' and 'soft' HRM, following the Harvard map and Michigan model of HRM (Price, 1997). 'Hard' HRM focuses on employees as resources which are controlled by management aiming to find "the right number of the right employees in the right place at the right time" (Torrington, Hall and Taylor 2002:65). 'Soft' HRM values employees through involvement, motivation and leading rather than managing (Storey, 1989) hence employees deliver a competitive edge through pro-activeness, commitment and participation (Rose, 2001:97). The Lakeside Group adopts a 'hard' approach and follows a 'best fit' strategy adopting PM and HRM practices to manage HCN's (see also Appendices E and G). Although the Lakeside Group generally focuses on a fully integrated strong HRM approach, it has to adapt for HCN's in Kenya in some parts in order to respect cultural differences. Higher PD index for example implies for more structured hierarchies as well as the UA index requires to provide employees in Kenya with more guidelines. The question of convergence and divergence of strategies is important for organisations. The Group generally emphasizes on convergence as it provides the firm with a universal identity (Ulrich & Black, 1999:45) explaining the core aims of the business. Although Kenya has been identified to be managed by the 'clerk of works' model due to its colonial history and premature industrial development (McCourt & Eldridge, 2003:23) the Group will focus on standards applied in the UK while adapting to local needs (see Appendix G). <heading>3.3.1 Resourcing</heading>The Group in general has a relatively flat organisation structure in the UK with empowered employees. This however is not possible in Kenya due to the above identified labour market conditions and cultural behaviours identified by Hofstede (2001). A more structured, hierarchical approach is adopted for the first years with the aim to flatten the structure and to standardize it according to the UK standards within a five years period. There are two groups of employees which have to be considered: domestic front-line employees and expatriate managers from the UK. Hence the Group will have to design two people management strategies. In general an HRM approach is adopted for its expatriate managers who will take responsibilities in senior positions. Although organisations often cannot afford investments in human capital (Sisson 1994:12) it is important for the Group's success in Kenya to value its key employees. Sisson (1994) identified a trend in the UK from collectivism towards individualism which means the employee - employer relationship should be more on an individual base, which would better embrace British people's cultural aim for individualism identified by Hofstede (2001). Labour markets in the UK and Kenya are very different in respect of unemployment, education level and wage level. Goldsmith et al (1997) explain that hospitality organisations recruit from different labour markets to fill their positions at various levels. Managers, mainly high skilled, experienced workers represent the primary labour market and are often recruited internally, although Riley (1996:140) believes that there is no qualitative difference between external and internal labour market. Front-line, seasonal, part-time and/ or low skilled worker forming the secondary labour market usually are recruited externally and within the domestic market. See Goldsmithal. (1997:17) for definitions of labour markets. In the case of the Lakeside Hotel Group, management will be recruited internally (see also Appendix H) from UK divisions and will run the new unit for up to five years. In this time local Kenyan staff will be trained in order to run the business in long term. This is conform to the Group's entry strategy explained in Guethling (2004) focusing on a short term ethnocentric approach and a long term geocentric approach. HCN's will be recruited from the secondary labour market due to a lack of primary labour market candidates. With the aim to recruit a harmonious workforce due to collectivistic culture in Kenya the Group will have a core group of front line employees and operational managers and then will recruit peripheral staff to cover peak periods due to the seasonality of tourism in Kenya. This number however is aimed to be as low as possible in order to minimize the problems of training, failure and costs. A further issue which has to be addressed by the organisation is the problem of the cultural understanding of the HCN's of needs and wants of the Group's exclusive customer market. Training will be necessary to overcome this problem and to ensure consistent service quality at the same standard as in the UK. Managerial operative staff will be recruited from local universities, especially from Kenyatta university. It is seen as important that some managerial posts are already delegated to HCN's which will boost their motivation and the Group's positive image. <heading>3.3.2 Rewarding and Motivation</heading><quote>"Take care of your employees and they will take good care of your customers and your customers will return" (Marriott, 1985).</quote>Hospitality services are different as identified before. Measuring productivity therefore is somehow problematic. Rewarding employees in relation to customer satisfaction further can be felt as unfair, as different cultures, attitudes and beliefs might clash at the service encounter hence leading to unsatisfactory appraisal and reward management. Fairness of appropriate rewarding is also based upon other factors such as a country's economy, internal and external relativities and different levels of fairness perception. International organisations need good knowledge of employment and taxation laws and employment practices of foreign countries (Dowling et al., 1999:181). Expatriates will have a large bundle of rewards as stated in Appendix H as they are key to success. Extrinsic rewards such as basic pay, pension and share options will all be paid in the home country currency due to unstable conditions and a low exchange rate in Kenya. Health insurance and medical help as well as education and other allowances for the expatriate's family among other benefits will be provided locally or organised by the headquarters. On the other side intrinsic rewards such as autonomy, job satisfaction or recognition will be ensured through the HRM strategy as explained before. Kenyan culture reflects a demand for predictable rewards based on performance (Nyambegera et al., 2000). These rewards contrary to implications of Kenya's high collectivism index (Hofstede, 2001) should be awarded individually due to low predictability of group performance (Nyambegera, 2000). Research further identified that Kenyans prefer being shareholder of the firm they work for. Extrinsic rewards such as time based compensation, shares and social benefits such as health insurance or medical care are important for Kenyans due to their poor economy and will boost motivation. In the Kenyan manufacturing sector, foreign owned companies are known to pay higher wages than locally owned organisations (Manda, 2002). The Group will position itself at the top end of the firms, paying competitive salaries firstly to attract skilled staff which can deliver high levels of service quality, secondly to retain them because competitors might lure them away and hence profit from the training provided and thirdly to establish a first-class image. Low M/F index however would indicate that Kenyans tend to emphasis intrinsic rewards. Nyambegera (2000) for example believes that some form of empowerment would be valued by employees; however the product offer, the educational situation and the ethnocentric approach impede such implementation at least within the first years. The company then again will emphasize individual recognition and a community feeling. Regular leave on public holidays will be admitted so staff can celebrate with their relatives in respect of the collectivist culture. As a third driver of motivation, Mullins (1998:313) identified social relationship as an important factor. Not only is there a demand from hospitality services for team work, with each individual playing an important role due to high personal contact time. The Kenyan collective culture furthermore expects some level of recognition of the employer to support the community and the firm's workforce. Employees receive wages and benefits in order to pay daily expenses such as food and housing. Health and safety as well as to some extent predictability can be provided by the employer and the government. Satisfaction of social needs however, cannot be paid for. This is the third level of Maslow's hierarchy of human needs. He states that only unsatisfied needs can motivate. Due to the fact that Kenya's economy is rather poor compared to the UK, the majority of the Kenyan workforce struggles to satisfy the first two levels of Maslow's hierarchy. An organisation such as the Lakeside Group which believes in the value of its employees hence has to provide an environment where the first three levels have to be satisfied, namely physiological, safety and social needs. <heading>3.3.3 Equal opportunities and diversity management</heading>People are different (Price, 1997) and the nature of the hospitality industry demands for a diverse workforce in order to meet the needs of a diverse customer market (Maxwell et al., 2000:367) and to remain competitive through provision of high service quality (ibid:372), which is especially important for luxury providers such as the Lakeside Group. Equal opportunities are driven by legal requirements (Gröschl & Doherty, 1999) aiming to reduce discrimination of minority groups by provision of a 'level playing field' (Torrington et al., 2002:367) where people contest on equal terms. This however is seen by the latter as treating the symptoms instead of the grounds of discrimination. A better approach therefore is diversity management which is integrated into organisational strategy (Kandola and Fullerton, 1994), concentrating on the individual rather than on a group and going beyond the recruitment process. Ellis & Sonnenfield perfectly summarize DM as a <quote>"... challenge of meeting the needs of a culturally diverse workforce and of sensitizing workers and managers to differences associated with gender, race, age and nationality in an attempt to maximize the potential productivity of all employees" (1994:82 as seen in Torrington et al., 2002:369)</quote>Companies with an ethnocentric focus normally should have a standardized approach to managing diversity (Harris et al, 2003:166). There are however large differences between labour markets in Kenya and the UK (Appendix F and Carpenter et al, 2004). The Group's strategy reflects these differences as stated in its mission statement (Appendix A). While in the UK and Europe it adopted a diversity management (DM) approach based on the MOSAIC method (Kandola and Fullerton, 1994) in order to reflect cultural, ethnical, gender and demographic differences and to attract the best workers (HCIMA, 1999), in Kenya the general policy has to be adapted for several reasons. The young labour market mainly exists of unskilled workers; hence managerial positions have to be filled with expatriates first in order to ensure success. Although there is not much equal opportunity (EO) legislation in Kenya yet (Appendix F), the company implements an EO approach with an aim to adopt practices of the MOSAIC approach to diversity management in future with the change to a geocentric approach. Black identified that economic development is linked to demand for higher labour standards (1999:593) hence with an improvement of the Kenyan business environment (increase of skill level and diversity) the Group will adjust its strategy accordingly. Training nevertheless will be available to all employees equally and adjusted according to their backgrounds because of the understanding that people are the main assets (Storey and Sisson, 1993:1) and hence have to be valued and cared of. Recruitment for non-managerial jobs will reflect an EO approach in order to form a diverse workforce which is especially important in sub-Saharan countries representing multi ethnical groups (Nyambegera et al., 2002) although they show a discernible national pattern (Nyambegera, 2000:640). The former authors emphasize that neglecting ethnic diversity will have severe impacts on organisational success as well as on a country itself (2002:1087) especially in conjunction with corruption as can be seen at neighbouring countries having civil wars. The Lakeside Group hence aims to be proactive, utilizing and maximizing employees' potential (Kandola and Fullerton, 1994) in order to gain a competitive edge (Cassell, 1996:55) at the same time not discriminating any group. <heading>3.3.4 Training and employee development</heading>Despite its importance for organisational success in an industry heavily relying on human assets, training is not yet integrated in organisations' strategies (Worsfold & Jameson, 1991:114) and often neglected (Cannell 2003:20). Organisations learn through managers whose task is to contribute to the incremental and discontinuous organisational leaning (Pedler et al, 1994:4). The HR literature further suggests that training is a vital component to unlock the underlying potential of employees (Santos & Stuart, 2003:27). Boella (2000:117) defines three main components of training: knowledge, skills and attitude. The Lakeside Group however will differentiate between PCN's and HCN's as these two groups need different approaches to training due to their differing culture and educational skill level. Expatriates will be trained already before their move to Kenya, throughout their stay and through a reflective seminar in order to recall problems and difficulties for future learning (see also Appendix H). Areas of training include the most important, although not widely implemented (Dowling et al., 1999:156) area of cultural awareness as well as language training (Swahili) which is not imperative for Kenya, yet enhances a deeper understanding of the culture and facilitates communication with local poor people. Technical knowledge has to be obtained by managers before leaving into a foreign country, however specific job related factors will be solved through personal assistance through headquarter. HCN's who have a slightly higher UA index (Hofstede, 2001) need a more basic though more intense training in order to teach service skills to boost their self-confidence in being able to fulfil the required tasks. Dowling et al. remind us of the paradox of 'the expense of cheap labour' (1999:166) meaning low wages, but intense training costs which applies to Kenya. Training itself has to be well structured and has to provide clear structures for Kenyans in order to enable them to perform effectively due to their mentioned UA index. Foucar-Szocki (as seen in Boella 2000:121) stated that experimental training such as on the job training, manuals and supervision will be the most effective methods. Due to the high luxury and individualized service nature offered by the Group, management has to ensure upfront that its' staff is well trained. Important therefore is a thorough induction (Torrington et al, 2002:219) which will be mandatory for each employee. There will be no difference in training between core and peripheral staff as it is in the 'flexible firm' model (Ashton & Felstead, 1992:244). Due to the high UA index and high collectivism in Kenya, the Group will emphasize on group work, role plays, experiential and well designed manuals which will provide employees to feel more confident acquiring new skills and knowledge. Content of training will be health and safety with high emphasis on HIV as well as service skills and culture. Due to the intention of a future independent management by HCN's the Group further enters into a corporation with the Kenyatta University in Nairobi, which runs a hospitality management degree (Kenyatta University, 2004), hence educating competent young managers which after successfully completing their studies will take part in a graduate programme in the Malindi unit to prepare themselves for future higher positions within the unit. Employees from the core staff will also have the chance to develop a career within the unit. Support and training will help to acquire necessary skills. <heading>4.0 Limitations, Conclusions and Recommendations</heading>Some of the assumptions this report is based on such as Hofstede's cultural dimensions are heavily criticized (Nyambegera, 2000; Pizam et al., 1997; and Cray & Mallory, 1997). Due to the scope of the report however, the author cannot go deeper into this discussion. Furthermore the author is biased due to a strong belief in HRM models, valuing people and proactively taking care of their well-being. This might have influenced the decision making process on which approaches to use for the Lakeside Group. In general however, Kenya has a huge potential for the future. Political change alongside with, although slow but steady, improvement of economy and the rich resources of people and nature the country has will make life better in a yet so called Third World country. International investments and job developments will help the population to improve their status quo. Organisations however, have to bear in mind the social and cultural environment they operate in. The design of human resource strategies has to integrate local community and their well-being in order to receive not only governmental support but also collaboration of groups and of each individual. Expatriates will only succeed when equipped with cultural sensitivity alongside with technical skills and knowledge. This is the task of organisations to train, motivate and to support their staff. Regarding development of HCN's the author suggests close cooperation with schools and universities, following best practice examples such as Marriott or Hilton hotels in order to get the most out of their staff and to gain a high reputation within the country. The Lakeside Group hence could proof that it is dedicated to perform better than industry in general as identified by Price (1994). To sum up, there are  "no universal solutions to organization and management problems" (Hofstede, 2001:373) when organisations expand into new cultures. 