<abstract>This essay is the assessment of module 3184 where we are expected to evaluate and ponder our work experience, and identify the learning we accomplished in relation to hospitality management and our own personal development. It consists of two parts, the first of which is based on the eleven qualities of successful managers, by Pedler et al (2001); it identifies two managerial skills I gained during my work experiences and also reflects upon two other which I did not acquire, or was not possible for me to improve. It is an introspective section, where I relate to industry examples I experienced, analyse them through Kolb (1996) Learning Cycle model and consider different author's approaches to interpersonal skills, their improvement, and impact on building a managerial attitude and methodology. The second part the essay, relates to how the Meridien Dona Filipa, Algarve, in Portugal, dealt with customer satisfaction and meeting their expectations. I analyse the attempts made by the enterprise to meet such needs and demands, and evaluate their procedures in order to do so, and shape the levels of achievement. </abstract><heading>Part 1</heading><heading>Managerial Features and Approaches to Learning</heading>Some authors such as, Adair, J (1984) have identified, essential features managers need to have in order to be leaders, being planning, initiating, controlling, supporting, informing and evaluating. Cameron (2002) and the Quality Assurance Authority (QAA) have also acknowledged talking, listening, negotiation and personal management skills as crucial for developing managers. Nevertheless, Pedler et al (2001) have most suitably integrated the above features and concluded eleven qualities apparent in successful managers. Following the question of the assignment I decided to select characteristics covering the full range of qualities recognized by the authors. Therefore, I decided to analyse how I learnt social skills and attributes and mental agility and why I was not able to learn how to have command of basic facts and continuing sensitivity to events in my work experience to date. There are different approaches to learning such as the cognitive, the behaviourist, and the Argyris "double-loop learning" method (1993).On the one hand, the cognitive model refers to the learning acquired at school, concerning a link between present situations and past experiences. Guirdham, M (1990) refers to it as explaining present observations by relating them to what was learned in the past, and keeping the information in the memory so it can easily be remembered. On the other hand, the behaviourist process consists of learning through experience, meaning that when a stimuli causes a reaction, the person links them together behaviourally, and therefore, repeats the reaction when the stimuli is experienced again. Argyris "double-loop" learning, mainly concentrates on rectifying mistakes by looking at the fundamental standards and strategies within the organisation. However, my experiences will be analysed and evaluated through the Learning Cycle by Kolb (1996) as it his model which combines both experiences and ideas, in a circular method of learning, where after an experience, we reflect upon it, draw our conclusions and finally put them into practice (Cameron, 2002).Guirdham (1990) defines the Kolb Learning Cycle as the cognitive process, through experience, as we are encouraged to reflect and meditate upon what occurred. <heading>Social Skills and Attributes</heading>When working at Vila Vita Hotel, in Portugal, and being responsible for the pastry of one of the many restaurants, I had to communicate with the Head Pastry Chef, the Head Chef and the Sous-Chef responsible for the restaurant where I worked in the evenings, my colleagues in the kitchen and restaurant staff. Apart from that, I was responsible for the desserts in the Gala Buffet of the resort, where I had direct contact with the customers, their needs, demands and expectations. It is clear to note, that the main aspect that comes through is the extraordinary need for communication. Dealing with a resort, having eight restaurants, and six bars, it is fundamental that there is a high level of contact between all staff. The quantities of ingredients I used had to be confirmed with the Head Pastry Chef, which on the other hand, had to present facts and figures to the Head Chef who heavily considered food cost (at the time I worked there, it was at 37%, the objective being 33%!).Apart from this, and working in a system where the restaurant had both set menus and "a la carte", my orders would come both through the Sous-Chef and the actual waiters. These schemes would work regularly and not on specific nights. As an example, set menus were intended to be sold first, and I had specific quantities of deserts. Due to my inexperience, I wrongly did not update staff about my remaining supply of deserts and the restaurant staff ended up overselling. It was not a nice thing to happen as standards where extremely high, so I decided that when having a certain amount left, I would always inform the Restaurant Manager, to subsequently notify his staff, so the problem would not repeat itself. <heading>Mental Agility</heading>In another situation (at the same hotel), I had be assigned a student who was training, to work with me. I already knew him, as he had been in the kitchen section of the same restaurant where I was in the evenings. The student was quite shy, and not very active, failing to handle stressful situations, hence, taking too long to prepare the orders that were placed. I had noticed, that my colleague would consider him as cheap labour, and did not invest too much in his capacities, giving him boring tasks, such as washing major quantities of lettuce, peeling vegetables, or, at the most, simply making "mise-en-place". He was appointed to me, I was warned that he was a weak student, and my Head-Chef didn't really know what to do with him; as I had been training also, two years before, I could understand my colleague's point of view, and their necessity to get the job done, given the time and the place (August, Algarve!), consequently not having time, to deal him. I felt the same way, wanting to work efficiently and effectively, however, as I had been in the situation he was, I knew how uninspiring and demoralizing it was to be given such jobs. I thought about how I would like to have been treated during my training and decided to talk to him, and know his interests. He said that he actually enjoyed the pastry section, however, not as much as the kitchen, because he had never spent much time there; so I chose to have him help with my own "mise-en-place", and in the evenings, he would be responsible for the ice-cream orders, we would do the set menus together, and I would also concentrate on the "a la carte" desserts. I wanted to motivate him, by delegating him simple jobs and making him feel as part of the team, but...it didn't work! It was a bit to much for him, and again, restaurant staff would wait too long, or he wouldn't prepare orders correctly, leaving them unfinished, the result being melting ice-creams, complaining waiters and clients (as he would also mix up some flavours) and the presentation was not always up to standard. As a result, and because I didn't want to jeopardize my routine, I determined he would only be responsible for the ice-cream orders, while I would prepare the rest. The result was a motivated trainee, and I realized that this industry demands from staff and managers some innate attributes; in addition, I understood that patience is a virtue and that a little persistence and encouragement, is needed to stimulate those who may not be well prepared to deal with the industry. <heading>Command of Basic Facts</heading>During my experience, at The Meridien Dona Filipa, I trained in the reception, and was confronted many times by customers and specific queries; however, being treated as a simple trainee, many times I did not have enough information to clarify them. The hotel had numerous room rates, which would apply to different markets and guests, and normally when a guest would walk-in, we were told to always state the rack rate (which was extremely high compared to the rooms provided!!!). In one situation, a guest approached me and explained that his family and himself, were renting a villa, though they wanted to move as they had two little kids and their neighbours were a group of teenagers who made a lot of noise during the night; apart from that, the quality of the facilities and the villa itself failed to meet their demands and expectations. They said they had stayed at a Meridien Art & Tech (a new concept by Meridien where the hotel is inspired in minimalist art allied with the newest of technologies-having extremely high standards and operating based on a different concept than Dona Filipa!) in Asia and enjoyed it very much; the gentleman said that money was not an issue, however, they would like to see the room before deciding. I spoke to the Front Office Manager who gave me the keys to a couple of rooms and told me to offer rack rate. As it was in the summer, the hotel had a very high occupancy, and they wanted connecting rooms because of the children, though, we only had two available which were not the best. I offered rack rate as I was told to, and they were disappointed; you could tell that they needed the rooms, but were not willing to pay such an amount for them (and they were right!).They asked for a suite, but all of them were occupied so I thought about negotiating a lower rate with them as they seemed quite distressed and were staying for 11 nights. I called the reception and explained the situation to the Front Office Manager; she decided not to lower the rate as she thought that other guests willing to pay would come along. The whole situation resulted in me dealing with a complicated issue which to me seemed perfectly easy to solve. They ended up leaving and asked me about other hotels in the area, to which I recommended the Meridien's largest competitor. As I had been training in the hotel for a little while and the managers were not willing to explain too many details to me, I felt that I had not been able to put the theory I had learned previously, in practice and satisfy the customers; the situation repeated itself a few times, where I sensed that due to my lack of information and the manager's reluctance in using me as an asset to their benefit, I did not feel happy with my performance. However, and as I knew I could not change situation, I finally decided that before these circumstances came to a point where I had to make a decision, I would hand them over to someone with more authority and autonomy, hence I was not able to complete the Learning Cycle. <heading>Continuing Sensitivity to Events</heading>It seems to me that this last attribute is an innate one which is improved and fostered through experience. Knowing that my work experiences are still at an early stage, and not always was I attributed the level of autonomy and authority (perfectly understandable and acceptable!) which I would have wanted, I cannot say I don't have continuing sensitivity to events as I'm not sure. Still, I found that after reflecting on all my experiences in the industry, I can easily adapt to different unexpected situations and to facts and information that may alter them, however I believe this is not enough to predict what may happen in a particular case and anticipate it. I do feel, that whilst I worked at the Vila Vita Hotel, I did after a while, sense that I automatically made decisions already expecting certain circumstances to happen. For example, with regards to making the "mise-en-place", after a few months I felt I could tell which set deserts were more popular between the customers and therefore, knew when to make more and justify my decision to the Head Chef; and what makes me consider that I do not yet have that sensitivity is that that sometimes my forecasting was not so accurate and unexpected situations would happen to which I would have to "naturally" adjust. To summarise, I think that most of Pedler's (2001) skills and attributes are innate and relate to our early stages of life and the education we were brought up with. Experience and knowledge, will only help develop and foster them but it ultimately depends on our culture and the process of socialization we go through. Not that it is impossible for someone to change and acquire such skills, but it does take time and some people are predisposed with elements that facilitate their training and skill acquirement. I believe that the situations where I was not able to acquire command of basic facts and continuing sensitivity to events should not be regarded in a negative way. Although my goals were not met, the experience itself enabled me to draw conclusions about different aspects in a manager's system of approaching and relating to a trainee, and I learned what I should not do in the future. Guirdham (1990), defines the gaining of skills and attributes needed for managers as a combination increased knowledge, which will result in more control in our behaviour with others. Consequently, higher levels of confidence will be attained, resulting in more eagerness to test new forms of interpersonal relations. Skills will be the outcome of such enthusiasm, and if correctly pondered and reflected upon will contribute to higher understanding. Needless to say, determination will be needed all through the way to keep motivated and complete the cycle resulting in continuous improvement and enhancement of the skills and attributes obtained. <heading>Part 2</heading><heading>"Consider the efforts made to deliver customer satisfaction by meeting their expectations"</heading>In order to customer demands, it is essential for the hotel to define what it is the customer wants and expects to receive (Kotler et al, 2003). Customer expectations vary depending on the market segment and on the origin of the guests. Hotels should therefore identify their guest's expectations and anticipate them when delivering the service. The Meridien Dona Filipa, Portugal, attracted many different segments, the most common being, couples who were very loyal to the hotel, young families with small children, teenagers on summer vacation, and many golfers, needless to say that each have different expectations, and it was during the summer that all these segments came together and it became complicated to satisfy everyone. What the hotel tried to do, was to meet the most apparent expectations and then try to satisfy guests as their requests would come up. Cleanliness was extremely important hence the lobby and entrance were spotless, the facilities provided were always at excellent condition, and if not, their maintenance would become a priority. As referred above, the hotel had many loyal customers which were retired couples who would come every year to spend a large amount of time at the hotel. The relationship between staff and these guests was very personal, I remember that when they arrived, they greeted staff just as friends, and the front-office manager would always spend time talking to them and sometimes even make herself responsible for their check-in. Furthermore, the general manager had only been at the hotel for a few months and he demanded to be called whenever these guests arrived. It was also interesting to notice that when something went wrong, these loyal guests would accept it better and this is confirmed by Johnston & Clarke (2001) when stating that the degree to which guests are tolerant varies with their level of commitment to the hotel and service. Still with regards to loyal customers, their check-in would be extremely faster than first-time guests as the front-office system retained all their details and there was a degree of trust that credit cards were unnecessary to ensure payment. All reception staff was extremely helpful and caring towards customers and this created a much more informal relationship between guests and staff, highly strengthening levels of communication. Some guests would have special requirements with regards to the room they were staying in and some loyal customers demanded the same room every time they came. All requests were given strong importance as they were considered an easy way of attaining higher satisfaction. The hotel also liked to surprise customers and during check-in, if there was a special date to be commemorated during the guests stay, it would be registered, and then room service would place a cake in their room. The actual design of the reception was very familiar, consisting of two wooden tables and comfortable chairs, maybe explaining why guests would stay to chat a bit after placing queries or requests. It appeared that guests felt as if they were at home, and this general sense of comfort surely contributed to service quality. <heading>"Evaluate the processes used to measure their success"</heading>Customer satisfaction is the outcome of a guest's evaluation of a service by weighing it against their expectations and belief of what is satisfactory (Johnston & Clarke, 2001). There are many ways of measuring customer satisfaction and these have to be adapted to different services and industries. However, one way of assuring it is through staff satisfaction. Mullins (2001), states that strong relationships between managers and staff are the foundation to consistent customer satisfaction. If staff are happy with their situation within the organisation and know that their opinions and interests are taken into account, and are treated as part of the company itself and not just as labour, their satisfaction is apparent and their attitude towards customers will be much more hospitable, positively contributing to an increase in satisfaction levels. In order to assess customer satisfaction in the hospitality industry managers may use questionnaires and surveys, focus groups, complaint and suggestion schemes and mystery shoppers (Johnston & Clarke, 2001). Questionnaires and surveys are interesting methods of acknowledging customers impressions and opinions, however, they may in a way be misleading, since below 5% of unsatisfied customers actually complain (Kotler et al, 2003).One of the most used questionnaires is SERVQUAL which assesses the customers expectations and perceptions of a service, having five areas related to quality, 22 factors linked to expectations and 22 to perceptions. The final results can then be used as benchmarks for improvement (Johnston & Clarke, 2001). Focus groups on the other hand, normally bring together a number of customers to effectively discuss a particular issue with a specialist (Johnston & Clarke, 2001), whilst compliant and suggestion schemes are a good way of collecting ideas from customers and analysing their dislikes in order to improve them (Kotler et al, 2003). Johnston & Clarke (2001) state these schemes normally identify the two extremes of satisfied and unsatisfied customers. Lastly, mystery shoppers normally come on behalf of an outside organization, and evaluate the business's overall performance, identifying areas which need enhancement; however, as mystery shoppers are professionals themselves, they may sometimes pin-point aspects which are unimportant to the guests. The Meridien Dona Filipa, in Algarve, Portugal, frequently used questionnaires which were placed in the rooms the night before the guest checked-out. The questionnaire covered all main areas, and was divided into departments with questions about the time it took to check-in, how friendly the receptionist was, or about the food, service and the prices practised, asking them to rate how well they were served in each meal (breakfast, lunch and dinner), and in each restaurant. Questions related to the member of staff that impressed them most were also asked, followed by a blank section for suggestions and complaints they would like to put forth. Finally, they were enquired if they would return and if they would recommend the hotel to a friend. These surveys in a general point of view were quite complete, however, not always were they filled in, because they were handed into reception and the quantity received was very low in comparison to the rooms occupied. There was also a large amount of guests who would rate everything as being fine. Knowing the conditions of the hotel and that it was very rare to find someone who was delighted with everything, it is obvious to conclude that these customers were included in those 5 % stated above which are dissatisfied but don't even bother to complain. Clearly, this would result in discrepancies within the results achieved and therefore not provide correct and precise feed-back about the hotel's performance and positioning within the customers perceptions. Also, it seemed to me that managers did not use the questionnaires to improve the service. They were read, and talked about for the first 10/15 minutes, but then put aside and this gave the impression that it was more out of curiosity than an actual interest in knowing guest's opinions. In conclusion, it is fundamental for managers to define their service and its characteristics and have the adequate resources to deliver service consistently in order to meet their guest's expectations, whilst still profiting. All staff must be determined and motivated to respond to and anticipate guest's needs, demands and expectations; time and money should be invested in training to make staff aware of the company's mission and objectives. Apart from that, organisations should determine their guest's requirements and wants to adequately design their service and maximise their resource utilisation (Johnston & Clarke, 2001). Furthermore I believe that it would be in the interest of The Meridien Dona Filipa, Portugal to invest in different systems of satisfaction assessment, instead of just questionnaires; they could try mystery shoppers in the summer when the hotel is very busy and maybe focus groups at off-peak periods, whilst still placing questionnaires in rooms. By bringing mystery shoppers, exact areas and extreme situations needing improvement would be identified, as it is in the summer that more complaints are registered and such professional help would definitely contribute to quick, efficient and effective improvement of particular services. I would suggest focus groups in off-peak seasons because there would be more time available to go over procedures, evaluate their consistency, practicality and their impact on satisfaction. The results of these three forms of assessment would offer a broader view of the hotel's functioning and allow sound measures of improvement and perfection to be implemented. 