I do not agree with Anscombe's idea that we should abandon moral obligation and duty. Anscombe does point out some problems with two major and conflicting ethical views of concequentialism and deontology, but her alternatives are unsound and there is contradiction in her argument. I shall argue that though her principal thesis and ideas seem sound, when Anscombe tries to explain differences between what is intrinsically 'just' and what can be 'just' depending on circumstances, she misses the point. I also think that her link between the 'just' and the 'right' is flawed (or as she says that we as yet do not have a link). I shall argue that moral obligation will occur with any theory and that by waiting for her "adequate philosophy of psychology", she is postponing what is inevitable. I do not think that moral obligation is a "survival", but something that is a necessity for any ethical theory. The key terms I shall be using are ones used by Anscombe herself and will require explanation, as their meanings are similar. 'Just' and 'unjust' are terms relating to justice and are not indications of right or wrong (though I shall comment on the connection). 'Right' and 'wrong' themselves mean morally or ethically right or wrong. I will not differentiate the terms ethics and morals (as has been done) for this discussion. 'Ought' will refer only to 'moral ought', where the word implies a moral obligation, something that Anscombe does not believe in. Elizabeth Anscombe begins her critique of modern moral philosophy with the thesis that we should not attempt philosophy of ethics until we have "an adequate philosophy of psychology" (Anscombe p.26 XXX). Despite claiming that ethical philosophy should not be done, she then goes on to say that modern ethical philosophy is fundamentally wrong as it is based on the idea of moral duty and "ought" and that these concepts are "survivals" from an earlier conception of ethic that is no longer applicable. Anscombe argues that this law - based conception of ethics has come from Christianity, which "derived its ethical notions from the Torah." (Anscombe p.30 1981). Modern philosophy has been most interested in ethics that does not require religion: <quote> "Since modern moral philosophy banishes God, regarding him as either dead, non-existent, or irrelevant, it's conception of moral philosophy is ultimately anachronistic"(D. Jamieson p.478, 1993)</quote>Anscombe argues that it is being done by people who live in a Christian/post-Christian society and that they have been influenced by the society that accepts moral obligation. <quote> "In consequence of the dominance of Christianity for many centuries, the concepts of being bound, permitted, or excused became deeply embedded in our language and thought."(E. Anscombe p.30 1981) </quote>"for Anscombe, the law conception of morality is untenable without God." (D. Jamieson p.479, 1993). Anscombe says that as we have abandoned the notion of God in moral philosophy, we should also now abandon the law - based conception of moral obligation, as it is pointless without a superior legislator. She disagrees with Kant that people are able to regulate and legislate for themselves. Anscombe attempts to show that some acts that we generally perceive to be wrong with our rule-based conception of ethics actually do not have a moral value. She uses the example of owing a grocer money to illustrate that there is nothing intrinsically wrong or immoral about withholding payment. 'X owes Y money' is a summary of many other facts such as 'Y delivered groceries to X' and 'X is solvent'. She therefore state that there cannot be a transition from "is" to "owes" like Hume said that there cannot be a transition from "is" to "ought". This whole scenario can be described as: <quote> "just human actions in the context of human institution; which institutions are themselves dependent on continued human action."(C. R. Pigden, p.429 1993)</quote>This could however be described in another way (something Anscombe is critical of Mill and Kant for not understanding). It is depriving a person of property (the payment or the groceries). This is stealing. I use the expression "depriving a person of property" specifically as it is on that Anscombe herself uses. She later says that the circumstances surrounding the action will determine whether this action is 'just' or 'unjust'. I would argue that to steal is always unjust, regardless of consequence though whether it is right or wrong, depending on the circumstances may be debateable. I shall return to this point later. Anscombe herself was not prepared to accept the concequentialist view that an action could be justified by its' consequences. Anscombe does not agree with the thought that it may be acceptable to kill the innocent for "over-riding purposes" p.34 (1981). Like the Deontologists, she finds some actions to be unacceptable. This is part of why I consider Anscombe's ideas confused. If there are moral facts, and at this point Anscombe seems to think that there are, a person must be obligated to try to 'do' right and avoid wrong doing. Anscombe argues that just as Aristotle did not have a blanket term for wrong, p. 30 (1981) but more specific terms that do not necessarily have moral value, so too should we. Instead of calling actions wrong, we should use terms such as unjust, and should reserve moral decision making until we have her "adequate philosophy of psychology". If we then have a theory that deems justice to be a virtue, we would then be able to label actions right or wrong. As, in Anscombe's opinion, we do not have such a theory, it is not possible to call an act that is unjust wrong. I agree with Anscombe at this point, as there is no consensus on ethics at present; the more specific terms do help to clarify acts. This may make future theories easier to formulate and to see what should be deemed virtuous. In attempting to clarify this point with examples however, I think that Anscombe makes a mistake. Anscombe attempts to show that while some things are always unjust, others are only unjust in certain circumstances. This would pave the way for a theory that by making justice a virtue would be able to avoid some of the criticisms that Deontology and Consequentialism face. Anscombe uses the example of someone being "judiciously punished for something which it can be clearly seen he has not done". p.38 (1981). She correctly identifies this as "a paradigm case of injustice" p.39 (1981). There is no way that someone could dispute that this is unjust. Any example where consequences would be better if the person was punished do not affect the fact that that the act is unjust. Anscombe attempts to contrast this with a case of an act that she says is just or unjust depending on the situation. When describing depriving people of their property, or not repaying debts Anscombe says: <quote> "the circumstances can clearly make a great deal of difference in estimating the justice or injustice of such procedures as these" Anscombe p39 (1981)</quote>She gives the example of taking a man's property that can be used to avert a disaster. Purely in terms of justice, surely this act is still unjust. Though this is not as obvious a case of injustice as the earlier case that defines injustice. The taking of a mans' property is still unjust. Though there may be near consensus agreement that it would be the correct action from everyone but the strictest Deontologists, the case is still unjust. I disagree with Anscombe that the circumstances may change whether the act is unjust. Anscombe argues that because there is a distinction between the 'right' and the 'just': <quote> "it, can't reasonably be asked whether one might need to commit injustice, or whether it won't be the best thing to do? Of course it can." p. 41 (1981) </quote>I agree with this notion. I agree that "wrong has been built in to the definition of injustice" Anscombe, p40 (1981). Despite the errors I think that Anscombe has made in what is just partly as a Deontologist, and partly as a Concequentialist, she has arrived at a sound conclusion. From here, Anscombe returns to what would happen if we had a theory that considers justice a virtue. A man would then perform actions that are just and avoid unjust actions, and perform virtuous actions and avoid vices. Anscombe claims this is similar to how Plato and Aristotle talk. This still requires a moral obligation to perform actions that are just (or in accordance with other virtues) and so in this theory, right. I believe that with any theory, whether it is agent, act or consequence centred, the person will always have an obligation to act in the best way due to that theory. Anscombe has succeeded in little in showing the superiority of the term just to right (and she does so in a flawed argument) other that showing that the term justice is sometimes mis-used. Her reservations about ethical philosophy without an "adequate philosophy of psychology" may be reasonable, but I think that once we have this adequate philosophy, we will again be bound by moral obligation I have explained why Anscombe thinks that we have a law based conception of ethics and that even if this is true, it does not give us any reason to abandon moral obligation. I have discussed Anscombe's use of different terminology to describe acts that does not necessarily deem an act to be wrong, but reserves judgement to a later time. Though I disagree with some of her ideas about the terms, I do agree that perhaps we should not make an ethical decision at this point, but that when one is made it will give us moral obligation. I also have shown that even agent centred ethical theories (like those of Aristotle that Anscombe agrees with) require moral obligation. 