Leisure itself and the attitudes towards it have continuously changed during the years. Whereas it used to be said that certain leisure activities where only available to certain people - e.g. based on social class, gender or age - it is now argued that everyone has the same leisure choices. The aim of this essay is to analyse if this is actually the case in the leisure sector of the opera. At first the traditional paradigm of social class and its influence on leisure choices will be examined. The notion of postmodernism and the influence of the mass media will then be discussed. Finally the effects of the traditional as well as the new paradigms on the opera will be analysed. This will then be used to answer the question if social class has an influence on the choice of leisure individuals make. In the traditional way of thinking, several factors influencing leisure decisions have been identified: social class, gender and age are some of those (Clarke and Critcher, 1985; Roberts, 2001). Each can have a different influence on the way individuals choose their leisure activities. For the purpose of this essay it has been decided to focus on the issues of social class, as this seems to have the highest impact on choosing to participate in the leisure sector of the higher arts, particularly the opera. Haywoodal. (1995) distinguish between two different dimensions of social class: The "objective dimension" and the "subjective dimension" (1995, p: 127). The objective dimension bases the class distinction on grounds of education, money earned and professional occupation. Roberts (2001) agrees with this by stating that "class is related to people's wealth, health and education" (2001, p:6). The subjective dimension of class on the other hand is based on other factors and is more difficult to measure. The differences here are through intangible aspects, such as the way people talk, what they wear and who they associate with. Those are the various factors that distinguish social classes, but how many classes actually are there? Clarke and Critcher (1985) identify at least three different classes: the upper class, the middle-class and the working class. The upper class is a relatively small group which consists of the people who are wealthier and have more power. Money, however, is not the only condition that the members of this group have to fulfil. Often the association with this class is only gained through inheritance, both of money and status. The middle class is harder to define, as the boundaries tend to shift with the passage of time (Clarke and Critcher, 1985). Therefore this group can be divided into upper and lower middle class depending on their wealth. The last division is the lower, or working class. The members of this group tend to have a lower income and often also a lower education. The working class culture is often seen as more collectivistic than the middle class culture, which is referred to as individualistic (Clarke and Critcher, 1985). Rojek (2000) claims that an additional class has developed over the recent years with the emergence of the so called "celebrity elite" (2000; p: 70). This group might possess the same wealth as the upper class, but is different to them on the grounds of education and behaviour. Therefore placing these individuals in the same class would be difficult and Rojek (2000) suggests the existence of a separate leisure class of the new-rich. Haywoodal. (1995) and Rojek (2000) argue that the social class an individual belongs to has an influence on their interests and therefore on their leisure choice. The French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu developed a theory to explain the reasons for those choices. He explains that people learn and acquire their different tastes and preferences during their childhood through their families and their surroundings (Bourdieu, cited in Haywood et al., 1995). This forms the so called 'habitus': "a system of durable, transposable dispositions which functions as the generative basis of structured, objectively unified practices" (Bourdieu, 1977, cited in Mahar et al., 1990; p: 10). This influences the decision between what kind of activities are found to be appropriate and which are not. The habitus forms the basis of building the "cultural capital" (Bourdieu, cited in Mahar et al., 1990). As Haywoodal. (1995) state, Bourdieu explains that this cultural capital has an influence on what kind of leisure activities are accessible to different people. For example the opera might be more accessible to a member of the upper class through the musical education that person received during childhood (Bourdieu, 1984). While Bourdieu argues that it is possible to move around in the different classes - for example moving to the upper class through a better education - it will always be possible to tell the new entries apart from the ones who have always been there (Bourdieu, cited in Wilkes, 1990). The reason for this is that the members of the upper class who were born into it, have internalised the appropriate behaviour during their childhood while the new members will always have to work at identifying what is suitable and what is not. Therefore Bourdieu (cited in Haywood et al., 1990) argues that "tastes are social breaks" (1990: 241): tastes are what distinguishes the members of one social class from another. Roberts (2001) explains that there is a constant argument about the decline of social class. However he argues that while the divisions of class might be changing, it is not declining. He gives three reasons for this: a rise of income in the working class normally would also bring about a rise of income in the middle class; hence the difference will stay the same. His second argument is that as soon as something becomes popular with the working class, the middle class normally moves on to a different activity. And lastly he states that even if the members of the lower class would catch up with the middle class in terms of income, they still would be considered as working class. Therefore "class remains very much alive and still plays a major part in virtually everyone's life" (Roberts, 2001; p: 23). However, in recent years arguments have developed that social class is losing in importance when it comes to decisions on leisure activities. There are two new paradigms which try to explain this phenomenon: postmodernism and standardisation which is brought about by the influence of the mass media. A postmodern society "refers to a generalized change in social conditions" (Rojek, 1995; p: 129). As Haywoodal. (1990) explain, "traditional hierarchies, divisions and boundaries collapse" (1990; p: 254). The result of this is that the difference between the high and low culture are no longer as important, if they exist at all (Haywood et al., 1990; Rojek, 1995). Several authors have analysed the effects that this has had on the social class boundaries: Bauman (1993, cited in Rojek, 1995) argues that in a postmodern society, birth and inheritance do not define a person any longer. He explains the concept of contingency: one is not set by a position in life anymore but has the possibility to change. Bauman (2002) goes on to explain that the class system has been replaced by the adoption of "symbolic tokens: "freedom of choice is limited solely by the availability and accessibility of such tokens" (2002, p: 434). The relevance of those tokens is established either through the authority of an expert or by "mass following" (Bauman, 2002; p:435). Therefore he argues that it is no longer the class system that defines the leisure choices made by individuals. Rojek (1995) agrees that the class system is in decline, but states a different reason for this. In his opinion the explanation for it is based on the labour market and leisure becoming more flexible. He argues that working class members now have a wider variety of leisure choices and are no longer bound to the constraints of social classes. People are becoming more individual and follow their own choices without having to assess if the choice conforms with the class boundaries. This, Rojek (1995) reasons, can be seen as evidence of the decline in the social class system. Another paradigm that argues that the boundaries of social class are decreasing is that of standardisation as a result of mass media. Mass media is any format where "a communicator can reach an audience beyond the scope of 'live' sight and sound" (Roberts, 2004; p: 122). Roberts (2004) explains that everyone uses this kind of media and therefore class segregation does not exist anymore. Nowadays one of the main formats of mass media is television viewing, which is done by almost everyone and "accounts for around two-fifths of all leisure time" (Roberts, 2004; p: 121). Baudrillard (1998, cited in Roberts, 2004) explains that it has become difficult for people to distinguish between the reality and images, which results in a sense of a "hyperreality" (1998; p: 121) where everyone does the same things and participates in the same forms of leisure. The Frankfurt school (cited in Haywoodal. 1990; and Roberts, 2004) takes a rather negative view of the mass media. They argue that in order to gain the audience of everyone and therefore become popular, products need to be very simple and mostly are very short lived due to short attention spans. However, even though it is undeniable that the mass media is having a very big influence on the leisure behaviour of people, Roberts (2004) argues that not everyone is doing the same and that people continue to have a big variety of choice concerning leisure. So do these arguments confirm that social class is declining or are class boundaries still relevant in today's society? In order to analyse this, a specific leisure sector - the opera - will now be examined. The opera generally is regarded as a form of "high culture" (Storey, 2003; p: 5). Therefore, according to the old paradigms, this would mean that the audience participating in this leisure activity are members of a higher social class. However, following the new paradigms, this is not be the case and the visitors are from all different levels of society. So what is true? According to Operaam (2002, cited in Roberts, 2004) "the opera audience is wealthier, older and more highly educated" (cited in Roberts, 2004; p: 190). This is confirmed by two Mintel reports (2003; 2004), which show that the highest percentage of opera goers are in the AB socio-economic group (see Appendix 1). It can also be seen that the opera audience normally reads broadsheet newspapers and shops at supermarkets such as Marks and Spencer (Appendix 2), which again indicates a higher social class. As opera tickets are normally higher priced (Currie and Hobart, 1994) the audience needs to be more affluent in order to afford the tickets. This is confirmed by the fact that the majority of opera visitors are pre-/no family two earners third age two earners (Appendix 3), indicating a higher disposable income. Borgonovi (2004) explains that the better an education someone has received the higher the chances will be of that person going to the opera. There is evidence for this in the statistics: the majority of the opera goers read broadsheets and only very few read popular tabloids (Appendix 2), indicating a higher education. Borgonovi (2004) states that in wealthier families - and therefore families of a higher social class - the likelihood that children will learn to appreciate the higher arts is bigger. This reflects Bourdieu's (1984) argument that tastes and preferences are learned in the early childhood. There have been some argument that opera has been made more accessible through the influence of television and that this has resulted in a softening of the social classes (Currie and Hobart, 1994; Storey, 2003). Through TV more people are able to access the opera without having to pay for it. This is in agreement with the argument that mass media has promoted standardisation and that through the television a wider audience is reached, eliminating class segregation. However, Storey (2003) highlights the fact that at live performances the opera is still considered a high culture. This is reflected by Roberts's (2004) statement that "the upper middle-class is far more likely than the working class to attend the opera" (2004; p: 189). It has been shown that even though leisure in general might have become more flexible, and people might be able to make their own decisions unrelated to any social boundaries, the leisure sector of performing arts, and in particular the opera, is still very much class segregated. Through the statistics it can be seen that the audience tends to be from the higher ACORN classifications and hence are more likely to belong to the upper class or upper middle class. In the traditional way of thinking, social class has a significant influence on the choice of leisure. Two dimensions of social class have been identified - the objective and the subjective dimension - and it has been argued that there are at least three different social classes: the upper class, middle-class and lower class. The family and the social surroundings of it form a "habitus", which then is the basis of cultural capital. Through this people know what kind of leisure forms are acceptable for their social status and which are not. Even though this can change throughout the live, it will always be evident who was born into the higher social class and who has achieved entrance through other means, e.g. through success in work. Even though the social classes might be changing, the traditional writers argue that there is no decline. In a postmodern society it is said that those classes do not exist anymore. People make their choices not according to class but by what the individuals would like to do. Leisure has become more flexible. Through the mass media everything has become accessible and everything is standardised, resulting in everyone doing the same things. However, it has been shown that the traditional paradigms of social class are still very relevant in the leisure sector of the opera. Empirical data highlights that it is still very much the more affluent and better educated members of society who attend the opera. Even thought the opera has been made more accessible through television, the actual performance are still mainly visited by the higher social class. Therefore it can be argued that, while the attitudes towards leisure may be changing, in the sector of the opera the notion of social class as an influence on leisure choices is still very much existent. 