Grazia is Britain's first weekly glossy magazine which has recently been launched onto the UK market. It is based on the upmarket Italian Grazia published by the market leading Mondadori Group, from whom Emap has secured a license for the title. In a similar manner to the Italian publication Grazia UK will be targeted at the 'elegant up-market women aged between 25 and 45'. Its characteristics include the usual "glossy arra of fashion and lifestyle news accompanied by high-end advertising in the beauty and cosmetic markets" (Media Week, Emap confirms Grazia launch). Grazia's launch in the UK market is bold and innovative and is likely to expand the market bringing something new to readers and advertisers. Emap's partnership with Mondadori Group has guaranteed Grazia UK a favoured position in with the likes of Armani and Prada. <heading>Grazia's Target consumer market</heading> Grazia has targeted itself to create a niche position in the market as a weekly fashion glossy and needs to succeed to justify Emap's huge investment of £16 million (2% of Emap's total turnover). Grazia is a mix of Glamour, Marie Claire and the top end weeklies should, therefore, create a good read, but fashion is high-end with price tags of around £300 (far from the usual High Street fashion prices expected from many of the weeklies). This indicates the targeted consumer for Grazia is an older, more upmarket wealthy woman. <heading>Market research</heading>Emap's consumer research would have 'produced facts about their target consumer' (Blythe, 2001) including their motivations, what they like to spend their money on as well as their spending power and disposable income. It may have also shown the ratio of interest in both fashion and beauty. Their distribution research will have established where the target consumer is likely to shop for the magazine- what is their lifestyle and where are they likely to live. However, a magazine is not an essential purchase. It is a lifestyle product that needs to be where their target consumers are. They will not travel a long way to a specialist outlet on a weekly basis just to buy a product such as this. For promotional research Emap could have used their other established magazines' databases to asses the effect of different forms of media promotion such as television and radio advertising. Product research would have identified the niche product requirement by looking for gaps in the market not being served by the product content of other existing magazines. Some of the secondary research would have been relatively quick and cheap because Emap already has existing successful magazines, which have factual data on what sells magazines. Expert analysis of the data already existing on Emap's companies records would have turned it into usable information; 'raw data in itself worthless unless it is manipulated to answer the right questions' (Blyth, 2001). <heading>The Competition</heading>Grazia has been described as a niche on its own with "an eclectic mix of real-life stories, fashion titbits hottest things of the week and old favourites of travel food and health" (Nicky Noble, Media Week). As the targeted consumer is a more mature, upmarket woman, the competition for Grazia is sparse because many of the weeklies, and also monthlies, are aimed at the average 20-something female interested in celebrities and high street fashion. Grazia's niche positioning "has fused fashion and beauty editorial of a monthly magazine with the features and pace of a weekly" (Nicky Noble, Media Week). Emap's huge investment of £16 million indicates their determination to succeed by expanding the sector as a whole. However, competition in the women's magazine market is particularly fierce, especially at this time of year. All five main magazine companies are launching a new women's magazine within the first four months of 2005. The National Magazine Company recently launched 'Reveal' magazine, which is in strong competition with Emap's 'Closer' because they are both a mix of celebrity, lifestyle and television listings. This, however, is no competition for Grazia. Conde Nast's and Northern & Shell's new launches are both in the monthly market, which is more likely to be competition for Grazia. Although a weekly , Grazia is predicted that it will have a bigger impact on the monthly sales market. This prediction is based on the recent impact that the new weekly men's magazines 'Nuts' and 'Zoo' had on the sales of 'FHM' and 'Loaded'. "The development of men's weeklies had a profound impact on the monthlies" (Media Week, How 2005 is shaping up as the year of the women reader). Therefore, if Grazia is to follow suit, Conde Nast's 'Easy Living' launch in March is likely to be strong competition for Grazia as it is described as the 'older sister' to Glamour magazine, as well as the targeted consumer is similar to that of Grazia's; 30-59 year olds. Northern and Shell's 'Happy', recently launched in April, may also have competition from Grazia as its market segment is a monthly fashion and beauty title. In this case, it seems that 'Happy' and Grazia are both aimed at fashion and beauty, although one being monthly and the other a weekly begs the question as to which one will be more successful in that particular niche. <heading>Marketing mix</heading>Product: The design Grazia has adopted is very distinct. All editions to date have brightly coloured lettering with a distinctive celebrity on the cover. By doing this, they are creating a diverse and instantly recognisable brand that stands out amongst the other competition. Those consumers that become brand loyal to Grazia will, as a result, instantly buy it without browsing its content list. The cover's marketing message is a mix of its weekly content with a new celebrity on the cover each week. This is combined with an extensive celebrity interview inside the magazine as well as articles on the hot buys of the week in accessories, beauty and fashion. The Chief Executive of Emap has already discovered "there is a very clear understanding about the Grazia brand and how it should be delivered" (Paul Keenan, Media Week). However, the brand is an established Italian one and therefore needs adaptation to fit the British market. The new brand of Grazia for Emap is likely to expand its product portfolio. If, using the a strategic tool such as the Boston Matrix, it establishes that Emap already have profitable 'stars' and 'cash cows' with good sales figures for 2004 (see appendix)'Heat'(1886,000 copies), 'Closer' (1044,000 copies), and the monthlies 'New Women' (799,000 copies) and 'Top Sante' (426,000 copies). These products are either in the Growth or Maturity stages with successful sales and good profit. This, then, allows Emap to 'invest their profit into a new product that is about to enter the introductory stage' (Naylor, 1999), this being Grazia. Price: Emap will want to market Grazia as representing good value for money. However, this does not necessarily mean that it needs to be the cheapest available. In fact, it would be counter-productive because the objective is to attract upmarket consumers. The main tenet of their marketing concept will be that most of their customers are prepared to pay a little more for something that works really well for them. If the product is good value, the reader will remain loyal whereas bad pricing will cause the consumer to look elsewhere. Because Grazia is a niche, it is difficult to create a competitive pricing strategy. This is especially true because it seems most of its competition will be monthlies. Emap therefore needed to be careful in establishing that Grazia represents good value. As the current weekly price of £1.50 (although a promotional offer in the free preview issue to get the first issue for half price at 75p) equates to £6.00 a month, this means that it is very expensive in comparisons to some other competitors such as 'Glamour' and 'Marie Claire' are only £1.95 and £2.50 suggesting that they are better value for money. Place: Grazia is currently being sold in most supermarkets and newsagents throughout the UK. When a new magazine is launched, the type of establishment in which it is sold is not an issue but the geographical location of that establishment might be. It will be Emap's responsibility to make the product widely available in all establishments in which the competitive magazines are sold. If Emap has researched correctly and therefore knows where their potential consumers live within the UK, they may target the highest population regions and focus on achieving more outlets in order to generate higher sales. Promotion: Emap has launched a massive £16 million advertising campaign in order to raise awareness of the new product to the right consumer. In television and radio campaigns and on posters and billboards (see appendix) .In outlets such as W H Smith, promotional staff handed out free preview issues of Grazia in the week before its launch on the 21 st of February 2005. The television advertisements have continued past the launch and have continued to grow in volume since they began on the 11 th of February. There are many programmes all aimed at the target consumer that that have carried Grazia (see appendix). Most of the airings have been during the daytime television slots. Grazia has also established its own catchy slogans to differentiate itself from its competitors 'Worth not waiting for' (on the posters), and "Impatience is a virtue" (for radio and television). They have also advertised Grazia through spokesperson appearances on television programmes on a popular channel 4 television show 'make me a supermodel' (see appendix). <heading>E-marketing :</heading>Emap has adopted the use of e-marketing as a form of communications medium. The Grazia website (see appendix) is very successful in relation to AIDA (Attention, Interest, Desire Action). Emap have produced a website with links to attract attention which will inevitably result in action from the receiver. The use of colourful bold pictures and editing attracts attention resulting in consumers wanting to purchase the product. They have produced a successful balance of enough information to create a desire to know more. Grazia information has also been made available through the use of 'hyperlinks', 'a fast way, so that users can access the information they need quickly' (Blythe, 2001). They have been able to achieve this by using existing internet advertisers such as 'Asos' (see appendix). Through marketing of this kind it means that 'the feeling of communication is taken to a more personal level' (Blythe, 2001). The hyperlink Emap created through the email is extremely informative catching interest immediately with excellent use of interactive options such as watching the television advertisement via their computer. This clever use of e-marketing allows the receiver to be the first to preview the new magazine and all of its content. <heading>Post sales performance</heading>There is little evidence to date as to how successful the launch of Grazia has been and whether they will reach their "hope to break the 150,000 copies barrier within the first 12 months" (Media Week, Emap confirms Grazia launch) will not be known for a few months. However, according to editor; Jane Bruton stated in Grazia's first issue so far they have created a successful word of mouth "with queues in some newsagents and even a rumour of a hussle in one well known supermarket" (see appendix). The magazine has also offered readers the opportunity to send letters voicing their opinions on the magazine in order to gage a reaction of their performance. They have also created a Grazia registration (see appendix) allowing access to consumer's personal details. Evidence of post sales performance advertising did occurred within the first week of its launch as on the 23 rd of February with W H Smith incorporated point of sale material clearly marking "Grazia as the week's no: 1 mag". <heading>Conclusion</heading>When Emap carried out their research for Grazia , they would have used both quantitative and qualitative data in order to discover if the niche was strong enough to exploit, achievable through surveys and questionnaires giving the relevant answers and opinions which could then have been analysed appropriately. All companies need a variety of products, which are varying in their product life cycle. 'This theory assumes that changes in the consumer preference go only one way- into decline' (Naylor, 1999).Therefore, from the research undergone it seems Grazia will create a successful list and portfolio for Emap. From the analysis of the current market, it seems that there is little competition in the niche Grazia has entered, especially so in the case for the weeklies. This provides evidence that Grazia will inevitably do well. However, the monthlies Glamour and Marie Claire, although aimed at a younger market (around 18-25), their price tags of £1.95 and £2.50 may viewed as much better value. Therefore Grazia must ensure they establish its niche segment to justify its price However, it seems the biggest competitor for Grazia is 'Vogue' magazine, with a content of high priced fashion such as Versace and Giorgio Armani, as well as a mixture of High Street labels including Monsoon and French Connection, creating endless fashion variety. This mixture of Designer and High Street labels is also evident in the beauty sector and 'Vogue' successfully achieves all this in an extensive magazine averaging 400 pages an edition. Nevertheless, 'Vogue', like with any other monthly, has the advantage of loyal subscribers on a yearly basis. With this, they know they will still sell successfully throughout the year. Grazia, like other magazines in the weekly sector fails to attract this subscription but there is the question; would they be able to attract subscribers at an expensive £6 a month? If not then they would need to reconsider their pricing strategy or follow 'Elle's' example of once being a weekly and now a successful monthly. . 