<abstract><heading>Executive Summary:</heading></abstract><heading>Hoopoe's products and potential activity</heading>Wilkinson are in a good position to benefit from Hoopoe's quite specialist business activities and skills-set. The small publisher has found its niche in reference publishing and online services, and arguably the most important thing that Wilkinson have bought is its reputable brand. To utilise the new acquisition in the best way possible, Wilkinson will need to assess Hoopoe's current strengths and weaknesses. The Boston Consultancy Group's Matrix is a widely used strategy tool that could help them to do this. A model to aid decision-making, it provides a 'snapshot' of a business at a given time, and asks companies to think about the market share and market growth of a product or product group (Blythe, 2001). Here is how Hoopoe's main business areas might fit into the Matrix. <figure/>A represents Hoopoe's print products: They have an impressive market share already, and the extensive list of titles in the adult and children's sector, as well as the good potential for growth on both sides of the Atlantic, informs us that they are the company's  stars. The fact that the reference books are heavily branded and that the Hoopoe Children's Encyclopedia is the market leader suggests that eventually these print products will be established enough to become cash cows. Wilkinson will have to pay close attention to the reference book market to assess whether they can justify funding and sustaining these stars to that state, however. They could well plummet as quickly as they rose (Blythe, 2001). B indicates Hoopoe's online services, which seem also to be  stars. However, these activities are taking place within the fast moving and competitive Internet environment, meaning the company faces a battle for market share. Hoopoe will likely be focusing on the growth of this area and on upstaging competition, so probably making a loss. This implies that Wilkinson should invest most heavily in this aspect of their business, possibly using the funds from future cash cows to develop it into a profit-generator. C stands for the company's CD Rom products. This is a difficult product range to define. Given its present low growth rate but potentially high new market interest, we can categorise it as a problem child. If Wilkinson plans to maintain its CD Roms they will need to conduct thorough market research, and possibly market from a different angle. Their present status suggests that these products could be shaped to fit their market better (Blythe, 2001), but if ignored could easily turn into unprofitable dogs. D shows the relative position of Facts on File CD Roms. The American company is a similar size to Hoopoe and produces acclaimed print and electronic reference products for the school and library market. Their CD Rom titles have a dominant market share, and the company is growing rapidly due to its strong emphasis on curriculum-relevant material and sales promotions to libraries ( URL ). Hoopoe might consider investing capital in other areas and selling the CD Rom list in light of such potential competition. Equally, Hoopoe could also challenge their competitors and imitate the activities that brought them success in this area. <heading>Integration options for the business</heading>Wilkinson must go through a process of making their new acquisition, and its very different specialisations, fit into the larger company. Practices will need to be made uniform and co-operative. The following table outlines some of Wilkinson's integration options: Standardising procedures and practices Hoopoe must be informed of how Wilkinson works in terms of reporting to superiors, briefing staff and dealing with customers, so that communication is coherent and consistent. Making skills and techniques uniform This may be difficult given that much of Hoopoe's work is in a more dynamic and rapidly moving sector than Wilkinson's at present. However, it could mean something as simple as Wilkinson's designers changing and likely updating their software so that it matches that of the designers and web author employed within Hoopoe's online services. It could also include deciding upon the same suppliers of production materials and services for print products. Changing Hoopoe's location Given that the lease on Hoopoe's Aylesbury property expires in twelve months, Wilkinson could realistically consider re-locating its offices to London, near to or inside their own. Having Hoopoe geographically closer would make business communication easier, but of course would have other repercussions that I will discuss later. Clustering business areas and departments Following a possible location change, Wilkinson could consider grouping related departments and business activities into one unit. The theory here is that they can be managed more effectively when their similar needs can be addressed (Handy, 1993). For example, Hoopoe's non-fiction children's list could be clustered with Wilkinson's children's publishing, and the area of Hoopoe's publishing that is focused on the National Curriculum could be grouped within Wilkinson's educational sector. Incorporating cross-functional teams and individuals To move towards the consistency of working practices, a team with transferable skills could be assembled to work within both Hoopoe and Wilkinson. For instance, production managers could universalise techniques and equipment across the businesses. Exercising managerial supervision and recruiting co-ordinators This is more a post-integrative monitoring device. Direct contact from management both during and after the acquisition will be vital to long-term co-operation. Wilkinson could employ a respected and suitably high-up member of the management team to liaise with the two areas of the business, co-ordinating and ensuring that they both adhere to the standardised procedures and work methods. <heading>Recommendations for managing change</heading>Lewin's Force Field Model can help us to analyse change by showing the forces pushing it forward and the restraining forces acting against it. Most of the problems that might hinder Wilkinson's takeover will be a form of individual resistance from staff. Firstly, Hoopoe could well have to relocate, and likely to London. This would have massive financial and lifestyle implications for staff members living in Aylesbury, who might, quite rightly, be averse to moving or even commuting. If Hoopoe does not renew its lease on its Aylesbury offices, then the staff must have the details of the move fully communicated to them. The recommendation here is participation, whereby workers are involved in 'decisions and actions which affect them' (Mullins, 2002) and are encouraged to offer their opinions. This would mean, as early as possible, informing the staff of the potential benefits to the company (and consequently, them) that would result from the move. Also, financial incentives could be offered to those willing to move, such as travel expenses and salary increases, as well as help with finding housing, etc. There is also very likely to be some aversion to new technology from the staff, given that Wilkinson plans to increase electronic services. 'Techno phobia' is a common result of fear of the unknown, and again, can be overcome by good participative management. If staff are informed of the facts and satisfied that the change is needed, with a feeling of 'shared involvement' (Mullins, 2002), then they are more likely to embrace it positively. I would recommend pilot schemes for new technology, so that problems and their potential solutions can be spotted and discussed with workers. Incentive payment schemes and rewards might also be introduced, so that staff feel more motivated to reach required levels in terms of operating new equipment. Following integration, Hoopoe's staff will have to adapt to new working practices and policies. Some of these they may not agree with, and in order for management to address dissatisfaction, I would advise the implementation of upward appraisals. These enable subordinates to comment on the competency and methods of managers, and should help to nurture an open and co-operative environment. They should also be designed with focus on the objectives of the organisation and the individual (Mullins, 2002). <heading>Motivation and team-working issues</heading>'Without motivation change is responded to negatively' (Naylor, 1999), and this acquisition could have both positive and negative effects as regards staff motivation levels. For some Hoopoe employees, the prospect of becoming part of a large and reputable corporation intending to diversify its range of interests may be exciting and stimulating. However, the upheaval is likely to bring about decreased motivation for a number of reasons. Herzberg's theory of Hygiene Factors stipulates that certain basic standards must be in place and must be recognised by workers before they can motivate themselves to accomplish 'higher' or more creative things. Hoopoe's staff could well find that their new working conditions do not meet their needs, and as a consequence they could be lacking in drive. For example, working hours under the larger company could be less flexible and relationships with superiors more formal. Also, motivation among staff could decline if they perceive certain inequalities within the new working environment. (Adams' Equity Theory is a useful model, stating that staff will change their behaviour to alter what they see as unfair or unequal practices.) It could be the case that staffing changes and promotions bring about jealousy, and certain individuals may feel that their skills would be more fitting to a given position. (To address this issue, management ought to conduct appropriate skills tests on workers, to ascertain their suitability for a new role.) On the other hand, staff may feel that longer working hours and increased responsibility are not coupled with proportionate pay increases or recognition. Again, financial incentives might have to figure as motivators, as well as other reward schemes. I also propose that feedback on performance be given regularly to reassure staff, and that frequent meetings be held to discover if staff members are discontented in their work. It is important to remember that the freelance staff employed by Hoopoe must also have their needs met if motivation is to stay high. They should have all of the details of the takeover (and new practices) relayed to them so that they feel like valued participants in the business and are aware of any new objectives. As regards team-working, shifts in staff and the development of existing products and services may mean that some individuals are no longer employed in the team role that best suits them as defined by Belbin. A designer who was formerly a completer finisher may be asked to carry out jobs meant more for a resource investigator, for example. Also, teams will have to go through their development stages all over again, because Hoopoe will inevitably bring in new staff members as their business expands. This will almost certainly result in conflicts and clashes of personality. A way around this involves the appointment of a team leader who is both 'both directive and supportive', willing to listen to different points of view ( URL ) and get around problems by building on interpersonal relationships. <heading>Human Resources Issues</heading>After the takeover, a number of human resources issues will present themselves. Primarily, and as mentioned, the company will inevitably have to recruit some new members of staff to inject new skills and increase the chances of the venture succeeding. (It seems almost certain that they will bring in more staff to work in the IT and Online Development sections of their list, given that they are interested in boosting these areas.) A problem facing the company is how to select who should work for them. They could see benefits from recruiting another senior member of staff who is experienced in publishing online and electronic school products, for example. They may also want to employ business or even publishing graduates in more junior positions, who already have some relevant management and software skills. In each case, difficulties could arise during the selection process if selection methods are unsuitable, including inappropriate interview styles or lack of compliance with equal opportunities regulations. Accurate job descriptions and person specifications will have to be created for applicants to respond to. Successful candidates will have to undergo an all-important induction and training scheme, to ensure that they are 'technically and socially competent' (Mullins, 2002) to function within the organisation. Existing staff members will also require development courses, especially in using any new technology. The Human Resources department must develop a carefully focused training programme, directed towards achieving the company's goals. Failure to do this might mean, for instance, that they do not recruit the most relevant and experienced people to carry out the training. The business will also have to make the decision of whether to send staff on external courses, and has the difficult task of staggering the training over a fitting time frame so that workers pick up the various skills as required. Given the upheaval of the takeover, and the introduction of new work methods post-integration, many staff members are likely to feel destabilised. To prevent this bad feeling affecting motivation, Human Resources might have to provide counseling services. The new recruits and other staffing changes may leave some workers feeling unsure about their job's security, too. New and uniform contractual agreements could have to be brought in to reassure staff, as well as give details of differences in responsibilities and pay. <heading>Financial considerations </heading>This Profit and Loss account shows Hoopoe's income from the previous three years: <table/>The business makes a not insignificant loss in each year. Better future management could certainly involve reducing the company's administration costs. This cutting down on bureaucracy might mean delayering the management hierarchy and simplifying procedures of accounting and correspondence (both within the company and with external contacts). Space might have to be utilised more efficiently in offices and warehouses, too, and payment terms revised ( URL ). An explanation for the current high administration costs may be the company's culture, so a long-term option for the future running of the business could include the introduction of a less rigid and more task-based structure. Indeed, this would need to be thoroughly planned through an Organisational Development policy. I believe that Wilkinson have made a good investment for a very fair price. Hoopoe's sales in the year of purchase were £2.7m, so the fee Wilkinson paid to the various investors and backers (£0.75m) was less than a third of this. Moreover, the company are buying an already established and successful brand, and gaining access to a specialist market that would not have been easy to penetrate otherwise. They have bought a ready-made list that includes a market leading title, and so have an excellent competitive advantage. We can compare them with Huveaux, who are a fast growing French company focused on educational and political topics. In 2004 they completed the acquisition of three smaller companies approximately the same size of Hoopoe and with similarly niche skills. One of these was Le Trombinoscope, a publisher of political biographical reference books in France, which cost them £1.4m, virtually twice what Wilkinson paid for Hoopoe. Since the takeovers, Huveaux's sales have more than trebled to 14.4m ( URL ), and their earnings per share have increased by 9%. As a specialist small company developed in the right way, Hoopoe too could bring such massive changes. It is also true that Hoopoe have respectable assets, and that their business with the US market will be profitable given the favourable exchange rate. <heading>Conclusive thoughts</heading>