 FORMULA Evolutionary theory tries to determine genotypic frequencies in populations and change through time, past, present and future. A variety of evolutionary mechanisms and forces have been classified by geneticists that affect the frequency of alternative genotypes in populations from one generation to the next. The most important of these evolutionary processes that also govern our variation are sexual reproduction, natural selection, genetic drift, mutation and recombination. Many ecological and other adaptive pressures also have affects on the exchange of genetic material between populations. All genetic evolutionary theory is based on the principles of Mendelian genetics discovered by the Silesian monk, Gregor Mendel. Mendel using experiments with peas, with differing physical characteristics such skin colour and wrinkled skin discovered the foundational laws of all genetics, based on what would be alleles operating at a single locus on a chromosome. He determined a distinction between genotype and phenotype, the genotype having two alleles or genes, in most cases on being 'dominant' and expressed and the other being 'recessive' hidden. Therefore, possible combinations of genes (if two alleles acting at single locus) determining genotype could be classified as two homozygous and one heterozygous, further leading to two phenotypes (if dominant, recessive), physically expressed traits. Not all alleles are either 'dominant' or 'recessive', there can be a joint affect of the alleles of a heterozygous genotype, making an equal number of three physically expressed blended phenotypes, although of course all gene remain distinct, it is only the expressed characters that are blended. For example sickle cell anaemia as will be discussed in the course of the essay. Boyd and Silk suggest that: <quote>Biologists describe the genetic composition of a population by specifying the frequency of alternative genotypes. (2003: 53)</quote>Gene frequency is calculated by the total number of the particular allele within a determined pool of gametes. Gene frequency is the total number of an individual allele at a particular locus on a chromosome within a determined population possessing the gene. (summation of all gene frequencies for genotypes at a particular locus equals 1, therefore is not proportionally affected by the size of the population).  FORMULA  As long as there are only two alleles at the genetic locus of interest in the gamete pool, gene frequency can also be calculated from collected genotypic information at the locus. After basic calculation the following equation is possible, taken from Boyd and Silk (2003: 55):  FORMULA  Looks to be common sense, but therefore works for genotypic information as well, as long as there are only two alleles affecting the genotype at a genetic locus. <heading>Sexual Reproduction </heading>The role of sexual reproduction can change the gene frequency, or genotypic frequency within a population from one generation to the next. If we model sexual reproduction as random mating amongst individuals, when no other forces are operating, gene frequencies reach stable proportions within one generation of change. As long as two alleles are acting at a locus, taking information from the gene frequency of the allele of interest and its opposing allele, this can be illustrated with the use of probability tables to calculate the creation of zygotes in the next generation, then recalculating the gene frequency of the allele of interest. After one generation, all gene frequencies in repeated probability tables, turn out to be the same number. This is known as Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, from the work of the German physician in 1908. He also formulated the following formulas for genotypic frequency for a genetic locus with two alleles. Taken from Boyd and Silk (2003: 57): 2 <quote> FORMULA  Where q is the frequency of allele (a) , and p is the frequency of allele (A).</quote>Therefore if sexual reproduction is just random mating between individuals, it cannot be the only force leading to evolution. Of course, sexual reproduction could be considered an infinitely more complex contest. Matt Ridley (1993) would regard describing sex amongst humans as random mating very questionable, together with most evolutionary psychologists. Socially stratifying psychological hierarchies exist between individuals and societies, genetic selecting processes such as the competing dichotomy in sexual selection theory of 'Fisherians' of the neo-Darwinist and 'Good-genes'. Matt Ridley (1993) might even go so far as to attribute the mechanism of sexual reproduction as a response to the perennial battle against parasitic invasion, within which the genders themselves were determined, separating us from an asexual nature. Modelling goes to show other genetic mechanisms must be involved in evolutional change. <heading>Natural Selection</heading><quote>If different genotypes are associated with the different phenotypes and those phenotypes differ in their ability to reproduce, then the alleles that lead to the development of the favoured phenotype will increase in frequency. Boyd and Silk (2003: 58)</quote>To illustrate the quote, consider a genetic disease such as Tay-Sachs which usually kills the individual with the homozygous genotype by the age of four. Every generation that passes, all homozygous individuals with the lethal allele will be removed from the population. Following, two alleles for every homozygous individual will be removed from the affected population, leaving only heterozygous individuals with the allele of interest. Therefore substantially lowering the overall gene frequency within the population (unless other selective factors are involved with regard it's original popularity), and increasing the gene frequency of the non-detrimental allele. The strength and direction of selection depends on the environment it operates in. If medical care is available for the treatment of a potentially deadly genotype, the strength of selection against the otherwise deleterious allele is negligible. While the example of deleterious alleles been removed from a population shows how selection changes gene frequencies, it does not show how selection can lead to the evolution of new adaptations, and the change in gene frequencies which ensue from it. It is important to note all organisms are capable of producing more offspring that can survive (Mathus). Of the offspring that do survive, on average, they are more likely to have an anatomy, physiology or behaviour that better prepares them for the demands of their environment. <heading>Modern Synthesis & Environmental Variation</heading>The principles of environmental variation are often associated with the 'modern synthesis' a body of theory based on empirical knowledge in the attributed to the biologists Wright, Fisher and Haldane in the 1930s. They were also known as 'Neo-Darwinists', so by called due to the prior popularity of theories based on Mendelian genetics following its own rediscovery and subsequent increase in popularity. Mendel's theories were perceived incompatible with Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection at the time. The Neo-Darwinists showed how Mendelian genetics could not be used to explain continuous variation, leading to a Darwinist theory of inheritance, and accounting for the way variation is maintained within a population based on Darwinian natural selection within an environment. Although, Darwin himself knew nothing about genetics, all his theory of adaptation by natural selection is framed in purely phenotypic terms. The fundamental theory of modern synthesis basically goes, continuous variation cannot be accounted for by changes of genotype at a locus per trait, as in Mendel's peas. To achieve the varying sizes of physical characteristics seen in a species there must be many different genotypes at many different loci, on different chromosomes (although genes were undiscovered the 1930s, but the principle is parallel). This coupled with the pressures of the environment, some individuals being better or less nourished than other individuals, therefore, aiding or retarding the growth of the physical expressed characteristic in question. For example, the famous example given by Boyd and Silk (2003) of the varieties finches that inhabit the Galapagos, originally studied by Darwin, more recently studied by Peter and Rosemary Grant. The Grants studied the continuous variation involved in the beak depth and width of finches. Their results go to show: <quote>Continuously varying characters are affected by genes at many loci, each locus having only a small effect on phenotype (2003: 60)</quote>If there were only a few genes at a couple of loci affecting beak size, with no environmental affects such as nourishment affecting growth, a stratified effect would be observed in the collect information of beak dimensions of different individuals. Could be analogous to the way we buy our clothes, 'small, medium or large'. In reality, empirical data shows the majority of expressed characteristics we see as un-stratified, complex gradual continuous variation, with no visible increments amongst data collected. Environment change and variation have large effects on gene frequencies within populations. Using Darwin's finches again as an example, when the climate changed and drought ensued on Daphne Major, the mean relative beak size of the finches increased due to pressures of natural selection to adapt to the change of available food. Larger beaked individuals survived better than small beaked individuals due to the increased size and hardness of nut and seed food source. This therefore increased gene frequencies affecting large beak size and growth. What is theoretically alleles controlling growth hormones, or calcium supply to the beak. Data collected from Daphne Major have shown a positive correlation between beak width and beak depth. Although, this was actually maladaptive. Whatever genotypes were increasing the advantageous trait of beak depth, were also by pleiotropic effect, increasing the beak width at the same time. It turns out selection favoured beak depth, and not beak width. The thinner beak could apply more pressure, than an individual with a wide beak. It therefore follows, as the finches neared selective equilibrium in the environment, the threshold for deletion also included birds with the largest beaks as well as the smallest beaks, altering gene frequencies for large and small beak characteristics. Still one of Darwin's problems remains, selection tends to deplete genetic variation when selection reaches adaptive equilibrium. <heading>Mutation</heading>Mutations can slowly add new genetic variation to populations and may produce novel phenotypic affects that selection can assemble into adaptation. But, not all mutations are advantageous, they can also have a deadly affect on the individual, or a neutral undetected affect. Mutations can be caused by certain forms of ionising radiation, such as X rays, and certain kinds of chemicals that damage the DNA and alter the message that it carries. Rates of mutation are very low, Boyd and Silk suggest ranging from 1 in 100000 to 1 in 10 million per locus per gamete in each generation (2003: 66). Boyd and Silk calculate the gene frequency of a single mutation to be 0.000001 (1 in a million new-borns) according to Hardy-Weinberg equations, based on the frequency of deleterious recessive genes being about 1 in 1000. This low-rate of mutation is sufficient to maintain variation within a population at selective equilibrium, and so solve Darwin's problem of selection tending to deplete selection. When mutation introduces enough new mutations to maintain a constant frequency of the gene, it can be said there is selection-mutation balance. Varying types of events exist in the mutation of somatic cells. Jurmain (1999) gives examples of 'frame-shift mutation', in which, during recombination base(s) can be omitted from the process causing the entire translation of bases into different codons, or amino acids. It is also possible for entire codons that normally contain 'stop' information between genes to be omitted or have the translation changed allowing the joining of genes. Point mutation is a change of a single base at one locus, changing the translation of a single codon, or amino acid. Sickle cell anaemia, is a disease with affects population in tropical regions in which falciparum malaria is prevalent. When the haemoglobin S allele in homozygous in the individual they suffer debilitating anaemia and do not live until adulthood, and so substantial amounts of the allele are removed from each generation. But, it happens in this case that the heterozygous phenotype is actually selected by natural selection, individuals heterozygous with the allele are 15% more likely to reach adulthood than individuals homozygous with the standard haemoglobin A allele. This is because of the resistance heterozygous individuals receive against malaria, although their blood cells do not carry oxygen quite as well homozygous haemoglobin A individuals. A balanced polymorphism is reached when heterozygotes have a higher genetic fitness than either homozygote, a steady rate at which both alleles exist in the population. From this, it can easily be understood how an advantageous single point mutation in an individual gene could be selected to reach substantial gene frequencies within the population (maybe within a few occurrences, over many generation to proliferate.). A crossing-over of alleles during the recombination of meiosis can producing novel combinations of traits. Chromosomes are frequently damaged during the process, break and recombine. Such an event can cause a crossing-over of alleles to create genotypes that were not in the parents, and therefore express new phenotypic characteristics. <heading>Genetic Drift</heading>Sometimes known as a random force, operating on small genetically isolated populations. To give a simple example, if we had an genetically and physically isolated Polynesian island population of 50 individuals, and during a storm a tree collapses killing 5 of the most successful, genetically fit individuals within the population. Much potentially advantageous genetic material could be lost. This could potentially have great changes on gene frequencies within the small population. Genetic drift in small populations causes random changes in gene frequencies. Gene frequency can change by chance alone bypassing the operations of natural selection. If a certain locus has roughly equal gene frequencies of two different alleles acting on it, analogy could be pretty much like two people repeatedly flipping a hand full of coins (the population are the individual coins), in turn, guessing if it is heads or tails until one person or the other has won all the coins. And so the individual would be homozygous with one or the other allele. If the two people had thousands of coins to flip between them, the time taken until one person had one them all would take much, much longer, if ever. Such a homozygous state is be called a point of 'fixation'. This process operates far quicker than natural selection on a small isolated population, mostly leading to maladaptation. The population will remain at fixation until mutation introduces a new allele. Jared Diamond (1991) gives examples of his experiences in the highlands of Papua New Guinea. Papua New Guinea probably has the most genetic diversity between populations on the planet. Being roughly the size of France, it has about a third of the earths mutually indistinguishable languages, its isolated inhabitants having been there over 50,000 years. The islands physical boundaries and thick vegetation are notoriously difficult to travel through, one expedition to explore the mountain peaks in the early 20 th century being abandoned after 7 months, only moving about 30 miles inland. There is also very little naturally occurring edible food to further inhibit travel. The inhabited highlands we only discovered in the mid-early part of the 20 th century by a botanist interested in studying the great diversity in birds there. Jared Diamond through his own study and travel has described the phenotypic diversities that exist between the small population groups that exist there, describing some small populations as been inflicted with various genetic diseases, and other equally isolated populations as having unusually late starting age for puberty amongst individuals, for example. Most scientists agree that population sizes must be fairly small, around one hundred individuals for genetic drift to have an important effect when it is opposed to natural selection. It is agreed, genetic drift has more noticeable affects on traits expressed by a genotype at a single locus, it is unlikely genetic drift would generate significant maladaptation in traits that vary continuously and are affected by many genetic loci. Genetic drift can also include the 'founder effect' or 'sewell height'. To give example from Boyd and Silk, the Afrikaners, descendants of Dutch immigrants who arrived in South Africa in the 17 th century. The small group of individuals who were part of the first colonising population carried with them a number of rare genetic diseases. These diseases are preserved within the modern population in high frequencies. For example the disease porphyria variegata, sufferers have an severe adverse reaction to anaesthetics. About 30,000 of the modern population carry the dominant allele for the disease, every on of them being descended from a single couple in the original population of immigrants (2003: 448). <heading>Concluding Remarks</heading>It is difficult to know where the boundaries are of the processes that do and don't affect gene frequency are. Do you discuss gene flow between isolated populations, species (ecological species concept), in detail? Allopatric speciation? Parapatric and sympatric speciation (although they don't seem to compatible with allopatric speciation)? The further affects of disease, and the environment in the way of adaptation could affect gene frequencies? Hidden variation? It seems processes and relative ideas can easily traverse into topics of environmental adaptation, pathology, and further genetic theory. Apparently, it is often easy to view a species as being in adaptive equilibrium, when equilibrium is not necessarily reached. The environment of the species could have changed in the recent past. Boyd and Silk give the example the Human species. Since the advent of agriculture and subsequent improved social infrastructure, the supply of sugar, fats and salts has been readily available for many humans. Before agriculture and animal husbandry, it was advantageous for the individual to have a behavioural trait to crave, and eat as much sugar, fat and salt as he could find, living on a diet of wild game, grass seeds and other plant foods. In the modern age it seems natural selection has yet to catch up with the technological advances, will still crave these foods, but today they are not always advantageous. They can lead to well known problems including bad teeth, obesity, diabetes, and high blood pressure. 