<heading>1) Selfish Genes and Group Selection</heading>The term 'selfish gene', was originally coined by Richard Dawkins in his book The Selfish Gene (1976). Dawkins argues that the fundamental unit of selection, and therefore of self-interest, is not the species, nor the group, nor even, strictly the individual. It is the gene, the unit of heredity. Dawkins does not define the term 'gene' by way of a cistron, the genetic material between START and END codons; he defines it as G.C. Williams does in Adaptation and Natural Selection: <quote>I use the term gene to mean 'that which segregates and recombines with appreciable frequency.'... A gene could be defined as any hereditary information for which there is a favourable or unfavourable selection bias equal to several or many times its rate of endogenous exchange. (1966: 26)</quote>For Dawkins, a gene is defined as any portion of a chromosomal material that potentially lasts for enough generations to serve as a unit of natural selection, a genetic unit small enough not to be frequently split by crossing-over during meiosis (which could constituted of many cistrons), and to be distributed around in the form of many copies. In Dawkins's words 'a gene is a replicator of high copying fidelity' (1989: 28). For such a genetic unit to be selected, and proliferate in individual 'survival machines' the predominant quality to be expected to in the successful gene is ruthless selfishness. This gene selfishness will usually give rise to selfishness in individual behaviour. However, there are circumstances exist in which a gene can achieve its own selfish goals best by fostering a limited form of altruism at the level of individuals. The apparently suicidal altruistic acts observable in some social species has led theorists such as V. C. Wynne-Edwards to come up with interpretations of group selection in which the individual acts "for the good of the species", natural selection acting on the group or species. As Dawkins demonstrates in terms of selfish genes, it is an untenable position and a misunderstanding of the evolutionary process. In his book The Social Contract (1970), Ardrey gives the example of the stotting high jumps of certain Thomson's gazelles when a predator is spotted as if to alert the remaining group of its presence, and whose apparently suicidal altruism moved him to categorically state that it could only be explained by group selection. The stotting of the gazelle is deliberately inviting to the attention of the predator, almost as if the gazelle is teasing the predator. This has lead to further interpretative theory by A. Zahavi (1977) who suggests the act of the gazelle is primarily selected as a signal to the predator, roughly translated it means: "Look how high I can jump, I am obviously such a fir and healthy gazelle, you can't catch me, you would be much wiser to try and catch my neighbour who is not jumping so high!" (1989: 171). Many mammal predators tend to attack the easy to catch, the old and weak, so in this respect the gazelle advertising its fitness in an exaggerated way is showing that it is neither old nor weak, and that the predator should look to his neighbours for a meal. Living in large groups has its individual selfish benefits, benefiting a gene for 'stotting' within the individual survival machine. According to this theory the gazelle's display is far from altruistic. <heading>2) Altruism and Kin Selection</heading>Prior to 1964, no theorist had come up with a satisfactory answer to the apparent altruistic acts that some individuals perform within groups. An example of this could be a group of vervet monkeys (Cheney & Seyfarth) an individual within which gives off an alarm call in sight of a various predators, though making itself more conspicuous. The question was; how does such an altruistic behaviour arise in evolutionary terms when it so obviously lowers the genetic fitness of the individual giving the call? And in comparison raises fitness of the individuals of the rest of the group who did not call, and can not call. As shown with the failings of group selection behaviours can not be selected just because they are beneficial to the group as a whole. Instead according to this example selection will favour genes for suppressing calling. <quote>Natural Selection can favour altruistic behaviour if altruistic individuals are more likely to interact with each other than chance alone would dictate. (Boyd & Silk 2003: 210)</quote>An understanding of this behaviour came with W.D. Hamilton's 1964 maths based paper The Genetic Evolution of Social Behaviour who made a series of fundamental contribution to the theory of evolutionary behaviour. Hamilton's insight was to see that any process that benefits altruists to be more likely to interact with other altruists than they would by chance could facilitate the evolution of altruism. Now if regard groups as breeding populations containing the kin group and extended members, if an individual is a caller by the rules of Mendelian genetics there is a 50 percent chance a sibling will share the genes for calling, and related percentages of chance for other family members (percentage of relatedness). Hamilton's theory of kin selection is based on the idea that selection could favour altruistic alleles if individuals interact selectively with genetic relatives. According to Hamilton's rule a behaviour will be favoured by selection if:  FORMULA  where,  FORMULA  Hamilton's rule leads to two important insights: <list>Altruism is limited to kin.Closer kinship facilitates more costly altruism. (Boyd & Silk 2003: 214)</list><heading>3) Reciprocal Altruism</heading>The theory of reciprocal altruism was originally introduced by Robert Trivers, 1971 in The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism. This is the idea that altruistic behaviour can evolve in a balanced relationship of interacting individuals. In these reciprocal relationships individuals can turn being the actor and recipient, in this respect reciprocal altruism is favoured by selection because over time the fitness gained by the reciprocal acts outweighs the cost incurred. Boyd and Silk (2003: 222) suggest there are three conditions occurring together that favour the development of reciprocal altruism, individuals must: <list>1) have opportunity to interact often,2) have the ability to keep track of support given and received, and3) provide support only to those who help them,</list>It is important to note that exchange does not have to be in kind. As shown with vervet monkeys (Cheney & Seyfarth) and other primates such as chimpanzees, for example, the act of grooming an individual can be reciprocated by the recipient by way of political coalitionary support, and other such examples. The big problem with reciprocal altruism is that it is costly to interact with individuals who do not reciprocate. Thus human cognition (and the cognition of other relevant mammals) should be attune to look for cheaters in social exchanges. Game theory, such as the 'Prisoner's Dilemma' explored by Axelrod (1984) (also in collaboration with W.D. Hamilton, 1981) demonstrates the logical problems of a behaviour for exchange, and can also shed light on the selective process of evolutionary altruistic behaviour. If there is only to ever be one exchange between individuals it is always most self-serving to not to co-operate, but with iterated exchanges so called 'nice' strategies are most beneficial to the individual, the most successful by way of 'Tit-for-Tat'. <heading>4) Innate and Environmental Influences</heading>I'm sure the debate of this subject has been and will be contained within the covers of very many large volumes of work. It is possible to say for definite a very intimate relationship exists between what is innate within us by way of programming of genetic information, and that of facts of mere physics. When observing any organism other than ourselves (to a lesser extent maybe our closest genetic primate relatives) we can, and do easily recognise behaviour in individuals that can be generalised across all individuals within the species, behaviours that are so universal to that species that they must be innately encrypted within its genome. Multitudes of universals exist within human behaviour as documented by Donald E. Brown (1991), humans has large amount of diversity in environmental habitation, yet it is manifest we have a distinct material human nature universal to all of us, whatever our environment. If we take human language acquisition for example; opposing arguments against any theory of innateness appear thin on the ground. Chomsky himself professes to be puzzled at any objections to an innate hypothesis, in that an empirically determined language would be immediately problematic: <quote>Is the idea supposed to be that there is no [relevant] difference between my granddaughter, her pet kitten, a rock, a chimpanzee? No one can be that crazy. But if there is a relevant difference, then we must accept the 'innatist scenario.' So what can we possibly be under discussion, except for the nature of the innate endowment? (Smith 1999:170)</quote>A mind of any variety can not be a blank slate, a tabula rasa, you cannot get something form nothing. <heading>5) Social: Solitary and Gregarious</heading>If we take the social organisation of primates for example; most diurnal and some nocturnal species are gregarious - they feed, travel and sleep in groups. Their social complexity can range from the most primitive form, the noyau, which characterises most primitive nocturnal mammals, up to the large complex societies of gelada baboons comprising of up to 800 individuals, when composed of the joining of bands. There is a fine line between defining the simplistic gregarious primate and the solitary primate species. A solitary system in primates could operate much like the noyau system, and yet unlike in the noyau the male who has fathered some offspring will not regularly access the development of the offspring, an example such a solitary system could be the orang-utan. Robert Trivers explains in evolutionary terms the evolution of fundamental social organisation in his thesis of 'Parental Investment' (1972): "any investment by the parent in an individual offspring that increases the offspring's chance of surviving at the cost of the parent's ability to invest in other offspring". The determining factors for this are measures of resources that a parent can invest, the variable being the environment. Other environmental factors governing formation social structure and constituent numbers are factors such as protection from predators, access to mates, assistance in protecting and rearing offspring, and improved access to food. <heading>6) Monogamy, Polygyny, Polyandry, Promiscuity</heading>Are all examples of mating systems: As point out by Trivers (1972), the mammalian reproductive system commits females to invest in their offspring, making some mating systems a more likely option than others. Monogamy - one female forms a mating bond with one male. Monogamy is common in birds, but relatively rare among primates, an example of which among primates would be the gibbon. Polygyny - a system in which a single male mates with many females. The most common mating system among primates. Polyandry - a single female forms a stable pair bond with two or more different males at the same time. Polyandry is rare among mammals but is known to occur in a handful of human societies such as the fraternal arrangements of the Nyinda of northwest Nepal, and is also known in tamarins and marmosets Promiscuity - the act of sex takes a social role more of confirmation of connectedness, a social cement, in which every individual mates with every other applicable individual. Though, there is no truly promiscuous system among primates, the nearest of which being among bonobos, because of the universal inhibiting behaviour among mammals of inbreeding avoidance. Although, bonobo mothers have been known to initiate their own offspring into the system. <heading>7) Inbreeding Avoidance</heading>Inbreeding avoidance among closely related kin is a 'human universal' (Donald E. Brown 1991). Humans that share large amounts of time in proximity in early childhood are not sexually attracted to each other when sexually mature, this explains partly why humans rarely mate with close relatives, although incestuous defined boundaries vary among societies. Evidence of this also from the attempted utopian communities of the Israeli kibbutzim, Spepher (1971) demonstrated for collected data that out 2769 marriages in 211 kibbutzim, only 14 marriages were from the same kibbutz, in all cases one partner joined the peer group after the age of six. Such a strong aversion to incestuous relationships is also demonstrated among primates and other mammals, in social mammals incest is usually prevented by the emigration of sub-adult males form the social group. Although less common, for example in chimpanzees and gorillas it is the sub-adult female that transfers between groups (Nishida 1979). Female chimpanzees after their first oestrus typically alter their range and are no longer associated with their male siblings. Yet, as Pusey (1980) observed; mother and sons share the same range yet never copulate even when the mother is in oestrus. In some cases the individuals are physically expelled from the natal group, as is the case with gibbons. In evolutionary terms such a behaviour of inhibition makes perfect sense, recessive deleterious genes carried by an individual are more likely to be combined in incestuous parent/child, sibling/sibling offspring, the chance of sharing the same deleterious gene being 50 percent. Evidence of this penalty is widely shown, for example E.O. Wilson (1978) showed in a survey from Czechoslovakia; of the 161 children born of mother/son mating 15 were stillborn, and 40 percent in total suffered from physical and mental defects. <heading>8) Social Tradition</heading>The transmission of a belief, of set of beliefs passed on from one generation to the next by learning, that affects the behaviour of individuals within the society concerned. The cultural relativist might suggest our social traditions are created by society on a purely logical basis, to aid economic relationships and marriage between groups and so on, but in many cases there is an obvious determinant connection with our biological basis, although the relationship is often unclear. An example of this in continuation from the last definition could be the human universal of incest taboo (Brown 1991). There appears to be an immediate link between incest taboo of social tradition, and innate behaviour for inbreeding avoidance as witnessed in the Israeli kibbutzim (Spepher 1971). Anthropologists such as Levi-Strauss (1969) offer interpretation in a wholly culturally relativist sense, and maintain that humans acquire incest taboo purely by social tradition; For many activities families must co-operate with each other, for example hunting. Alliances between families can be cemented by intermarriage, fathers giving away their daughters. In many societies the groom has to pay a bride price, in some the groom has to buy his wife by working for her kin, and in others gifts are exchanges between families. If such a system is workable in is essential incest be prevented, daughters must be married into other families and sons must be free to look for brides outside their immediate family. On this view incest taboo is universal because it is essential to form alliances between families. As shown, this may be a very naïve view in light of empirical evidence and cross-comparative study among primates, a self important anthropocentric view. <heading>9) Tinbergen's 4 Questions Why? </heading>Tindergen (1963) showed there are four ways of answering the question why in behavioural ecology; function, causation, development, and evolutionary history. Using Krebs and Davies's example of a starling foraging for food, if we ask why it is foraging in a particular way we could answer as follows: In terms of function; how can patch choice and prey choice contribute to the survival of the bird and its offspring. In terms of causation; the proximate factors that caused the starling to select the foraging site or prey site. These may include clues to prey abundance, such as type of soil or vegetation, or the activities of other birds. In terms of development; this answer is concerned with the role of genetic predispositions and learning in an individual's decision making. In terms of evolutionary history; how starling behaviour has evolved from its ancestors. This answer might include a study of the starling adaptive radiation to fill ecological niches and the influence of competition from other species on the evolution of starling behaviour and morphology. (1997: 4) <heading>10) Memes (Dawkins)</heading>Dawkins (1989) describes 'memes' as the new replicators, a replicator in analogous fashion to a strip of DNA selected by natural selection fro its phenotypic survival value. In Dawkins's own words: <quote>I think that a new kind of replicator has recently emerged on this very planet. It is staring us in the face. It is still in its infancy, still drifting clumsily about in primeval soup, but already it is achieving evolutionary change at a rate that leaves the old gene panting behind. (1989: 192)</quote>Dawkins took the word 'meme' as an abbreviation of the Greek rook 'mimeme', to represent a unit of imitation. He gives examples of memes to be tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, belief in life after death, God, etc. Memes are information encrypted in the brain, culturally transmitted from brain to brain by representational methods of human communication in through the sensory input systems and out through the motor systems. Dawkins describes memes in analogous fashion as having their own 'meme pool' in which they propagate themselves in much the same way as alleles, yet instead of leaping from body to body via eggs and sperm, memes jump from brain to brain by a process he roughly calls imitation (1989: 192). Dawkins also suggests the survival value of a meme, for example 'God', results from its 'psychological appeal' (1989:193). From a philosophical point of view, of which it respectfully is, I don't think the 'new replicator' analogy as a unit of selection stands up particularly well, for one Dawkins gives no explanation of the process of how memes evolve over time, by way of the analogous methodology of genes in crossing over, and mutation of sexual gametes. There also seems to be a species chauvinistic aspect to the theory that implies humans can only have cultural transmission. Dawkins is also dangerously close to reverting to describing the mind as the tabula rasa, in a culturally relativist aspect with respect to: "All that is necessary is that the brain should be capable of imitation: memes will then evolve that exploit that capability to the full" (1989: 200). You can not get something form nothing, a substantial amount of the entities Dawkins would regard as memes have to be innate such as a concept of mind, of the 'I exist' variety, other people have minds, true and false, certain aspects of our religious sensibilities etc.. Dawkins also fails to develop the role of 'psychological appeal' in the survival value of the meme, presumably which are innate. If we remove the failing 'evolution' analogy, we are left with what could resemble a physically encrypted theory of knowledge which resembles a biologically relative Quinean 'web of belief', the 'psychological appeal' Dawkins does not account for could be replaced by the modularity thesis's of evolutionary psychology. <heading>11) Ecology</heading>The scientific study of the interaction of organisms with their environment, including both the physical environmental aspects and the other organisms that live within it. As demonstrated by Brown & E.O. Wilson (1959) in The evolution of the dacetine ants, who related the colony size and structure of dacetine ants to their feeding habitats. <heading>12) Population</heading>"A set of organisms belonging to the same species and occupying a clearly delimited space at the same" (E.O. Wilson 1975). It might also be useful to define it as a breeding population in the same respect. A population can also be defined its genetic constituent terms. Boyd and Silk suggest that: "Biologists describe the genetic composition of a population by specifying the frequency of alternative genotypes" (2003: 53). Gene frequency is calculated by the total number of the particular allele within a determined pool of gametes. Gene frequency is the total number of an individual allele at a particular locus on a chromosome within a determined population possessing the gene. (Summation of all gene frequencies for genotypes at a particular locus equals 1, therefore is not proportionally affected by the size of the population).  FORMULA  As long as there are only two alleles at the genetic locus of interest in the gamete pool, gene frequency can also be calculated from collected genotypic information at the locus. After basic calculation the following equation is possible, taken from Boyd and Silk (2003: 55):  FORMULA  The mathematical logic looks to be common sense, but therefore works for genotypic information as well, as long as there are only two alleles affecting the genotype at a genetic locus. <heading>13) Mixed Species Groups (Polyspecific Associations)</heading>Symbiotic, mutually beneficial relationships can form between groups of different species, benefiting the individuals contained within the groups when the ecological environment allows. This relationship is perhaps more common than is at first though, and exists between a variety of organisms. One widely known symbiotic relationship is that of the zebra and gnu, for in respect to W.D Hamilton's idea of the "selfish herd" there is safety in numbers from predators for individuals within the respective groups, and on that individual selective basis, ecological factors allowing, a gnu is as good as another zebra. Trivers (1971) refers to the reciprocal relationships that have evolved between 'cleaner-fish' and there much larger predatory clients, because the benefits of having the cleaner-fish remove unwanted parasites from the large host outweigh the benefits of eating the cleaner fish, and the cleaners get a good supply of food it has attained a privileged position. Large fish genes for allowing the cleaner-fish, approaching them in a certain fashion, to clean them and not eat them have been favoured in gene pools. Cleaner-fish genes for approaching a large predatory fish in a certain fashion and entering its mouth to clean it have been favoured in gene pools. Symbiotic relationships of mutual benefit are also common among plants. Lichen appears superficially to be an individual plant like no other. But it is really an intimate symbiotic union between fungus and green alga. Neither partner could live without the other. If their union had just become a little more intimate it would not be possible to tell they were a double organism at all. Richard Dawkins, in this respect, comes up with a more radical thesis that there could more double, multiple organisms than we have recognised: <quote>...it has been plausibly argued that mitochondria are, in origin, symbiotic bacteria who joined forces with our type of cell very early on in evolution... I shall speculate that we shall come to accept the more radical idea that each one of our genes is a symbiotic unit. We are giant colonies of symbiotic genes. (1976:182)</quote>Don't we also share our bodies in many mutually beneficial ways with innumerable parasitic organisms? <heading>14) Selective Pressure</heading>This can be defined as any feature of the environment that results in natural selection. This can come from a wide range of sources such as impoverished food resources, predation, or competition from members of the same sex for a mate can cause male individuals of a certain genetic types to survive to different average ages, to reproduce at different rates, or both of these factors. <heading>15) Ecological Niche</heading>Ecologists use the term niche to refer to a particular way of 'making a living' (Boyd & Silk 2003), a particular food resource within the ecological habitat a species is adapted to, or can adapt to. It is also concerned with the kinds of food eaten and when, how, and where the food is acquired. Speciation is concerned with ecological niches; the rate of speciation depends on the number of available niches. Darwin's finches provide a good example of exploitation of ecological niches (Grant & Grant). When the finches first migrated to the Galapagos form the South American mainland about half a million years ago, all the ecological niches for small birds were empty. There were empty niches for specialisation as seed eaters, cactus eaters etc. and eventually became distinct species as observable today (adaptive radiation). <heading>16) Competitive Exclusion </heading>The supposed principle of ecology, competitive exclusion states that two species with very similar adaptations cannot coexist in the same ecological niche. The principle is questionable. For example, it has come under question due to the falsification of the hominin evolutionary theory of 'the single-species hypothesis' of Dobzhansky and Mayr, which stated that only one species of hominin could exist at one time. In this case, culture was viewed as such a novel and powerful behavioural adaptation that two cultural species simply could not exist side by side. This thesis collapsed in the mid 1970s, after fossil discoveries in Kenya indisputably demonstrated the coexistence of two quite different types of hominin; Homo ergaster and Australopithecus boisei (Lewin & Foley 2004). Subsequent discoveries have also demonstrated likewise. <heading>18) Kleibers's Rule</heading>Kleiber's rule regards the metabolic rate of mammals and the way it changes in proportion to body mass. For every unit of weight heavier mammal, the mammal only induces a proportional 75 percent equivalent increase in energy requirement per unit. For example if the mammal's weight increased 100 percent, it would only have a 75 percent increase in energy requirement. It therefore follows that the heaviest mammal would have the lowest metabolic rate, and the lightest mammal would have the highest metabolic rate per unit of body weight. Therefore, if the ecological environment allows, food resources being proportional to body size, the bigger the mammal the more energy efficient it is less time spent feeding. Kleiber's rule also gives explanation to the reason why there are not any leaf eating primates under 700g; leaves are just too impoverished in energy to sustain a small primate with a high metabolic rate (as the amount of food you can intake is also directly proportional to body size), the primate in question would have to spent its entire time feeding. <heading>19) Habitat and Ecosystem</heading>Habitat is a species specific term relating to the organism physical environment in a particular place. While the term ecosystem refers to all the organisms living within that particular physical environment (E.O. Wilson 1975). <heading>20) Allopatric and Sympatric</heading>Allopatry refers to an absence of overlap of geographic range of two species or populations. Sympatry refers to an overlap of geographic range of two species or populations (Fleagle 1999). <heading>21) Gene</heading>There appears at first to be some differing opinion over what a gene actually is. The American geneticist T.H. Morgan was first to coin 'gene'. Some molecular biologists refer to the term 'gene' in the same way as that of a cistron; the genetic material contained on a chromosome between START and END codons. For Dawkins this is insufficient in the evolutionary sense, he defines it as G.C. Williams does in Adaptation and Natural Selection: <quote>I use the term gene to mean 'that which segregates and recombines with appreciable frequency.'... A gene could be defined as any hereditary information for which there is a favourable or unfavourable selection bias equal to several or many times its rate of endogenous exchange. (1966: 26)</quote>For Dawkins, a gene is defined as any portion of a chromosomal material that potentially lasts for enough generations to serve as a unit of natural selection, a genetic unit small enough not to be frequently split by crossing-over during meiosis (which could constituted of many cistrons). In another respect, different varieties of a particular gene are called alleles, though sometimes also referred to as genes. Individuals with two copies of the same allele are homozygous, while individuals with different alleles are heterozygous. As Boyd & Silk suggest: "A segment of the chromosome that produces a recognisable effect on the phenotype and segregates as a unit during gamete formation" (2003: A7). Maybe, E.O. Wilson's definition is most universally pliable: <quote>"The basis unit of hereditary" (1975: 585).</quote><heading>22) Species</heading>"A group of organism classified together at the lowest level of taxonomic hierarchy." (Boyd & Silk 2003: A15) There is much disagreement among biologists about how to define a species; there are many different types of species concept: The biological species concept is defined by the extend of the group that an organism is willing to mate within it's natural habitat, though some more distant individuals are willing to mate but can not produce fertile offspring. In a similar respect the isolation concept (Mayr 1976) defines a species by the extended by members can produce fertile offspring, in connection to 'isolating mechanisms'. Though this is problematic due to some hybrids being fertile, others not, such as with the donkey and ass. The  recognition concept (Patterson 1978) is determined by members of a species sharing a common fertilisation system including in animals a specific mate recognition system (SRMS). I addition to the isolation concept, for example humans are not attracted to chimpanzees we don't have the same method of recognising mates, we don't share the same SRMS. Every species has a unique fertilisation system; species specific signals and responses. It is easy for use as humans using our own primary sense vision to observe other animals that do so in a similar respect, although emphasis on vision alone should not be used. Sound is a key factor in the SRMS of birds, butterflies and many nocturnal primates, giving information on the position of the potential mate, and in some instances status and willingness (bushbabies). Many bushbabies we thought to be the same species because they look quite similar, although sounds involved in their SRMS are completely different and are actually genetically quite distantly unrelated (Lock and key-sexual organs, bone, hand pad patterns). The ecological species concept points out that gene flow is neither necessary nor sufficient to maintain species boundaries in every case, and argues that selection plays an important role in maintaining boundaries between species. If we take an example form Daphne River, Darwin's finches, it has been estimated that the medium ground finches and the large ground finch mate in 10 percent of individuals due to overlap in habitats (Grant & Grant). This view maintains that the two populations of finches still remain distinct species because selection is acting upon two optimal sizes of beak signifying the fittest individuals and the most numerous individuals in the respective species, the hybrids the weakest and least numerous. Still another species concept the Phylogenetic species concept is used in museums; the smallest clutter of individual organism within which there is a parental pattern of ancestry and descent. <heading>23) Gene Flow</heading>Boyd & Silk define it as "the movement of genes from one population to another, or one part of a population to another, as a result of interbreeding" (2003: A8). Gene flow reduces variation between populations (or species, depending on your preferential definition). Example of this was of Darwin's ground finches given in the last section. An example from human life could be the opening up of Japan to the outside world early in the 20 th century, this allowed gene flow, interbreeding with other populations of humans, and therefore reducing variation that could have occurred due to genetic drift. <heading>24) Genetic Drift</heading>"Changes in gene frequencies over generations, resulting from chance rather than selection" (Dawkins 1982: 294). Sometimes known as a random force, and operates on small genetically isolated populations. To give a simple example, if we had a genetically and physically isolated Polynesian island population of 50 individuals, and during a storm a tree collapses killing 5 of the most successful, genetically fit individuals within the population. Much potentially advantageous genetic material could be lost. This could potentially have great changes on gene frequencies within the small population. Genetic drift in small populations causes random changes in gene frequencies. Gene frequency can change by chance alone bypassing the operations of natural selection. If a certain locus has roughly equal gene frequencies of two different alleles acting on it, analogy could be pretty much like two people repeatedly flipping a hand full of coins (the population are the individual coins), in turn, guessing if it is heads or tails until one person or the other has won all the coins. And so the individual would be homozygous with one or the other allele. If the two people had thousands of coins to flip between them, the time taken until one person had one them all would take much, much longer, if ever. Such a homozygous state is called a point of 'fixation'. This process operates far quicker than natural selection on a small isolated population, mostly leading to maladaptation. The population will remain at fixation until mutation introduces a new allele. Jared Diamond (1992) gives examples of his experiences in the highlands of Papua New Guinea. Papua New Guinea probably has the most genetic diversity between populations on the planet. Being roughly the size of France, it has about a third of the earth's mutually indistinguishable languages, its isolated inhabitants in Diamond's words having been there over 50,000 years. The islands physical boundaries and thick vegetation are notoriously difficult to travel through, one expedition to explore the mountain peaks in the early 20 th century being abandoned after 7 months, only moving about 30 miles inland. There is also very little naturally occurring edible food to further inhibit travel. The inhabited highlands we only discovered in the mid-early part of the 20 th century by a botanist interested in studying the great diversity in birds there. Jared Diamond through his own study and travel has described the phenotypic diversities that exist between the small population groups that exist there, describing some small populations as been inflicted with various genetic diseases, and other equally isolated populations as having unusually late starting age for puberty amongst individuals, for example. Most scientists agree that population sizes must be fairly small, around one hundred individuals for genetic drift to have an important effect when it is opposed to natural selection. It is agreed, genetic drift has more noticeable affects on traits expressed by a genotype at a single locus, it is unlikely genetic drift would generate significant maladaptation in traits that vary continuously and are affected by many genetic loci. Genetic drift can also include the 'founder effect' or 'Sewell height'. To give example from Boyd and Silk, the Afrikaners, descendants of Dutch immigrants who arrived in South Africa in the 17 th century. The small group of individuals who were part of the first colonising population carried with them a number of rare genetic diseases. These diseases are preserved within the modern population in high frequencies. For example the disease porphyria variegata, sufferers have an severe adverse reaction to anaesthetics. About 30,000 of the modern population carry the dominant allele for the disease, every on of them being descended from a single couple in the original population of immigrants (2003: 448). <heading>25) Sexual Selection</heading>Darwin's theory of 'sexual selection' has often been an item of controversy and debate. Original debates raged between the 'Fisherians' and the 'good geners' of the neo-Darwinists. Sexual selection is a form of natural selection that results form differential mating success within one gender. In mammals it is usually males that compete in male to male competition over access to females. Such behaviour is determined by facts of reproduction; for a female to have an offspring there is much investment at stake and there are large periods of time between potential offspring, in most mammalian species having to raise the infant themselves. Males on the other hand in most mammals can have as many offspring as physically able without the burden of investment. Sexual selection is often much stronger than ordinary selection. The most successful of males will in mammals will often have many more offspring than the most successful female, while it is also the case that usually a larger percent of males will fail to reproduce than females, selection is harder on the male. Sexual selection an be broken into two forms; intrasexual selection that results from competition among males, and intersexual selection resulting from female choice (Boyd & Silk 2003: 185). Adult male baboons are nearly twice the size of adult females, and are armed with large canine teeth for fighting and defence unlike the female. The degree of sexual dimorphism in body size is most pronounced in species with the greatest competition among males over access to females, an example of intrasexual selection. A good example of intersexual selection is the peacock. The male peacock is essentially in evolutionary terms giving a display of health to any receptive female. His tail hinders his ability to escape from predators, but enhances his attractiveness to females. Female peahens are attracted to males with the most eyespots on their trains. <heading>26) Allopatric Speciation </heading>The widely supported view that divergence of population into distinct species (no longer interbreeding) takes place in geographically separate places. An example of this could come from Roger Kingdom; populations of guenons in the course of their evolution were left isolated in patches of forest due to the ebb at flow of forestation during climatic change, this leading to genetic drift and distinct species. The alternative sympatric (or, parapatric) speciation gives rise difficulties in understanding how the incipient species can separate if they are continuously in a position to interbreed with one another, and therefore mix their gene-pools. Although Darwin's finches (Grant & Grant) demonstrate the divergence of a single species into multiple empty ecological niches. <heading>27) Adaptive Radiation</heading>Adaptive radiation occurs when there are many empty ecological niches. It is the process in which a single species diversifies into a number of species, each with its own distinct adaptations. The most well known of these adaptive radiations coming at the end of the Cretaceous era, when the dinosaurs disappeared. The mostly small, nocturnal mammals that had coexisted with dinosaurs until that point then diversified to fill all the now empty niches evolving in to elephants, killer whales, bats and multitudes of megaforna (Boyd & Silk 2003: 98). <heading>28) Allometry</heading>A disproportionate relationship between size of a body part and the size of the whole body, the comparisons being made either across individuals or across different life stage in the same individual (Dawkins 1999: 290). Social insects, especially ants provide a good example, large ants tend to have a relatively very large head; the head grows at a different rate to the rest of the body. In mathematical terms, the size of the body part is taken to relate to the size of the whole raised to a power. As E.O. Wilson clarifies: <quote>Any size relation between two body parts that can be expressed by y = bx a , where a and b are fitted constants. In the special case of isometry, a = 1, and the relative proportions of the body parts therefore remain constant with the change in body size. In all other cases [a does not equal1] the relative proportions change as the total body size is varied (1975: 578). </quote><heading>29) Extended Phenotype</heading>"All effects of a gene upon the world" (Dawkins 1999: 292). Dawkins (1999) argues for the biological perspective that recognises the beaver's dam, the spider's web, the bird's nest as not just merely products of the phenotype, the individual organism considered the functional whole, but parts of the phenotype, in the same way as the beaver's teeth, the spider's legs and the bird's wing (Dennett 1996). Although in theory the extension could project much further, Dawkins's adds that in practice in is convenient to limit the extended phenotype to cases that directly influence survival chances of the gene, positive or negative (1999: 292). <heading>30) Phylogeny and Classification</heading><quote>"Ancestral history on the evolutionary time scale" (Dawkins 1999: 296).</quote><quote>"The evolutionary relationships among a group of species, usually diagrammed in the form of a 'tree of life'" (Boyd & Silk 2003: A8).</quote>Classification is the method in which humans physically represent the world, we consciously and sub-consciously do this even when no definite defining line exists between concepts. Visually classified information aids humans in comprehension of reliably classified knowledge, for aid in learning and in formulation of new ideas. There are several important reasons why reconstructing phylogenies play an important role in the study of evolution: Phylogeny is the basis for the identification and classification of organisms. The arrangement of phylogenetic relationships between organisms in taxonomic hierarchies. Knowing phylogenetic relationships often helps to explain why species evolved certain adaptations and others not. New species form due to natural selection, modifying body structures to perform new functions. As Boyd and Silk suggest (2003) from Phylogenetic trees, for example, it is possible to observe the adaptations of quadrupeds, knuckle walkers and bipedalism in evolutionary order, an aid in determining relatedness. It is possible to deduce the function of morphological features or behaviours by comparing the traits of several species. The comparative method, by which it is possible for example to aid in argumentation of whether arboreal or terrestrial primates live in larger groups involving the collation and systematic display of data. (Boyd & Silk 2003: 105) <heading>31) Grade vs. Clade</heading>Due to the increased use of cladistics and stricter government of phylogenetic analysis, it has become clear that while clades are 'real' representations, grades, although an established concept in classification, are far more problematic. Clade is derived from Greek, and simply means branch, and refers to the evolutionary branches on the 'tree of life'. It is theoretically possible that an 'objective' phylogenetic tree could actually be constructed and represent what actually happened in evolution. Grades, on the other hand, are far more harder define. Basically a grade is a group of organism that share similar biological organisation, and system of adaptive traits. Grades have their origins in the 'Systema Naturae' of Linneas, the concepts of are deep rooted in biological phylogeny. For the main part grades and clades coincide, but at certain levels it is questionable whether the old fashioned grade is a useful term. Many problematic examples exist among classification of the primates. Lewin and Foley give the following example; monkeys can be said to represent a grade relative to both apes and prosimians, but the groups that constitute them the platyrrhines and catarrhines are not monophyletic clade. The tarsier for example is a prosimians grade of animal, yet in terms of clade it is an anthropoid. There is much dispute over hominins, as they are clearly a grade it is impossible to tell where to draw the line for that grade. <heading>32) Adaptation and Adaptability</heading>A feature of an organism created by the process of natural selection. It is important to note all organisms are capable of producing more offspring that can survive (Malthus). Of the offspring that do survive, on average, they are more likely to have an anatomy, physiology or behaviour that better prepares them for the demands of their environment. The principles of environmental variation are often associated with the 'modern synthesis' a body of theory based on empirical knowledge in the attributed to the biologists Wright, Fisher and Haldane in the 1930s. They were also known as 'Neo-Darwinists', so by called due to the prior popularity of theories based on Mendelian genetics following its own rediscovery and subsequent increase in popularity. Mendel's theories were perceived incompatible with Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection at the time. The Neo-Darwinists showed how Mendelian genetics could not be used to explain continuous variation, leading to a Darwinist theory of inheritance, and accounting for the way variation is maintained within a population based on Darwinian natural selection within an environment. Although, Darwin himself knew nothing about genetics, all his theory of adaptation by natural selection is framed in purely phenotypic terms. The fundamental theory of modern synthesis basically goes, continuous variation cannot be accounted for by changes of genotype at a locus per trait, as in Mendel's peas. To achieve the varying sizes of physical characteristics seen in a species there must be many different genotypes at many different loci, on different chromosomes (although genes were undiscovered the 1930s, but the principle is parallel). This coupled with the pressures of the environment, some individuals being better or less nourished than other individuals, therefore, aiding or retarding the growth of the physical expressed characteristic in question. For example, the famous example given by Boyd and Silk (2003) of the varieties finches that inhabit the Galapagos, originally studied by Darwin, more recently studied by Peter and Rosemary Grant. The Grants studied the continuous variation involved in the beak depth and width of finches. Their results go to show: <quote>Continuously varying characters are affected by genes at many loci, each locus having only a small effect on phenotype (2003: 60)</quote>If there were only a few genes at a couple of loci affecting beak size, with no environmental affects such as nourishment affecting growth, a stratified effect would be observed in the collect information of beak dimensions of different individuals. Could be analogous to the way we buy our clothes, 'small, medium or large'. In reality, empirical data shows the majority of expressed characteristics we see as un-stratified, complex gradual continuous variation, with no visible increments amongst data collected. Environment change and variation have large effects on gene frequencies within populations. Using Darwin's finches (Grant & Grant) again as an example, when the climate changed and drought ensued on Daphne Major, the mean relative beak size of the finches increased due to pressures of natural selection to adapt to the change of available food. Larger beaked individuals survived better than small beaked individuals due to the increased size and hardness of nut and seed food source. This therefore increased gene frequencies affecting large beak size and growth. What is theoretically alleles controlling growth hormones, or calcium supply to the beak. Data collected from Daphne Major has shown a positive correlation between beak width and beak depth. Although, this was actually maladaptive. Whatever genotypes were increasing the advantageous trait of beak depth, were also by pleiotropic effect, increasing the beak width at the same time. It turns out selection favoured beak depth, and not beak width. The thinner beak could apply more pressure, than an individual with a wide beak. It therefore follows, as the finches neared selective equilibrium in the environment, the threshold for deletion also included birds with the largest beaks as well as the smallest beaks, altering gene frequencies for large and small beak characteristics. <heading>33) Parallel and Convergent Evolution</heading>The power of natural selection can be seen in the phenomenon of convergent (or parallel) evolution. Typically if two species share the same adaptive characteristics, it is thought that this reflects shared ancestry, in that they both inherited the trait from a common ancestor. Shared traits are thus homologies, in that they have a common origin. The basic bones of the vertebrate are excellent examples of homologies (Lewin & Foley 2004: 36). Convergent evolution the other hand, is where distantly related species come to resemble one another very closely by adapting to similar ecological niches. A good example of this would be the recently determined bushbaby species in West Africa. The extensive nature of convergence in the biological world is possibly the strongest evidence of all for natural selection. <heading>34) Gradualism and Punctuated Equilibrium</heading>These terms refer to two modes of evolution. Gradualism views evolution as proceeding by the steady accumulation of small changes over long periods of time, Darwin suggested "we see nothing of these slow changes in progress, until the hand of time has passed the ages." The idea was further developed by B.S. Haldane a Neo-Darwinist of the Modern Synthesis. In contrast, punctuated equilibrium (a thesis of and named by Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould) sees morphological change as being concentrated in brief burst of change, periods of a few thousand years, usually associated with the origin of a new species. Darwin often expressed concerned at the impoverished evidence in the fossil records, Lewin and Foley (2004) suggest it equates to taking a photograph of a football game every ten minutes, then afterwards trying to determine what happened. Dawkins, in chapter six of "the extended phenotype" expresses concern that the theory of punctuated equilibrium is being manipulated to attack the validity of Darwinism, due to the impoverished fossil record and Darwinism apparently being a gradualist theory, as Darwin said in this respect "nature does to make leaps". It might be completely feasible that both modes of evolution are possible, rapid adaptation to new/empty niches or gradual isolated environmental change etc.. There is possibly evidence of rapid change coming from the rapid adaptation and speciation of the finches of the Hawaiian Archipelago and Daphne Major. I don't think Darwin's got any worries. <heading>35) Describe Darwin's theory of Natural Selection in modern genetic terms. </heading>If different genotypes are associated with the different phenotypes and those phenotypes differ in their ability to reproduce, then the alleles that lead to the development of the favoured phenotype will increase in frequency..... The differential survival of different alleles. 