<heading>Introduction</heading>A priority of conservation biologists is to assess primate population densities in order to determine conservation status and identify species most urgently in need of protection. To ensure a precise estimate of population density it is essential that appropriate research techniques be employed. In order make an educated choice it is essential to be familiar with the species ecology (e.g. home range, nocturnal / diurnal / cathemeral, breeding season, detectibility) and the area of study, prior to commencing research. This can be achieved by carrying out a pilot study, through extensive reading or by conducting interviews with locals. <heading>Research methods</heading>Actual population density can be acquired through a Direct Count. To ensure accuracy all animals must be easily detected, clearly seen and reliably identified (Sutherland, 2000). A census of Aloatta pigra was carried out using a variety of methods to thoroughly search the study site and confirm the correct identity of all individuals (Estrada et al., 2002). Not only did this method take several days to complete, but, assuming animals learnt to avoid commonly used paths, repeatedly walking the existing trail system possibly resulted in unreliable results. The survey provided preliminary results only and it was concluded that further assessments be carried out in the area to test consistency (Estrada et al., 2002). Actual counts can be unsuccessful in acquiring primate population densities and often it is more accurate to estimate absolute populations from representative samples through Qudrat or Distance Sampling. Quadrat sampling involves the observer assessing population density in replicate plots within the study site. This method is used to carry out indirect observations, counting sedentary objects such as dung or nests. Indirect sampling has been employed to census population densities of a range of Great Ape species (Buij, Singleton, Krakauer & van Schaik, 2003; McNeilage et al, 1997). To estimate the population of Pan troglodytes verus in southeastern Senegal systematic line-transects of chimpanzee nests were conducted (Pruetz, et al., 2002). Transects radiated from a central point traversing a range of habitats providing unbiased results, once the results had been weighted according to the proportion of habitats within the chimpanzee home range. It was assumed that each weaned primate built a new nest every 24 hrs and the duration of each nest was consistent throughout. Only "fresh nests" were counted and decay rate was measured according to a scale determined in a previous study allowing comparisons to be made (Baldwin et al., 1984; Fernandez and Tutin, 1981). No fresh nests were observed along line transects radiating along systematic compass points so, in addition, areas known to be most used by chimpanzees were selectively sampled. This method also relied on every animal being seen or detected within each plot. Small teams covered areas working in a series of strip transects to improve vigilance. Employing multiple observers in a single area made it necessary to mark the objects being counted to avoid double counting. Strip transects require determining a cut-off point according to the distance that the observer can see animals. In dense forest areas species density may be under estimated due to poor visibility. To overcome this, Parallel Transects can be used. Parallel transects require the observer to be familiar with the study site and are often used in long-term study areas. During  Gorilla gorilla beringei censoring at Bwindi Impenetrable National Park a sweep of the study site was conducted (McNeilage et al, 2001), thoroughly covering the entire area and allowing a large amount of data to be collected fairly rapidly. Parallel transects avoid bias caused by single line transects which often misrepresent features such as vegetation type, within the study area (Ross & Reeve, 2003). Results obtained agreed with previous studies in the area indicating a reliable data collecting technique. Like the parallel transect method Distance Sampling eradicates limitations caused by poor visibility, but requires less ground to be covered. It may be more useful when surveying unexplored areas of dense forest. This method assumes only a proportion of animals will be detected along a randomly chosen line transect or within a plot. The total number of animals is determined from the proportion within a known distance according to species detectability. Line Transects enable the observer to cover a large area while recording constantly and are often a favoured technique when studying wide ranging primates occurring at low densities (Ross & Reeve, 2003). Line transects should be carried out at a standardized speed and new trails cut in straight lines. Following established trails regularly used for additional activities such as hunting or logging will cause bias (Sutherland, 2000). Due to time restraints, topography and to limit habitat damage it may be more appropriate to follow existing trail systems as illustrated in a three-month study of Eulemur fulvus carried out in South-eastern Madagascar. Despite conducting test surveys of proposed methods, results were unreliable. Low, imprecise density estimates resulted from short transects and too few replications (Johnson and Overdorff, 1998). In situations where terrain is particularly treacherous Point Sampling can be employed (Nguyen, 2000). Point sampling causes minimal disturbance and is extremely useful when studying highly conspicuous or nocturnal primates (Gursky, 1998). The absolute density of Propithecus tattersalli in an area of North-eastern Madagascar was assessed using fixed-point sampling from high altitude observation points (Vargas et al., 2002). While this method does not allow for detailed data on group composition or habitat type, it can provide reliable information on species presence across a geographic range, assuming the landscape is clear and the species highly visible. Independent data points may be obtained from point sampling, useful for management purposes and this method avoids inaccuracies caused by inadequate transects (Sutherland 2000). <heading>Conclusion</heading>No single method is the most accurate in measuring population density of primates. In practice, population surveys are never completely without bias. Often more successful studies employ a range of sampling techniques in order to minimise limitations. From the knowledge acquired as a result of accurate density sampling realistic conservation goals can be set and future losses prevented. 