<heading>Introduction </heading>The following case study is based on a 42 year old male client with no close family and a history of repeated suicide attempts and delusional thoughts. The client is not someone that I have nursed and so any hypothesis or conclusions which I have reached during this assignment are based on the limited information that I have about the client and the application of my knowledge and reading around the subject of Mental Health law and ethics. Mental health nursing involves a greater awareness of the law than general nursing, since at times we are treating people without their consent (Hendrick 2000), this factor will be explored in relation to John later in the case study. I have presumed that, as is the accepted practice when writing a case study, John is not the client's real name but been changed to protect his identity. Ethics can be defined as a generic term for the various ways of understanding and interpreting moral life (Beauchamp & Childress 2001). Our system of law and legal frameworks are built on what is commonly held to be right or just and designed to prevent injustice against the individual or society and maintain order. Medical ethics are a combination of what is required by law and the rules that various professional bodies have designed to help practitioners with difficult decisions. Beauchamp and Childress draw on historical ethical works along with their own observations from the healthcare environment to formulate their ethical theory which is known as biomedical ethics and has four main principles: Beneficence, the principle of doing good, non-maleficence, the principle of doing no harm, respect for autonomy and justice. All four of these principles will be discussed in relation to John within this essay. <heading>Part 1 - John's Community Psychiatric Nurse (CPN) and General Practitioner (GP) are considering whether to compulsorily admit John to hospital under the Mental Health Act (1983). What are the legal and ethical issues they should bear in mind? </heading>Before compulsory admission into a psychiatric hospital is allowed to happen, it must be proved that an individual is suffering from a mental illness. Defining a mental disorder is always difficult since no one is ever a text book case; this is one of the reasons why most compulsory admissions require the agreement of two medical practitioners (Jones 1996). The case study that we have about John does not tell us whether he already has a diagnosis of a specific mental health problem, although it does tell us that as well as a history of repeated suicide attempts, he also experiences auditory hallucinations and persecutory delusions. The Mental Health Act (DOH 1983) states that a person may be compulsorily admitted into hospital where it is in the interests of his or her own health, or in the interests of his or her own safety, or for the protection of other people. If John were detained, the reason used would be that it is in the interests of his own safety since he is a risk to himself; the professionals would cite his past suicide attempts and his current low mood and suicidal thoughts to illustrate this. The Mental Health Act is a legal document based on considered opinion of medical professionals and is designed to protect the best interests of the ill person; it is therefore both a legal and ethically binding piece of work. Since it is likely that John is already known to the services (the fact that he already has an appointed CPN tells me this), he should have a plan of care where the risk of deterioration of his condition and any possible consequences have already been explored at a time when he was not quite so ill. The plan of care involving the service user is based on the Care Programme Approach (DOH 1999), referred to hereafter as CPA, which encourages collaboration in order to better meet the needs of the service users and to empower them to express these needs (Barker & Whitehill 1997). Psychiatric nursing, perhaps more so than any other branch has to take a holistic view of the person that they are treating, not just the illness or the healing of a wound. It is essential that we try to understand the values that an individual holds and try to accommodate these into the plan of care. As professionals, we would not want John to feel he was being bullied into a hospital admission and become more agitated - there are ways of explaining a situation to a client without being threatening and this must be attempted even if one thinks that the client is too ill to comprehend what is going on. Whitler (1996) suggests some ways that we can assist clients to make decisions about their future care, as well as personalisation, he prioritises information giving and mentioning opportunities. It must be remembered when using Whitler's work that his subjects were older adults in care homes and so the results may not be directly applicable to a patient of John's age. John could be admitted into hospital using a section 2, 3 or 4, the implications of these sections and the persons involved will be discussed in the next few paragraphs. The application to admit John must be made by either his nearest relative or an approved social worker (ASW) since these are people who are seen as acting in the best interests of the client. Since we are told that John has no relatives, the application would have to be made by an ASW. For admissions under both sections 2 and 3, there is a need for the opinion of 2 doctors, one of whom must be section 12 approved which means that they are registered with the home office as a specialist in mental health. The second opinion doctor could be John's GP. It is likely that John's CPN would also play a part in the admission by acting as an advocate for John and to co-ordinating the planning of the Mental Health Act assessment. If John is not deemed to be in immediate danger, it is likely that he would be admitted using section 2 of the Act which allows detention for assessment and if necessary, compulsory treatment for up to 28 days. He could be admitted using section 3 of the Act (admission for treatment lasting up to 6 months) although this stipulates a condition that medical treatment is likely to alleviate, or prevent a deterioration in his condition (Thomas et al 1997) which, since he has been treated with ineffective medication in the past can not be proven to be true leaving a possibility that John could contest his admission on these grounds. It is likely that if John begins to respond to treatment whilst on the section 2, this would be converted into a section 3 to allow him to complete his treatment in hospital. John could also be admitted to hospital using section 4 of the act if the CPN and GP think that he is in immediate danger and that he needs to come into hospital straight away then he can be brought in with just the GP's recommendation and application by the nearest relative or ASW. This section can last only 72 hours. There is no information about whether John has been admitted into hospital before but if he has recently been admitted using a section 2 then the healthcare professionals would be likely to admit him using section 3 of the act if the presentation of his illness has not changed significantly. There are cases of patients who lack the capacity to consent and are admitted into hospital voluntarily (Dimond & Barker 1996), these people are outside the capacity of the mental health act and so in some respects, the nurse may be acting in the patient's best interests by allowing them to be sectioned rather than an informal admission. A section gives the patient clear rights whereas a patient who has been informally admitted may be unsure of their rights and see the possibility of being sectioned as a punishment for bad behaviour. <heading>What are the effects of admitting John under the Mental Health Act 1983? </heading>John will not able to vote because he is deemed to be living at the hospital's address for the duration of his detention period and the address is not classed as residential. A sectioned patient who has gone absent without leave can be compulsorily returned to hospital. Section 2 allows treatment without consent and section 3 of the Act allows treatment without consent for a period of up to 3 months after which permission must be granted by the patient or a second opinion must be obtained from another doctor. Section 4 does not allow compulsory treatment for the period of detention. The patient has a right to appeal to detention under section 2 or 3 of the Act. The detained patient may appeal to the hospital managers and/or a tribunal committee consisting of 3 independent individuals. Section 4 can not be appealed against due to the short duration. The patient may be granted section 17 leave by the Responsible Medical Officer (RMO); specifications may or may not be placed on this leave including time limits, escorts or places (Dimond & Barker 1996). It is again, the nurse's role to ensure that the correct section 17 leave is written up for a patient before they are allowed to take it, the leave should also be recorded by the nursing staff to ensure that it is complied with. By admitting a patient into hospital under a section you are removing their choice in the matter which could be considered unethical since they are no longer autonomous. John says that he has nothing to live for and wants to die which may be interpreted as a suicidal thought, however the team must be very clear about this, using his presentation and knowledge of his illness (or symptoms) to guide them - they will ask searching questions to deem whether he is a suicide risk and may also use a tool such as Beck's Depression Inventory (Beck 1979) to rate his depression and suicidal thoughts. John's personal values must also be considered when thinking about compulsory admission into hospital - the professionals involved would have to consider whether taking control of the situation would worsen John's depressive state and make him more suicidal. If we look at the 4 principles of biomedical ethics (Beauchamp & Childress 2001) we could say that by detaining John in hospital against his will, we are removing his autonomy but we would say that the action is non-maleficent since to leave John in the community may mean that he does harm to himself. The action of detention would also be considered just in the eyes of the law since the policies and procedures set down by the Mental Health Act will have been followed but it would also have to be proved that John was treated justly as a person - that he was fully informed of all of the facts about his detention and the consequences of being on a section as well as his right to appeal. The final principal that must be mentioned is beneficence - the concept of doing good for one or more others, in John's case the healthcare professionals would say that by admitting John into hospital they are doing good for him by preserving his life. Beneficence can at times lead to paternalism, the concept of "we know what's best for you"; it should be remembered that mentally ill adults still have a decision making capacity and although their illness may prevent them from seeing all things clearly, we should still value their opinions and wishes wherever possible. <heading>2. John has now been admitted to hospital but continues to refuse any treatment. The ward team is considering giving involuntary treatment to John. What are the legal and ethical issues they should bear in mind? </heading>Depending on what section John has been admitted on, there is every possibility that it would be legal to treat him with medication against his wishes, however this is a practice that is a last resort and the client will very often be "encouraged" to comply with medication rather than have it forcibly given (this is usually administered as an intra-muscular injection). Having medication forced upon oneself must be a very unpleasant and frightening experience, it could be said that the client's body is being violated and indeed many patients do regard non-consensual Intra Muscular (IM) injections as assault (Barrett 1992 cited in Glenister 1997 pp46). The practitioner would in all cases try to convince the client to admit themselves into hospital as an informal patient. The case study tells us that trials of various medications have proved ineffective for John's condition, so perhaps it can be deemed not unreasonable that he is currently refusing to agree to treatment. Psychiatric medication can have various unpleasant side effects and if John were experiencing any of these, combined with the fact that the medication was not improving his symptoms then we should ask ourselves if it is right to subject him to forced treatment when we do not know how effective it will be. Another treatment method which may be considered is Electro Convulsive Therapy (ECT). ECT is at times prescribed for clients exhibiting a severe depressive state, it is usually after trials of various drugs have failed to alleviate symptoms and it is a commonly held view that it is a last resort since although it can yield excellent results, physicians still do not know exactly how it works and it can also have some unpleasant side effects. In all cases consent is sought from the patient prior to the treatment. The rules and regulations surrounding this treatment are different to those dealing with drug administration since it is viewed by the government and the Mental Health Act as an invasive treatment (Bartlett & Sandland 2003) and as such it is not automatically covered as a treatment which may be administered without consent on a sectioned patient; instead the RMO must apply to a tribunal for permission to treat. <heading>What consequentionalist arguments for treating John could be put forward? </heading>Consequentionalism can be defined as follows: "whether an act is morally right depends only on the consequences of that act or of something related to that act, such as the motive behind the act or a general rule requiring acts of the same kind." (Sinnott-Armstrong 2003). Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill were both pioneers in this school of thought, believing that a person's rules/laws or code of conduct could be broken or ignored if the act that they carried out had a result of yielding the greatest good for the greatest number of people, this concept is also known as Utilitarianism and is the most well known consequentionalist school of thought. The consequentionalist argument for treating John without his consent would be that by doing so, his suicidal ideas may subside and he would be less of a threat to himself and less of a worry to the staff on the ward. Although Consequentialism, does value a person's autonomy and strongly objects to paternalism, John Stuart Mill proposed a strategy of temporary intervention which states that intervention is justified to ascertain whether a person is acting autonomously (Mill 1985). On the subject of suicide, he proposes that if the suicide was autonomous and the individual had the capacity for autonomy then no further action is justified (The internet encyclopaedia of philosophy). The consequentionalist argument could be used in another way by the hypothesis that if John is treated with medication against his will, it could be the case that the medication does not work and possibly has nasty side effects and the fact that he had not consented to treatment may potentially cause him to become more ill and reinforce his persecutory delusions - perhaps in this case, the consequentionalists would not treat John without his consent. <heading>What duties are involved in considerations of treating John involuntarily? </heading>The idea of duty in ethical theory comes from the work of Immanuel Kant (1724-1804). His theory of ethics, known as deontology is obligation and rules based and proposes that a person's intentions are crucial in determining the moral worth of his or her actions, it is not concerned with the consequences of an action as are the Utilitarians. Kant proposes that persons are autonomous, that is self governing, personhood, that is humanity has primary value. No individual's personhood has more or less intrinsic value than the personhood of any other individual, and so every individual's humanity should be respected equally (Olsen 2003). As healthcare professionals, we are bound by a duty of care, for nurses this means adhering to NMC guidelines and the rules laid out in the Mental Health Act for the treatment of patients, but not Paternalism. We must maintain respect for the individual at all times and as such respect their opinions. Coercion is a strong theme with Kant since he proposes that coercion negates a person's autonomy. Yet another duty that the healthcare professional must bear in mind is Standard 7 in the National Service Framework for Mental health - preventing suicide: the government has set a target of a 5% reduction by 2010 (DOH 1999) and it is likely that the Managers of Mental health trusts would be keen to help the government achieve this and therefore encourage their staff to be extra vigilant. As professionals, we may feel we have a duty to try to treat John's illness, otherwise it appears that we are detaining him for no reason. Health professionals who do not take reasonable precautions to safeguard a suicidal patient who then goes on to kill themselves may be sued for negligence in the civil courts (Thomas et al 1997). Moral philosophers may be content with the way they think about right and wrong but those who want to use a system of ethics need to be concerned with what that system actually does (Jones no date). In the real world we are often forced to choose between principles and this is the case with John. The nurse has a duty of care towards John who is considered ill enough to be in hospital. If we look once again at the 4 principles of biomedical ethics (Beauchamp & Childress 2001), the deontological approach would see us with a conflict of interests - by treating John without his consent, we would be removing his autonomy and this is one of the things as nurse's that we are supposed to be promoting. <heading>What are John's best interests? What are his wishes? How do these principles conflict? </heading>There is a clear conflict between beneficence and autonomy here for the professional since John's wishes to kill himself and refusal of treatment are not going to result in an improvement in his condition whereas we know that if he consents to treatment then there is at least a chance he will begin to improve. An ethical question that we must ask ourselves though is who is the physician to say what will be the best outcome for John? John's wishes appear to be that he does not want to take medication and he does not want to come into hospital. It is indicated that he feels suicidal from the statement which we are given "he says that he has nothing to live for and wants to die". It would be important for the healthcare professional to try to talk to John about what he really wants and to find out if these suicidal thoughts are the only ones that he has about the future. The Caring Grid (Seedhouse 2000) is a useful tool which can be used to help practitioners decide on the best course of action in difficult situations by combining external factors with their own internal thoughts about a subject. <heading>3. What are the implications of the legal and ethical issues that you have considered in this case for your own practice? </heading>I found it interesting when researching this assignment to realise that sectioned patients actually have clearer rights than informal ones. I found the nurse's role in scrutinising medical recommendations such as section papers(Dimond & Barker 1996) and making sure that all is correct particularly relevant since an example of this happened incorrectly whilst I was in practice. Section papers were accepted by nursing staff and it was later found that neither of the doctors was section 12 approved and therefore the section was invalid. This had major implications since meanwhile the patient was restrained which they could have used as grounds to sue the trust. I was also unaware that post registration, each practitioner is personally responsible for ensuring that practice meets legal requirements and maintaining professional competence, which means keeping up to date with new procedures and policies (NMC 2002). An ethical issue that has come to the forefront whilst writing this assignment is the helplessness felt by some sectioned patients and in future I will be much more aware of the fact that we are treating vulnerable patients and the balance of power is strongly in the professional's favour so this must not be abused. Ethical frameworks within nursing are tools to promote discussion. There is no categorical right or wrong and every situation must be judged separately. Personally I feel that it is important to have a set of professional conduct rules such as the NMC guidelines, but to stick to these rules religiously and to interpret them literally could potentially lead to nursing practice becoming dehumanised ( Glenister 1997). Ethical theory is based on other people's interpretation of the best way to deal with a situation and in writing this case study, the thing that has become clearer to me is that we must also try to empathise with the service user. I have read many accounts during my research for this essay by "survivors" of the mental health services in Britain, all of whom have identified a feeling of helplessness whilst being treated. I have spoken at length in this essay about over-ruling a person's autonomy when they are mentally ill and this seems to be what users find most abusive about in-patient treatment. Whilst I am training and after I qualify, I am going to attempt to involve users more in their treatment plans and better understand the CPA model which I have heard being referred to in practice but never actually observed procedure being adhered to as it should - by collaboration with the client. 