<abstract>The meaning of the word research means to search again or to examine carefully and to discover new facts (Hawkins, 1991 pg 438). Because nursing is a practical profession the role of research is essential to developing and refining knowledge which can then be used to improve clinical practice. Nurses need scientific knowledge to help improve their decision making and to provide the best possible care to patients and how to implement that care (Burns and Grove, 1995). Evidence based research is critically reviewed to allow the validity of the evidence to be determined, and its clinical acceptability within practice (McCandlish, 2001) I will be using the Critical Skills Appraisal Program (Public Heath Research Unit (2003) (CASP) guidelines to critically analyse the following papers. </abstract><heading>Critical Appraisal of a Qualitative Research Paper</heading>This essay examines an article by Chapple, Ziebland and McPherson where the Stigma, shame and blame experienced by patients with lung cancer is examined in a qualitative study via a number of narrative interviews with patients with the condition. The authors of this research provide a clear statement of aims justifying that there is very little qualitative research on the perceptions of those suffering from lung cancer and the stigma that they face (Coughlan, 2004, Walters, 2004). The negative impact of stigma on those suffering from lung cancer is discussed, and implications of increased stress and contribution towards psychological and social morbidity are also noted as potential side effects of stigma. This may provide information for future stop smoking campaigns to reduce stigma by society for those suffering from smoking related diseases. This is very important when considering the nature of the health education information the public are given at present about self harming activities and the rising percentage of smokers in our society. The opening of the DIPEx website precipitated the study and revealed a spontaneous theme of stigma. The aim of qualitative research is the viewing of events in the social world through the eyes of other people (Bryman, 2001) and trying to understand the phenomenon from the perspective of those experiencing it (Morse and Field, 1996). The stigma experienced by those suffering from lung cancer or other human emotions can not be accurately recorded with the use of statistical evidence nor gain the depth needed by the use of a questionnaire (Burns and Grove, 1995). The phenomenological research method is appropriate as this is a humanistic approach as this subject is one of a sensitive nature where participant and researcher work together to describe experiences as they are lived by participant (Forchuk and Roberts, 1993). The researcher in this study continually referred to the participants as patients rather than the preferred participants or informants, which suggests they are co-participants of the study and not just there to be studied exposing possible lack of pre existing relationship between researcher and participant (no details are given) which may not be appropriate considering the nature of the research (Streubert and Carpenter, 1995). The use of taped interviews allows the researcher to illuminate the subjective experiences had by the interviewees; the length of the interviews was not restricted allowing full saturation of data to be achieved, using an interview as the method of data collection also allows the opinions of those members of the public who are illiterate to be included. The chosen method of research design is appropriate for the aims of the study but the reasoning behind the chosen design method is not discussed or justified by the researchers. <heading>Was the recruitment strategy appropriate to the aims of the research? </heading>The recruitment strategy is mentioned briefly and participants were selected from diverse sources and invited to join but it was not specified who invited them, how they were approached and what information they were offered, if any. It was also not made clear which members of the public were invited to join the study and if members of the public were not selected as they were thought to be unsuitable for the study. This could influence the outcome of the study as a true representation of the feelings of those suffering from lung cancer can not be found; only one small quote was given from those considered to be "deviant" as they did not feel blamed or stigmatised. But as this is a piece of qualitative research the researcher has an active part in the study and the findings are influenced by the researcher's values and judgement (Burns and Grove, 1995). As the researchers were primarily interested in the experiences of stigma this may have been a criterion for being approached. The sample size is underpinned by a sound methodology which is clearly explained and justified and the finial number of participants was greater than that needed due to a desire to include a diverse sample that included those from different social backgrounds, sex and age. The idea that lung cancer may be perceived differently by those from different ethnic group is an area which is not explored in this research piece. <heading>Were the data collected in a way that addressed the research issue? </heading>The data for this study was collected in an appropriate manor, and the method of data collection was clear. Interviews were conducted at the participants own house, tape recorded and then transcribed to provide accurate information. Although the reasons for this were not made clear it would appear more ethical to discuss this sensitive matter in a personal environment and to be more convenient for those who are ill. By taping the interview more detail can be recorded and the interviewer can give their full attention to the participant. It is not made clear how the interview was conducted or if it was semi structured in any way, the patients were asked to 'tell their story' which meant that the sample responses were not limited in any way, although there was interaction between the participant and researcher, it is not clear if the researcher steered the conversation towards stigma if the subject did not occur independently during the interview. It may have been useful to use between method triangulation of data by using a number of different complementary methods of data collection to increase information about the chosen subject (Crookes and Davies, 2002). A number of focus group sessions may have raised more issues of stigmatism as it encourages group interaction and helps to monitor changes in attitudes and opinions, can encourage participation from reluctant interviewees and also the responses of many people on the same subject can be gained in a short period of time (Ogier, 1998). Focus groups may not have been appropriate due to the sensitive nature of the discussion, the vast geographical locations of participants and inconvenience, some people dislike expressing their views in public and it is possible that members of the group may dominate the discussion. <heading>Has the relationship between researcher and participants been adequately considered? </heading>There was limited consideration of the potential bias researchers may have had on those they were interviewing, the relationship between the researchers and the DIPEx project is mentioned but this appears not to influence the results. The researchers state that they are particularly interested in the feelings of stigma and blame but no mention of leading questions within the interview or selection of those experiencing stigma was explored. The researchers did not critically examine their own role or their influence and potential bias through out the analysis and selection of the presentation of the data. <heading>Have ethical issues been taken into consideration? </heading>This research was approved by multiple ethical comities and interviews were conducted by a medical sociologist. It is not discussed whether the sociologist was capable of dealing with emotional issues that may arise from the interview session or if any additional support was offered to those who participated from those specifically trained to deal with emotional issues such as psychologists or McMillan nurses. Although the interviewer gained consent to conduct the interview, it is not made clear what information participants received at the "invitation" and what they study would involve. Issues regarding confidentially are not mentioned, this is especially important when discussing this topic as some of those interviewed had not told their friends or family of their condition because of fear of stigma they may face. <heading>Was the data analysis sufficiently rigorous? </heading>The description of the data analysis is limited but allows insight as to how the data was organised and grouped. Thematic analysis is used as the researcher claim that themes and groups were developed from the data, but there were no details of how the themes were picked. The data received from the forty five interviews lasted between one and three hours and were then transcribed, and then offered to the participants to confirm, as this is a very time consuming method of data collection one has to question the level of data analysis that was possible with only three researchers. The use of the NUDIST (non-numerical unstructured data indexing, searching and theorising) computer system was used in the managing, organisation and supporting of research in qualitative data analysis, this is an approved method of data analysis (Crookes and Davies, 2002) <heading>Is there a clear statement of findings? </heading>The researchers portrayed a strong hypothesis that people most people with lung cancer experienced some form of blame and stigma, they mention contraindicated data briefly with possible explanations that participants who are older may not experience this stigmatism to such an extend as smoking was seen as socially acceptable and even encouraged for those in national service when they first became addicted. Although a strong case is portrayed there is no discussion over the credibility of their findings. <heading>How valuable is the research? </heading>On its own this piece of research is unlikely to change practice but if other pieces of research were conducted and a meta-analysis was carried out the research would be seen as more reliable and may influence a change in health promotion campaigns and education to reduce stigma attached to certain illnesses. This change may also affect the teaching of healthcare professionals when dealing with those who are thought to have inflicted their own illness. Although anti-smoking campaigns are unpleasant especially for those who are suffering from the condition, I believe they would be less successful at deterring younger people from starting smoking leading to higher levels of the population suffering from lung cancer in the future and a larger health care budget having to be supplied to treat this preventable disease. This paper does help us to understand the phenomena of stigma surrounding illnesses and may prove useful for understanding similar situations were stigma is an issue such as other types of cancer, obesity and HIV. <heading>Critical appraisal of a quantitative research paper</heading>This essay examines an article by Walker, Townsend, Oakley, Donovan, Smith, Hurst, Bell and Marshall (2002) titled Health promotion for adolescents in primary care: randomised controlled trial. The study asks a reasonably focused question that focuses on the discussion of health behaviours at a general practice consultation with teenagers and appropriate follow up care. The measurement of effective change achieved by the intervention taking place is also mentioned. This study was approved by the local ethics committee. <heading>Was this a randomised controlled trial (RCT) and was it appropriately so? </heading>The use of a RCT is appropriate for this research design as the study is making measurements over the health changes observed between a control and intervention group, leading to quantitative results and analysis comparing the two variables using a large number of participants which are followed for a specific time period (Greenhalgh, 1997). This RCT did not include an inclusion or exclusion criteria which is common (Cormack, 2000) (only that participants had to be between fourteen and fifteen years of age) which is appropriate due to the intervention that is being studied as no exclusion criteria can be thought of. <heading>Were participants appropriately allocated to intervention and control groups? </heading>The participants of the study were stratified according to sex but the researcher did not justify this stratification or how it would affect the variables that were being studied. The randomisation process was not given in great detail and the allocation of a "random number seed" by the researcher leaves room for potential bias within the study. The randomisation process would have been more reliable if the researchers had used an outside call centre to place the teenagers in the control or intervention group to reduce the chance of bias in the selection process or used identical opaque envelopes which contained the arm of the trial the teenager would be allocated to, which were picked at random once they had been accepted into the trial. Randomised Controlled Trials are thought to be more effective if they are carried out in multiple geographical locations (Tarling and Crofts 2002 second Ed), this trial may have benefited from using General Practices from other areas outside of Hertfordshire to increase the variety of clinical settings and factors such as local policies for General Practices and school on health promotion. <heading>Were participants, staff and study personnel 'blind' to participants' study group? </heading>Neither staff nor study personnel were blind due to the nature of the study and I can see no reasonable manor in which blinding could be carried out. The researchers did use identical questionnaires for both intervention and control groups. This allowed the coding and entry of data to be blind therefore a certain degree of blinding was possible known as blind analysis. This helps to reduce researcher bias. <heading>Were all of the participants who entered the trial accounted for at its conclusion? </heading>Although all of the participants were accounted for at the end of the study with explanations of why they withdrew and outcomes were analysed in the intention to treat group <heading>Were the participants in all groups followed up and data collected in the same way? </heading>The collection of data from all of the participants via the questionnaire was obtained at the same time and the same method was used but the collection of data from the control group was not as rigorous as that of the interventions group as it is not made clear if they provided saliva samples to measure levels of cotinine and had physical measurements taken at base level, therefore when measurements were taken at twelve months there was no reliable data to compare it to and assess actual change making the control group data less relaible. <heading>Did the study have enough participants to minimise the play of chance? </heading>The study claims that they needed a minimum of 254 teenagers in each of the two groups having accounted for a sixty percent response rate and a thirty percent loss to follow up. This number was reached on all occasions but there was no recorded input from a medical statistician which is recommended. None of the researchers listed appear to have the necessary qualifications to conduct this role which brings into question the validity of the sample sizes needed. The results for the questionnaires are presented as a percentage, results from the student t test, chi squared which are all acceptable statistical tests, no power calculations were included in the results. Walker et al did not discuss if the information on the questionnaires contained any qualitative data or open questions, from the data in the research paper it would appear that the data collected could be coded numerically which lends itself to statistical analysis is cost effective and allows a wide coverage to be achieved (Tarling and Crofts, 1995). This study showed that those in the intervention group showed considerably greater changes or improved health behaviours at three months but the difference between the two groups was minimal at twelve months. Although the use of the SPSS system is thought to be sufficiently rigorous for data analysis, the use of the system may have contributed to the lack of a medical statisticians input (Cormack, 2000) <heading>How precise are these results? </heading>Just because behaviour was shown to change a little at three months after health advice was given the research can not prove that the change was due to the advice given. Many other factors may have influenced the change such as friends, family, media and school. The researchers decided to include the information from teenagers who did not respond to all three questionnaires as analysis was by intention to treat, where the largest non-response rate was at twelve months but greatest change in positive behaviour was seen at three months, combined with a high response rate. They also decided to include teenagers who did not attend the clinic but still filled in questionnaires in the intervention group. This decision is very likely to have affected the data collected and may have been a major contributor to the lack of change noted by the researchers in the final analysis of the results. <heading>Were all important outcomes considered so the results can be applied? </heading>I feel this trial would have benefited from some semi-qualitative data. A methodological triangulation techniques, this would have allowed the researchers to combine qualitative and quantitative data would have provided a greater insight to how medical intervention could be more effective from the perspective of the teenager and what else they need to help them instigate the changes to improve their health. As this intervention appeared to be effective (in the first three months), well received and relatively cheap for the beneficial changes in life style and problems that were referred further research would be of benefit and may influence a change in the health care that is offered to teenagers and the rest of the population in terms of preventative measures. The questionnaire given to the teenagers was designed to detect possible depression; those in the intervention group who appeared to be depressed were offered follow up care which resulted in improved mental health outcomes at twelve months. Those in the control group who appeared to be suffering were not offered any medical treatment or intervention. This can be seen as an ethical issue as depression is a mental health issue and can not be improved by a change in lifestyle directed by the participant. I found the use of the CASP guidelines very helpful when critically analysing research papers, they required much greater detail to be looked in the paper to ensure that I made up my own mind as to the validity of papers rather than believing the conclusions and results portrayed by the authors of the paper. I believe this skill will enable me to use research selectively to enhance my practice using only papers I believe are of high credibility. 