<heading>Jones, D L, Jurowski, C & Uysal, M (2000), "Host community residents' attitudes: a comparison of environmental viewpoints", Tourism and Hospitality Research, 2 (2): 129-156. </heading><heading>Notes</heading>Studies the diverse views expressed by hosts regarding tourism development in environmentally sensitive areas. Analysis of perceived benefits and costs. Examines how hosts' attitudes support Ayala's view (1996) that 'ecotourism is a means of strengthening the economy' and also McClaren's (1998) that 'ecotourism development can strengthen the social structure and protect the environment' (p.131). Classification of hosts according to their views on the environment and tourism development. Implications for tourism planning. <heading>Comment & Analysis</heading>Hosts hold diverse positions on how far they will tolerate different types of tourism development, related to the impacts (positive and negative) development has on themselves and their community (p.130). Maintains that ecotourism development is motivated by both economic and ecological factors. A balance must be struck between preservation of the ecosystem and economic benefits, taking into account the views and values expressed by hosts. Hosts' opinions regarding ecotourism directly affect their attitude towards the economic, social and environmental impacts (p.133). i.e. their valuation of the importance of the different aspects of development. Studying and understanding hosts' attitudes towards the environment, the benefits and costs of tourism development for themselves and their community, and the types of development supported or tolerated reduces the risk of conflict and can aid tourism planners and managers. Results of the survey identified four attitudes: Awareness of the limits of nature; humans can manage nature; humans have control over nature; and humans abuse and interfere with nature. These attitudes were sorted into three cluster groups: Conservationists, Anthopocentrics & Optimists (p.138). Conservationists are most concerned with environmental welfare. They perceive greater costs and fewer benefits for themselves from tourism development. They are most likely to support ecotourism with limited infrastructure development rather than larger projects. Anthopocentrics view development as an opportunity and see nature as a resource to be controlled and used. They are likely to support all types of tourism development for the economic benefit of themselves and the community. They recognise the costs of development, but do not value them as highly as the potential benefits. Optimists recognise both the costs and benefits and believe that nature is capable of supporting development. They will probably shun large resort developments (high-impact), but be in support of other created attractions, especially those that are historic or cultural based. The main differences are not in the recognition of the costs and benefits, rather in the valuation attributed to each of these. The tourism planning process must involve the community and convince all groups that any development will respect their views and fulfil their needs/expectations. Discussion, a code of ethics and education are key to sustainability. Development must have positive ecological, economic and social returns (p.152). Suggests further research and identifies weaknesses in the study. <heading>Evidence to support argument </heading>Previous research regarding the potential for conflict arising from tourism development (Allen et al, 1988; Ap, 1992; Botlein et al, 1991; Jurowski et al, 1997; Prentice 1989; Tyrrell & Spaulding, 1984) which suggests that there is a need to better understand the attitudes of hosts towards tourism development if that growth is to be successful and sustainable. Previous research concerned with host attitudes towards tourism development (Allen et al, 1988; Perdue et al, 1987; Ritchie, 1988) which demonstrate the variety of views held amongst host communities, and the struggle they have reconciling their economic needs and ecological wishes (Liu & Var, 1986), further highlighting the need for a deeper understanding of hosts' attitudes towards the environment and their acceptance of development. Previous research which identified the same three attitudes towards the environment as found in this study: Ecocentric, Anthopocentric and balance of nature (Optimist). (Albrecht et al, 1982; Uysal et al, 1994). Findings from this study: Identification of attitudes and clusters; demographic profiling of each cluster; cost/benefit analysis (to the individual and to their community); types of development accepted by the individuals in each cluster. <heading>Key links</heading>Allen, L.R et al. (1988), 'The impact of tourism development on residents' perceptions of community life', Journal of Travel Research, Vol.27, Issue 1: 16-21. Dunlap, R. & Van Liere, K. (1978), 'The new environmental paradigm: A proposed measuring instrument and preliminary results', Journal of Environmental Education, Vol.9: 10-19. Jurowski, C (1998), 'A study of community sentiments in relation to attitudes toward tourism development', Tourism Analysis, Vol.3, Issue 1: 17-24. Jurowski, C., Uysal,M. & Williams, D.R. (1997), 'A theoretical analysis of host community resident reactions to tourism', Journal of Travel Research, Vol.36, Issue 2: 3-11. Malloy D.C. & Fennel, D.A. (1998), 'Ecotourism and ethics: moral development and organizational cultures', Journal of Travel Research, Vol.36, Issue 4: 47-57. <heading>Dyer, P, Aberdeen, L & Schuler, S (2003), "Tourism impacts on an Australian indigenous community: a Djabugay case study", Tourism Management, 24 (1): 83-95. </heading><heading>Notes</heading>Examines the effects on the Djabugay people of the presentation of their culture at the Tjapukai Aboriginal Cultural Park. Advantages and disadvantages of their involvement in tourism. Highlights lack of cooperation between non-indigenous managers and indigenous staff; lack of cross-cultural awareness; exploitation of the Djabugay. Key issues include: Confusion regarding participation and equity; representation and control of the Djabugay culture; limited material benefit for the Djabugay. <heading>Comment & Analysis</heading>Presentation for tourism can lead to the trivialising of a complex and dynamic culture (p.84). The Djabugay dancers had to alter their routines to suit tourist schedules. Enforced manipulation of their traditions and heritage to suit tourist expectations. The study highlighted confusion regarding rights and obligations within the Park. Management (non-indigenous) and employees (mostly indigenous) and Djabugay elders disagree on many issues related to the implementation of initial agreements which were designed to ensure that the Djabugay people would benefit from tourism at the Park. Significant dissatisfaction. Highlights the importance of including local people in the management of the Park. At the time of the study, the Djabugay had no representative on the Park's board. The Djabugay had limited opportunities for entering the management structure, or taking more financial control over the Park, despite initial agreements. Managers lacked appropriate and sufficient information to make informed decisions about the representation of Djabugay culture, leading to 'resentment and disregard' of management decisions (p.90). The research highlighted the lack of a 'spirit of partnership' as referred to by McClean et al, 1997, p.9 (p.85). Communication issues: Management to staff communication was in the form of written newsletters, ignoring the Djabugay's oral tradition. The Djabugay felt largely unable to raise issues and concerns with management. Despite the problems, the Djabugay were proud of their culture and wanted to share it with tourists. In fact, they would have liked greater involvement and more opportunities for direct interaction with tourists. Despite manipulation of some elements, the Park has served as a basis for cultural revival. The Djabugay have not seen much material benefit from their involvement in tourism. The Park serves as a warning to future projects where there is a desire to significantly improve quality of life through cultural tourism. <heading>Evidence to support argument</heading>Own research at Tjapukai Aboriginal Cultural Park, with cooperation of staff at all levels and the Djabugay people. Supporting evidence from other papers concerned with Aboriginal culture based tourism. Some statistical evidence from official bodies. <heading>Key links</heading>Altman, J.C. (1993), Indigenous Australians in the national tourism strategy: Impact, sustainability and policy issues, Australian National University, Canberra. Altman, J.C. & Finlayson, J. (1992), Aborigines, tourism and sustainable development, CAEPR discussion paper no.26, Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, Australian National University, Canberra. Finlayson, J. (1991), Australian Aborigines and cultural tourism: Case studies of Aboriginal involvement in the tourist industry, Centre for Multicultural Studies, University of Wollongong, Wollongong. <heading>Sheldon, P J & Abenoja, T (2001), "Resident attitudes in a mature destination: the case of Waikiki", Tourism Management, 22: 435-443. </heading><heading>Notes</heading>Research in Waikiki but with the aim of applying the findings to other mature tourist destinations. Gives recommendations for maintaining good tourist industry-resident relations. Based on the premise that sustainable tourism depends heavily on local input and the cooperation of the resident community. The importance of relations between the visitor, the resident community and the place itself. Not a particularly groundbreaking study, but builds on past research. <heading>Comment & Analysis</heading>There are many previous studies of Waikiki. As well as a well recognised destination, it provides 13% of jobs in the state of Hawaii and 10% of gross state product. Respondents to the research survey tended to be long-standing residents of Waikiki, with an average age of 56.5. It can be assumed that they responded because, having lived there a significant time, they feel a commitment to the area that more recent arrivals may not. Older residents were found to be less likely to accept change. Natural and park space were central to respondents' concerns, reflecting their choices of leisure activities. 92% desired improvements to be made to the Ala Wai canal; Waikiki beach was the feature most liked by local people, followed by parks. Respondents desired even more parks and open spaces, suggesting that they want an 'enhanced outdoor recreation experience' (p.440). Some concerns about maintenance of facilities. Despite tourism and other commercial activity, 58% did not believe the area was overcrowded. The major concern was traffic congestion. Specific recommendations include: Revitalising Waikiki through identifying Waikikian culture and involving local people in it. Creating a 'sense of place'. Minimise the commercialisation of culture. Involvement with locals is preferable to created-for-tourists representations. Stimulate partnerships between local residential, business and Government to broaden citizen input. Despite the initial aim of applying the findings to other mature destinations, all recommendations made are very specific to Waikiki. Initial research questions are somewhat vague, e.g. 'what are the resident's opinions of destination features?' For example, questions and responses could be grouped specifically into natural and built environment, or opinions on facilities designed primarily for resident use, and those tailored towards tourists. The study considers only very few elements that residents may like or dislike (Table 6). Many others may also be relevant. <heading>Evidence to support argument</heading>Own research in Waikiki. Previous academic papers on Waikiki as a tourism destination and on tourism development. <heading>Key links</heading>Dinnel, T. (1997), Living in Waikiki: A report on interviews with 48 Waikiki residents, HI: The Planning Department, City and County of Honolulu. Cooke, K. (1982), 'Guideline for socially appropriate tourism development in British Colombia', Journal of Travel Research, 21 (1): 22-27. <heading>Lynch, P A (1999), "Host attitudes towards guests in the homestay sector", Tourism and Hospitality Research, 1 (2): 119-144. </heading><heading>Notes</heading>Need for research identified: Absence of research into host families and their relationships with guests. Significant industry interest in 'small end' accommodation. Concern over quality management. It is generally accepted that the quality of the bed and breakfast/farmhouse stay sector needs improving. Guests demand higher standards. Ambiguity regarding host-guest relationships: Are hosts' interests and behaviour predominantly commercial or domestic? Aims to describe the main characteristics of the homestay sector and 'test the hypothesis that host attitudes differ on the basis of their commercial orientation' (p.123). Homestay tourism results in high intensity host-guest relations and relatively large economic benefits. <heading>Comment & Analysis</heading>43 businesses identified as falling within the homestay sector. 206 interviews conducted with host families. Analysis of hosts using variables in family life cycle and commercial orientation. Hosts generally female, between 31 and 60 years of age. Motivated by a 'feel good factor' (social and psychological wellbeing), self-education and financial benefit. They feel responsible for guests and desire their integration, single hosts more than others. Younger hosts had more problems 'fitting guests into their personal and family lifestyle' (p.132); older hosts had greater feelings of responsibility towards their guests; in the middle age ranges, integration as part of the family was encouraged. Hosts imposed rules. Many were common to most homestay businesses. 78% discouraged long phone calls; 72% wanted guests to attend set meals; 53% set time limits on bathroom use. 72% experienced occasional communication problems. The report concludes that carefully planned training and support are needed in order to advance the sector without commercialising hospitality (p.142). Host-guest matching could be developed through examining host attitudes and guest expectations in an attempt to enhance the quality of the guests' stay. Host attitudes to guests are most influenced by family life-cycle factors (e.g. age, presence of children etc.) Payment through third parties (e.g. tourist board) rather than in direct transactions seems to improve host-guest interaction. Further research into the levels of integration desired by guests is required to supplement the findings of this paper. Limitations are identified as being that this was an urban study and the findings may not be representative of rural homestay situations. <heading>Evidence to support argument</heading>Own research undertaken with Scottish host families. Supporting evidence from a wide range of previous research into the homestay/farm tourism sector. <heading>Key links</heading>Argyll et al (1981) 'Social situations', in Pearce, P.L. (1990), 'Farm tourism in New Zealand: A social situation analysis', Annals of Tourism Research, 17 (3): 335-352. Stringer, P.F.(1981), 'Hosts and guests - the bed and breakfast phenomenon', Annals of Tourism Research, 8 (3): 357-376. 