This report examines Merseytravel in terms of its potential contribution to tourism in Liverpool, its role in urban regeneration, interaction with other stakeholders, and opportunities and threats which must be taken into account in strategic planning. Of specific interest are those opportunities related to Liverpool's European Capital of Culture status in 2008 and the strategies required to ensure that the benefits are seen well into the future. <heading>The role of Merseytravel. </heading>Merseytravel's primary role is as a service provider to the local community, owning and operating Mersey Ferries and the Mersey Tunnels, working in partnership with the Strategic Rail Authority on the Merseyrail network, maintaining bus network infrastructure (stops, shelters, stations), subsidising unprofitable but essential routes, providing free travel for the elderly/disabled, and the strategic planning of public transport in Liverpool, as well as having some responsibility for ticketing (Merseytravel, 2004a). It is responsible for liaising with and coordinating the numerous operators and providing frameworks for medium and long-term development. Stated aims in the Merseyside Local Transport Plan (2000), put together by Merseytravel and local authorities, are: <quote>"To ensure that transport supports sustainable economic development and regeneration; To moderate the upward trend in car use and secure a shift to more sustainable forms of transport such as walking, cycling and public transport; To secure the most efficient and effective use of the existing transport network; To enhance the quality of life of those who live, work in and visit Merseyside." (Transport Merseyside, 2004c)</quote>For Capital of Culture 2008 Merseytravel's fundamental role does not change, but it has a potentially enormous influence over the success of the year since its Merseytram project is central to the urban redevelopment programme centred on Paradise Street which is dominating '08 preparations. The tram network is designed to serve local needs, through linking the city centre to outer suburbs, connecting areas of relative prosperity with less developed neighbourhoods, providing access to employment and leisure opportunities and - eventually - a link to Liverpool John Lennon Airport, but it must also serve the needs of visitors and businesses during '08, hence "[enhancing] the quality of life of those who live, work in and visit Merseyside" (ibid.). Furthermore, any problems with public transport systems during 2008 would be damaging not only in terms of immediate visitor satisfaction but also for Liverpool's image around the UK since it would undoubtedly attract negative publicity. <heading>Taking advantage of 2008 Capital of Culture status. </heading>As shown in Appendix i, a SWOT analysis of Merseytravel highlights a number of strengths and various opportunities, but there are also a significant number of serious issues to be confronted if both Merseytravel and Liverpool are to benefit from European Capital of Culture status in 2008, and further, if the tram scheme and redevelopment of existing infrastructure are to be wholly successful. There are several ways Merseytravel can benefit from Liverpool's European Capital of Culture designation. Building upon already high levels of power and interest (as identified by Double, Kalloghlian and Wilkinson, 2004, where only visitor attractions, local government and The Mersey Partnership were deemed more significant stakeholders in tourism development for '08), Merseytravel is in a position to play a greater role in the development of Liverpool as an attractive tourism destination. Not only does Merseytravel have a significant influence over the arrival and departure of visitors to Liverpool (whether through the Mersey Tunnel in private vehicle, or on public transport by bus, ferry or train) and the first impression generated (service quality, appearance of termini), it also facilitates their movement around the city during their visit. As such, visitor interaction with elements of Merseytravel could prove a make-or-break factor in their overall visitor experience and their perception of the city. With such a high-profile event as Capital of Culture '08, there is a great opportunity for Merseytravel to consolidate then improve its position as a key player in tourism and acquire a greater influence over the future development of Liverpool (for its own benefit and that of the local community it serves). Secondly, Merseytravel has already developed a more proactive role in '08 projects and in some ways taken advantage of Capital of Culture status. Given the scale of the developments and the inflexible deadline, there is a great sense of urgency surrounding all 2008 related projects. Merseytravel and in particular the new Merseytram scheme is recognised as a fundamental cog in the larger regeneration 'machine', and it seems as though Capital of Culture 2008 has been used to justify much of the considerable effort that has already been invested in accommodating all parties concerned when discussions may, in other circumstances, have dragged on for much longer. In this way, Merseytravel has been able to push forward some of its own projects, albeit as part of a much larger scheme and not without conflict, when it may otherwise have had to wait longer, conduct more consultation or further adapt plans. The buzz surrounding '08 gives extra impetus to Merseytravel's short-term future development and such high-level involvement in Grosvenor's city centre redevelopment project only serves to increase its influence with local government and project a positive image of the organisation to local people, who will - if everything goes as planned - associate Merseytravel with progress and environmental improvements. At a purely business level, visitor numbers are expected to rise in 2008 meaning an increased number of people using Merseytravel services to arrive at and subsequently travel around Liverpool. More passengers will increase income for Merseytravel partners and the expected partial introduction of the tram service will also provide a new source of revenue. Although the increase in passenger numbers may well give rise to new operational issues (a possible need for greater frequency or capacity on certain services), this should have been foreseen and appropriate preparations should have been made. The five-year Local Transport Plan due to be published in 2005 should include details of how the transport system will cope with the extra demand and how the anticipated infrastructure enhancements will fit in to the Capital of Culture schedule without causing disruption. A successful Capital of Culture year would further raise the positive profile of Merseytravel. All the 2008 developments have also created a platform for discussion and the potential for cooperation between stakeholders. Merseytravel is building solid relationships with key stakeholders involved in the regeneration of Liverpool (e.g. Grosvenor) while consolidating existing relationships with the likes of Network Rail, Virgin Trains, First North Western, Liverpool Vision and Liverpool City Council (Liverpool Vision, 2004a) to bring about rapid, positive change in the provision of public transport in Liverpool. Rogers and Slinn (1993: 39-40) explain, "organizations [...] have to choose the strategic direction in which they wish to go" and of the seven options proposed, Merseytravel is consolidating its existing position, developing services (improving the current offering) and diversifying into related products (the forthcoming tram network). There is also the potential for developing the market (growing passenger numbers) as capacity expands on the public transport network and visitor numbers increase leading up to and during 2008. From this point of view it seems that Merseytravel has identified a clear strategic approach it wishes to pursue and is well set to benefit from Liverpool's Capital of Culture status in 2008. Many of the projects which benefit Merseytravel also represent large scale and permanent infrastructure and environmental improvements for the local community meaning that the effects of '08 developments will continue to be felt long after 2008 itself has passed. <heading>Sustainable management. </heading>Clearly there are several areas where Merseytravel can gain long-term benefits from Liverpool's Capital of Culture status. Previous Cities/Capitals of Culture have reported benefits over ten years later (Ryan, 2002), so it is important for all stakeholders to look at 2008 as a springboard for the future rather than just an end in itself. Firstly, the necessary involvement with other key stakeholders in projects in the run-up to 2008 should lead to the development of stronger relationships, facilitating any future interaction. Initiatives such as the ten-year Local Transport Strategy/five-year Local Transport Plan, the City Centre Movement Strategy, the Paradise Street Development Area and the renovation of Lime Street Station are all good examples of Merseytravel's role, often in a coordinating capacity, and demonstrate how it operates as a hub for interaction between transport operators, developers and local Government planners, thus linking the tourism operating environment and the macro environment as identified by Liu (in Seaton, 1994: 21). If this collaborative role within a strong regional framework can be continued and proves to be successful in delivering projects as anticipated, that can only be good in terms of sustainable management. <fnote>LIU, Z.-H., 'Tourism development - a systems analysis', in SEATON (1994): 20-30. </fnote>Secondly, a well organised and fluid transport network in 2008 would further improve the reputation of Merseytravel and would most likely increase the chances of obtaining backing (political and financial) for new schemes as may be outlined in future Local Transport Plans. Current and near-future successes can set Merseytravel and Liverpool'08 apart as examples of best practice. It is important to recognise that Merseytravel has to serve the immediate needs of 2008, but also retain flexibility to adapt to the post-'08 reality; Merseytravel must perform in very different circumstances. Any steps taken to get full advantage from 2008 must not compromise the longer-term functioning of the transport network. i.e. projects such as the tram network should maintain usefulness for the local community at their core rather than be driven solely by a need to present a particular image in 2008; changes for '08 should probably be primarily in terms of temporary increased capacity on the Merseytravel network rather than permanent infrastructure, unless of course those permanent works can be shown to be appropriate, desirable and viable in the long-term (Wilkinson, 2004b). <heading>Minimising negative effects. </heading>As shown by the SWOT analysis (Appendix i), there are few threats to Merseytravel posed directly by '08. However, there are several related areas which need to be considered. The strict deadlines and enormous responsibility which the 2008 Capital of Culture designation has brought have inevitably lead to stress and there have been persistent rumours of the strain beginning to show as City Council-Merseytravel relations deteriorated over recent months (Kelly, 2004a; 2004b). This is something that must be dealt with as soon as possible through regular meetings, extensive dialogue and a willingness to recognise the various needs of each stakeholder. The strategic plans of Merseytravel and the City Council may not always be completely synchronous, but it is vitally important that each includes enough flexibility so as to be able to accommodate the other; they will always have to work together closely. Merseytravel's plans include large scale construction across the city centre, so perhaps the greatest threat is posed by building works around Lime Street Station and Merseytram, both with first stages due for completion in 2007 (Liverpool Vision, 2004b;  URL , 2004). In addition to disruption caused to local people (which must be sensitively managed), non-completion of the works before 2008 could be disastrous, potentially "leaving Liverpool looking like a large building site [...] at the very time when it should be looking its Sunday best" (Kelly, 2004a). The direct effect on Merseytravel of such a scenario would be a failure to capitalise on the extra visitors to Liverpool and increased costs while city centre works are halted during 2008. There would also be a second set of problems arising from the extremely negative publicity that would follow and severely damaged relations with the local community and other stakeholders. At the heart of Merseytravel's development over the next few years, the tram scheme is particularly important. Merseytram is an integral part of the wider regeneration of the city, key to the success of Destination Liverpool in 2008 and beyond and, if managed well, has the potential to add great value to the visitor experience as well as serve local people. However, given the high costs and publicity surrounding the plan, if managed badly it could be present serious problems for the Capital of Culture year and further damage the reputation of a city already set back by the failure of several large-scale development projects (e.g. King's Dock, Fourth Grace) (Hernon, 2004). Finally, Merseytravel is expanding the public transport network rapidly over coming years. Given that infrastructure "is normally shared by residents and visitors alike" and "does not normally generate income and is treated as a public investment in most tourism developments" (Cooper et al, 1998: 108) Merseytravel needs to keep in sight long-term goals and not become blinkered by the urgency and magnitude of '08. Although the network might be busy in 2008 with the additional visitors, beyond then numbers may well fall and Merseytravel will have to justify all the investment and disruption. <heading>Conclusion. </heading>Merseytravel has a clear vision for the future, spearheaded by several key development projects and supported by a network of partners. There are areas where Merseytravel can make real progress on the back of Capital of Culture '08, but the stakes are high and as with any great risk, the potential benefits are huge, but the cost of failure would be vast and the effects far-reaching. It is in everyone's interest for Merseytravel to continue the good work it has done in the city up to now and I am convinced that, through cooperation with other stakeholders, it will be able to do so. 