<heading>1 Introduction</heading>The Châteaux Hotel Group was founded in 1990 in the UK (see Appendix 1). With three hotels The Châteaux Hotel Group forms a group of hotels that have been renovated and refitted in accordance with their prestigious past and their many individual features. Each unit has its own style and character. Prime locations are in the countryside. These five star hotels house between 25 and 40 guest rooms, four to eight suites, food and beverage facilities and provide various leisure amenities including cultural programmes. The Châteaux Hotel Group operates three hotels in the UK. Due to France's location in Europe and its constantly high number of tourist arrivals (WTO 2004) The Châteaux Hotel Group is thinking about to open further properties in France. The country is situated in Western Europe and borders on Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, Andorra and Spain. France offers a great diversity of landscapes including rivers, lakes, coastlines and sea sides, mountain ranges, rural areas and cities. France is a democratic country and has got an economy which is shaped by private enterprises and substantial intervention by the government in key sectors such as transportation and communication that, however, is declining (Whyte 2004). The French hotel industry comprises nearly 30,000 establishments and can list 1.5 billion overnight stays in 2003. It is the most visited country (Ministère Délégué du Tourisme 2005a). Wine tourism is just one area of tourism opportunities in France. The economic potential of this market sector has not been realised for a long time. It has changed, however, since the last years. Wine-related attractions such as wine museums, wine routes or wine tasting have increased. It can be expected that this market sector is growing in future times (Frochot 2000). <heading>2 Evaluation of the Business Environment of the UK and France</heading><heading>2.1 Theoretical Framework </heading>The literature provides different approaches that help to identify the macro environment of an organisation or country. One of them is the PESTE-framework which focuses on political, economic, social-cultural, technological and environmental influences. Political factors that may affect conducting a business include all the actions a state is involved like legislation, regulation or transfer of power. Whereas economy comprises all fields that concern business and consumer behaviour socio-cultural influences look at values, attitudes, population or lifestyle. The technological environment refers to changes that may impact the industry or an organisation in terms of transportation, distribution, communication and production. Environmental factors can be natural disasters a country has to deal with or the geographical setting including variety of landscapes and climate (Campbell et al 2002). Those external factors are crucial for a company entering a new market. However, they become even more important when entering a market abroad. Here, it can be followed Stonehouse et al (2000 p 72) who state that: <quote>"factors in the environment, the industry and the market will drive the enterprise towards one type of international strategy - either one that is fully global or one which makes concessions to localized customer needs."</quote>Therefore, this paradigm is used to analyse and compare those factors regarding the broad environment of the UK and France in order to facilitate decision-making, planning and implementation of strategies for a business planning to enter a foreign market. <heading>2.1.1 Political Influences</heading>Both the UK and France are countries whose political systems are based on democratic principles (Whyte 2005, Whyte 2004). This means for a British company planning to set up a business on the French market that it will operate in a country with a stable democratic system similar to the one at home. Moreover, both countries are members of the European Union (EU) and thus, some of the political decisions are made within a shared framework and affect both countries to the same extent. So, for example the Treaty of Maastricht on European Union includes, among others, the principle of Freedom of Establishment (Europa 'no date') which facilitates the market entry for British entrepreneurs in France. <heading>2.1.2 Economic Influences</heading>The UK has one of the strongest economies in Europe. The service sector contributes the major part to the GDP and counts about two thirds of the total GDP (Whyte 2005). The overall GDP growth was above the EU and OECD average between 1994 and 2004 (see Appendix 2). The rate of unemployment was lower in 2004 compared to ten years ago (see Appendix 2). France, different from the UK, has to struggle with unemployment (see Appendix 2), high labour costs, an inflexible labour market and high taxes. The economic growth of France is below the total OECD level and only slightly above the EU average (see Appendix 2). The average income per capita, however, is comparable with the one of the UK (see Appendix 2). With the aim of attracting foreign investors France has agreements with many countries to protect enterprises against double taxation (Whyte 2004). As a result, France tops the UK in terms of FDI inflow which counts to one of the highest worldwide (see Appendix 3). A further fact that needs to be mentioned is the introduction of a common European currency in 2002. France is a member of the Euro zone, the UK, however, not. Therefore, British companies doing business with countries of the Euro zone need to take into account that they have to pay an exchange rate and transaction costs. This again may cause higher product costs compared to the costs participants of the Euro zone have to pay and this again may hamper their business (Whyte 2005). <heading>2.1.3 Social-Cultural Influences</heading>Since the last 30 years the population is ageing in the UK. The number of people 65 and older has risen whereas the figure of those younger than 16 years has fallen. This development will continue over the next decades (see Appendix 3). This means in terms of travel and tourism a growing market as the income for retirees went up over the last years continuously and so does life expectancy due to better health conditions (see Appendix 3). Focusing on the age structure of France it is like in the UK. The number of retirees goes up significantly and at the same time the working population falls due to an upturn in the birth rate (Whyte 2004) (see Appendix 4). Thus, the consequences are similar to those of the UK. Although the disposable income of retirees is slowing down in France they still form a strong-financial group (Moreau 2002). Both the UK and France have a highly-developed educational system. The number of those who attend higher education has increased noticeably since the previous decades (Whyte 2004, Whyte 2005). This has resulted in a demand for new tourism products which focus on culture, arts or heritage. <heading>2.1.4 Technological Influences</heading>Since the 1950s the UK has seen a dramatic shift away from the use of public transport towards the use of private transportation. This drift is caused by changes in the size of the rail network which halved; emergence of a motorway network and rising economic affluence among the population that led to the move out of city centres towards urban areas (Whyte 2005). France in comparison offers one of the most sophisticated transportation networks worldwide. It has a high-quality road network and provides more than twice the amount of motorways and roads than the UK (see Appendix 5). The development of car ownership corresponds with the situation in the UK. According to the National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies INSEE (2005a) the number of cars rose between 1980 and 2004 from 18 million to nearly 30 million in France. The railway system is also leading and connects Paris with many other European cities. Improvements have been made regarding interregional links which were neglected. France's air transport network counts to the upper average. It provides hubs for domestic and international flights from Paris and Southern France as well as several regional airports throughout the country (Whyte 2004) (see Appendix 5). A good public transportation system, like the one France has, is one of the preconditions for attracting tourists and business from abroad. Regarding the Internet use France lags behind other European countries. The penetration rate was only 37% in 2003 compared to 56% in the UK (Whyte 2004). There is also a gap between young people (over 80%) and people aged 65 and older (15%). Bearing this in mind the selection of distribution channels and means of communication for marketing should be made carefully in order to reach the potential consumer. <heading>2.1.5 Environmental Influences </heading>Both the UK and France have diverse landscapes which offer various leisure possibilities. Compared to the UK France has a more attractive climate. Depending on the geographic area it reaches from warm Mediterranean sea climate to a moderate climate at the western and northern coastlines and the mountains. Due to this variety it is a destination interesting for domestic and international tourism (Whyte 2004). However, it needs to be mentioned, too, that France is exposed to a certain degree of environmental risk in terms of flooding. During the last years Southern France had been hit by floods especially during the peak season in summer. The floods caused damage to the traffic and transport system as well as tourist facilities (Henley 2003). Looking at Britain the trend is similar. According to the Environment Agency (2005) the flood risk in some parts of the UK has increased during the last years. Although, flood prevention has been improved heavy rain, storms and rising sea and river levels led to floods in previous years. However, generally spoken, both countries are not affected by a very high level of environmental risk in terms of earthquakes, water shortage, droughts or heavy storms like other parts of the world and this in turn provides a relative safe location for setting up a business. <heading>3 Tourism Demand in France </heading><heading>3.1 Drivers of Demand Framework</heading>Burkart and Medlik (1981 p. 50) state that <quote>"determinants are the economic, technological, social, cultural and political factors at work in any society that drive and set limits to the volume of a population's demand for travel." </quote>Taking this as a foundation Middleton et al (2001) develop this idea further and identify eight major drivers of demand including economic, demographic, geographic; socio-cultural attitudes to tourism, mobility, government/regulatory, media communications and information and communications technology. They assume that these factors can be applied to all countries due to their universality and the fact that each country is exposed to the same external influences. There may be, however, one determinant more influencing in one market than in another one as well as the nature of a single driver may vary from country to country. For the purpose of this study Middleton's paradigm is applied in order to identify the drivers of tourism demand in France. <heading>Drivers of Tourism Demand in France</heading>The main determinant for tourism demand in France can be seen in its diverse sceneries which range from coastlines and rivers, beaches and mountains, rural regions including vineyards to cities and culture. So, France provides a great variety of tourism and leisure opportunities. Also its temperate climate may be a driving factor for visiting France. However, technological advance and social-cultural shifts have led to a change in consumer behaviour and therefore, can be seen as the key factors supporting the demand for tourism. Technological progress is reflected in a dramatic increase in using air and land transportation (European Travel Commission 2004a). France has a well-developed transportation infrastructure. Its extended motorway and road network, railway system, numerous international and regional airports as well as sea links provide a solid basis. It may boost international, domestic, business and leisure tourism as nowadays a good accessibility is of high importance especially not to lose out competitors. But the technological advance cannot be regarded in isolation but needs to be linked to the social-cultural changes, too. Ageing populations are nearly a global trend and in particular in developed countries (Kotler 1999, Moutinho 2000). It creates a huge potential for the tourism industry in France (see PESTE). Better educated people are another group that boosts the demand for tourism products because they tend to be more interested in travelling and in wine tourism in particular (Hall and Mitchell 2001) (see PESTE). A further aspect intertwining social-cultural change and technology is the process of rationalisation. Advanced technology has reduced the working time what means that today's employees have more leisure time compared to the past. This can be also identified as a driving factor for demand in French tourism and leisure activities (European Travel Commission 2004a). So, generally spoken changes in consumer patterns and technology during the last decades made the tourism industry to the biggest industry worldwide. France's sophisticated transportation system and its great variety of landscapes offer a very good basis for benefiting of this trend and can be seen as the key driver for international as well as domestic tourism. Hence, it could present a competitive advantage for a British hospitality company operating in France. <heading>4 Hotel Supply Factors in France</heading><heading>4.1 Porter's Five Forces Framework</heading>The aim of an industry analysis is to scan the mircro environment a company operates in with regard to its competitors and its own position within the industry sector. Porter's framework is one tool to identify and evaluate the business surrounding of an organisation. He distinguishes between five forces (see Appendix 6) which verify the company's competitive situation (Porter 1980, Campbell et al 2002, Stonehouse et al 2000). However, Campbell et al (2002) state that Porter's model has some limitations. They criticise that Porter assumes that all five forces apply to the same extent to a company and argue instead that some factors may be more important than other ones depending on the business itself. Another aspect that is mentioned refers to the isolation of macro environment and microenvironment in Porter's framework. In reality there is certain interdependency between both environments. In other words, changes in the broader environment may influence the actions of the nearer environment of an organisation and therefore, have also to be taken into account by analysing the industry. A further point that is raised by Rumelt (1991 in Campbell et al 2002) concerns the assessment of the profitability. He argues that it depends on the single organisation and its mode of operation if it is successful and rather less on industry factors. Here it can be followed Stonehouse et al (2000 p.85) who emphasis that <quote>"... whether or not industry structure determines profitability, managers must understand the environment in which they operate to assist in the choice of strategy."</quote>So even this paradigm has certain constraints it presents an analytical tool for scanning the microenvironment of an organisation. But it should be beard in mind that one force may have a stronger significance for one business than for another one (Stonehouse et al 2000) and that markets and environments are more complex and inter-reliant (Campbell et al 2002). Nevertheless, Porter's framework can be identified as a helpful tool to determine the market position of a British hospitality organisation and the external influences it might have to deal with when entering the French hotel market. Taking the results an adequate competitive strategy to take advantage of opportunities or overcome possible threats can be developed. <heading>4.2 The Competitive Environment of the The Victorian Châteaux Hotel </heading><heading>4.2.1 Threat of Substitute Products </heading>The French hotel market is faced with a high share in overnight stays in non-commercial accommodation. Second homes and overnight stays at a friend's or family's home among domestic travellers (Ministère Délégué du Tourisme 2005) can be seen as a potential substitute for the hotel. Moreover, a single European currency enables customers to compare consumer prices and in particular hotel rates more easily. This again could lead to the fact that they find well-priced alternatives in other Euro zone countries and eventually decide to spend their vacation there instead of France. <heading>4.2.2 Threat of New Entrants</heading>The EU principle of Freedom of Establishment has lowered the entry barriers for companies of EU member states. So, a British entrepreneur wishing to set up a hospitality organisation in France is treated equally and not faced with any country specific regulations in terms of entering the foreign market. This legislation enables a free movement between the different EU states but, in turn, increases competition on the tourism market as well. The common European currency might be another factor that reduces the entry barriers. Hotel companies operating in Euro zone countries do not have to pay exchange rates and transaction costs anymore what again may make them to build up or expand their business to markets within the Euro zone. This increases competition. <heading>4.2.3 Bargaining Power of Suppliers</heading>The bargaining power of suppliers is low in the field of human resources due to a relatively high rate of unemployment in France (see Appendix 2). Therefore, employers can carefully recruit staff which suits best in their organisation. Furthermore, hotel organisations cooperating with catering companies may cut their bargaining power by applying backward integration. In other words, food is prepared by the hotel itself instead of an external deliverer what in turn the bargaining power of the hospitality organisation increases towards the supplier. <heading>4.2.4 Bargaining Power of Consumers</heading>The emergence of the Internet in the early 1990s led to the rise of a new distribution channel for tourism services (European Commission 2004). Customers are able to get access to a wider range of products and so, can gather more information about tourism destinations and hospitality offers. It enables them to compare more easily different hotels including their services offered such as rates, location or special prices. This again heightens their bargaining power towards the hotel companies which need to attract clients by offering best prices in order to compete on the market (White 2004). According to the European Travel Commission (cited in European Commission 2004) reservations made via Internet have more than doubled from about 16% to 35% between 1998 and 2002 in Europe and shows the increase of bargaining power of consumers towards suppliers. <heading>4.2.5 Intensity of Rivalry in the Industry</heading>Due to the fact of free movement and establishment of businesses within the EU the competition between hotel companies may have went up as it is easier to set up a firm abroad. Budget hotels have a share of 75% in the French hotel sector. Three star hotels count 20% and four star and luxury hotels 4% (INSEE 2005b). These figures show that the main competitors for luxury hotels are rather in the budget sector than the luxury sector itself. Key competitors within the market sector range from organisations operating worldwide to companies working only in France (see Appendix 7). However, rivalries can be also seen in neighbouring countries. As a result of introducing the Euro prices are now transparent what in case of France has caused an increase in outbound travel because of better prices in foreign destinations especially in Eastern Europe (European Travel Commission 2005). <heading>5 Market Entry Decisions </heading><heading>5.1 Determinants of Market Attractiveness</heading>In order to determine the market attractiveness of the potential host country external influences it is exposed to need to be analysed. These factors include the country risk, cultural distance, the level of economic development and foreign business presence (Contractor and Kundu 1998b). Whereas country risk comprises the degree of stability in the field of business and policy cultural distance refers to similarities or dissimilarities between home and host country. Economic development aims at the level of income, size of market and saturation of the market and how it may affect the organisation by choosing a particular entry mode. Foreign business presence is dependent on the height of entry barriers for international companies in terms of governmental regulations. Thus, the higher the number of foreign businesses the lower the entry barriers might be (ibid). <heading>5.2 Market Entry Modes</heading><heading>5.2.1 Franchising</heading>The idea of franchising is to use the business concept of the global hotel company, the franchisor, by the 'local' property, the franchisee. Brand name, technology and reservation system, marketing and financial support are granted by the franchisor who in return obtains a fee that covers the different activities as well as a percentage of the revenue by the franchisee firm. The parent company does not run the hotel, however, provides guidance and training (Contractor and Kundu 1998a, Kotler et al 1999, Lewis and Chambers 2000). Franchising is one opportunity to enter a foreign market and in particular in countries with a high risk because equity is low for the franchisor as the amount of the franchising fees are dependent on sales and not profit (Contractor and Kundu 1998b). It allows companies to grow faster since capital investments are 'shared' between both parties. <heading>5.2.2 Ownership</heading>Owning of an establishment requires a high investment in terms of capital and developing of a communication and distribution strategy for the organisation. This again, may constrain the activity of business expansion and also increase the case of business failure. Due to limited equity the creation of a brand name is rather low. However, control over the company is higher and the property, seen as a product, may also be more consistent. The number of ownership is probably higher in host countries with similar cultures. Simply because the parent organisation may not experience difficulties it may has to deal with in a dissimilar environment compared to the one at home (Contractor and Kundu 1998b, Lewis and Chambers 2000). <heading>5.2.3 Management Contract</heading>A management contract is an agreement between physical owner of the property and the business management. In other words, the hospitality organisation pays a fee and provides technological equipment, brand name and support in operational management in order to run the estate as part of their international group without owning it. Management contracts are long term and include a relatively low financial risk. They offer a further option to enter a market abroad without a very high equity investment on the part of the managing company (Contractor and Kundu 1998b, Kotler 1997, Lewis and Chambers 2000). <heading>Market Attractiveness of France</heading>The country risk can be evaluated low. France as one of the founding members of the EU offers a continuous and stable political environment. Its level of economic development is high. However, regarding the growth of the GDP it needs to be said that there is only a slight rise during the last years. Nevertheless, the French market is strong and has grown steadily when looking at the period of the early 1990s to the beginning of the 2000s (see Appendix 2). So, both external forces provide good basic conditions for a company to go into the country. Furthermore, it needs to be mentioned that France can be seen as a country easy to enter for a UK business because of the agreement of Freedom of Establishment between EU member states but otherwise also one hard to compete in due to a certain price transparency within Euro zone countries. The foreign business presence in France is high. It is among the countries with the highest FDI inflow worldwide. Regarding the hotel sector Southern France has gained increasingly in popularity among investors. The improved infrastructure concerning the transportation network and business facilities are mentioned as one of the major reasons for it (Bock and Foster 2004). This may signify certain openness towards foreign enterprises and support the idea expanding in France. In terms of cultural distance France may also be an attractive country to invest in for a UK hotel firm as there are several similarities between both states which should facilitate the management of a hotel in France. In addition to that, both countries have experienced equal shifts in social, demographic and technological matters what has resulted in changed consumer behaviour. Thus, a British organisation is familiar with this development and can act appropriately in order to take advantage of it. Moreover, it has to be pointed out that there is a high level of education which might be interesting in terms of recruiting staff as the company can rely on high qualified national personnel familiar with country specific practices. It may also keep costs lower since the number of required home workers can be kept low as well and so, in turn, no transaction costs have to be paid (see Appendix 7). <heading>5.4 Entry Mode</heading>Based on the mentioned facts the chosen entry mode is a management contract. It is assumed that owing to a high level of FDI penetration and a European Single Market competition is strong. A management agreement allows entering a foreign market with low equity investment on the part of the host company and limits the financial risk. A relatively low cultural distance may also favour this mode of entry. The parent company can rely on national labour force since they are possibly familiar with operational functions and therefore, costs for training should be low. This can be supported by the fact that France counts to the countries with a very high level of education (see Appendix 4). <heading>6 Key Target Markets for The Victorian Châteaux Hotel</heading>According to the WTO (2004) France ranks number one in international tourist arrivals worldwide. The UK including Ireland composes the main foreign source market followed by Germany and the Netherlands. The United States are the major market outside Europe. Those countries, except for the Netherlands, are also leading in international tourism expenditures (see Appendix 8). Looking at the national market it can be stated that French people favour to spend their holidays in their own country but using budget accommodation or staying with friends rather than using upscale or luxury hotels. Additionally, it seems to emerge a trend to outbound tourism among French holidaymakers (European Travel Commission 2005). Regarding the development of an ageing population the number of retirees increases and with it the number of potential consumers. As discussed earlier they present a strong target group on which should be focused. According to the European Travel Commission (2004a) they demand products higher in quality and comfort. Therefore, they may be potential customers for the upscale and luxury hotel market. Due to the high market share of international tourism including expenditures it should be focused on this market sector. Priority should be put on the home market country followed by regional markets with particular regard to leisure tourists. It also needs to be taken into account that the tourism demand can be seasonal, especially outside the urban centres and hence, lower the demand for tourism and hospitality services. Targeting on retirees may remedy it to a certain degree as this group tends to take vacation during off-season periods (ibid). <heading>7 International Strategic Orientation</heading><heading>7.1 Centricity Framework</heading>The concept of centricity includes four different approaches to marketing management for a company that expands their activities to foreign markets. The ethno-centric approach is home-country orientated what means that the focus is put on customers' interests and needs at home. Polycentricism, however, sets priority to the consumer patterns and values of the host country. In other words, taking the former approach the domestic marketing strategy is applied to the foreign country and still aims at the domestic market as a key market. The latter, however, includes marketing different from home and rather sees the host country as target market. The regio-centric approach sees its key market at greater regional areas including across borderlines whereas the geocentric approach targets globally. Marketing and product are universal and not adapted to values, attitudes, behaviour or trends in a specific country or region. These four orientations provide different opportunities how an organisation can manage its marketing activities on the international level (Wind et al 1973, Roper et al 1997). <heading>7.2 Recommended Strategic Approach for The Victorian Châteaux Hotel</heading>Owing to the focus on the home market as the primary key target market an ethno-centric approach is recommended. Marketing and product in general can be maintained as in the UK and this again, reduces costs. Thus, the ethno-centric approach may also be less risky in terms of capital investment and in particular for smaller organisations that cannot rely on a strong financial background. Furthermore, it can be argued that the secondary key market is the regional market that includes mostly European states. These countries share in general a similar culture and therefore, values and consumer behaviour are presumed to be alike. Thus, the marketing strategy which is used for the home market should be broadly applicable for this target group as well. It has to be added, however, that single elements of the marketing mix need to be adapted to the different countries in order to be successful. Generally spoken, the ethno-centric approach may provide an appropriate strategy when entering the French hotel market because it puts the major emphasis on the home country market but can also be applied to the secondary market to a certain degree. <heading>8 Brand Image and Positioning </heading><heading>8.1 The Idea of a Brand </heading>Following Kotler's definition (1997 p. 443): <quote>"a brand is a name, term, sign, symbol, or design, or a combination of them, intended to identify the goods or services of one seller or group of sellers and to differentiate them from those of competitors". </quote>In other words, a brand signifies or stands for a certain product or service delivery and can be easily recognised and associated with this particular product or service delivery by the customer. Consumers also have a particular expectation of a brand product because they may have used it before and want to have the same experience when buying it again. The idea of a brand, however, is more intricate. It has to be attributed a profound meaning to the brand in order to have a product which is fully recognised as a brand (Kotler et al 1999, Lewis and Chambers 2000). <heading>8.2 Positioning and Positioning Strategies</heading>Lewis and Chambers (2000 p. 322) state that positioning aims at creating <quote>"a distinctive place in the minds of potential customers, a place where customers know who we are, how we are different from our competition, and how we can satisfy their needs and wants". </quote>Hence, positioning is about placing the product on the market from a customers' point of view and not the management's one. It has to be developed an image, the client's advantage needs to be shown and the product must differentiate itself from competitive products (Morrison 2002). There are various positioning strategies in order to position a company. These can include criteria such as location, price, standard or size which allow a comparison between the market players in a competitive sense. A positioning map is a technique that helps to identify the positioning of a brand and its competitors. According to the selected position strategy the attributes of the company and its major competitors are plotted appropriately. This again, should provide detailed information about the positioning of the compared organisations to each other. Again, here the customers' perception is decisive (Lewis and Chambers 2000). <heading>8.3 Brand Image and Positioning Strategy of The Victorian Châteaux Hotels</heading>The brand The Victorian Châteaux Hotels stands for high quality and comfort. It is associated with a superior service in all fields provided and perceived as hotel brand guarantying a distinguished atmosphere and flair. Customers expect to experience a 'unique' stay. The brand aims to represent the prestigious past at present days. The Victorian Châteaux Hotels is a softer brand. Elements like properties are former castles that are converted into hotel premises and therefore, vary from each other and offer the guest different experiences. The application of a positioning map (see Appendix 9) pointed out that The Victorian Châteaux Hotels offer a higher rack rate than two of its competitors. Only one has topped its price. Looking at the location plotting with regard to the proximity to Paris The Victorian Châteaux Hotels ranks three out of four. So, offering a relatively high price in contrast to the other hotel companies may weaken its market position. However, its brand image is associated with very good quality standard and thus, it might boost the position on the market towards its key competitors. The Victorian Châteaux Hotels should maintain its positioning strategy and keep focusing on a high price high quality approach because that is what customers expect from it and how they perceive this brand. <heading>9 Hospitality Marketing Mix</heading><heading>9.1 Theory of Standardisation and Adaptation</heading>Organisations setting up new business on foreign markets are faced with the decision whether or not to adjust their marketing mix strategy to the potential host country. One option is standardisation and means that a company maintains its marketing mix when entering the market abroad. Adaptation or customisation, however, is the opposite option and refers to a marketing mix that is changed towards national or local regulations and culture (Kotler 1997, Jain 1989). But it is nearly impossible to stick completely to one of these approaches. Here it can be followed Buzzell (1968 p. 104) who states: <quote>"... multinational standardization would mean the offering of identical product lines at identical prices through identical distribution systems, supported by identical promotional programs, in several different countries. At the other extreme, completely "localized" marketing strategies would contain  no common elements whatsoever. Obliviously, neither of these extremes is often feasible or desirable."</quote>However, he (p.108) also points out that: <quote> "... in Western Europe but also some other parts of the world, social and economic trends are working in favor of more, rather than less, standardization in marketing policies. Tourism, international communication, increased numbers of multinational customers, and other forces are all tending toward greater unification of multinational markets."</quote>This development may have even enforced during the last decades towards a globalised market. Therefore, bearing in mind that there is no absolute standardised or customised marketing strategy it is necessary to decide which elements of the marketing mix should be standardised and adapted respectively. Here, different factors play a role such as culture, legislation or economic development including market structure. <heading>9.3 Hospitality Marketing Mix of The Victorian Châteaux Hotel</heading><heading>9.3.1 Location</heading>The Victorian Châteaux Hotel should focus on countryside regions and in particular wine areas which are within an easy reach for the key target markets. Here, regions such as Burgundy, Alsace or Champagne may be selected. The first unit may be opened in the greater area of Epernay, Champagne, depending on availability of suitable facilities which can be converted into a hotel. This site should be chosen because main competitors are not situated directly in this area and it seems to be that there are no luxury hotels so far. <heading>9.3.2 Product</heading>The Victorian Châteaux Hotels are previous castles converted into hotel premises. They are refitted in accordance with its prestigious past and many individual features. It is planned to offer 30 guestrooms and suites. All rooms have their own style and are equipped with a mini-bar, television and radio. Two individual conference rooms ranging from 15 to 40 seats can be used for business meetings, workshops, and other occasions. A restaurant with local specialities and a wine cellar with a wide choice of wines, especially those from the region, are included. There should be an additional panoramic dining room suitable for receptions and a bar that has a very fine collection of wines. Leisure facilities include a heated open air swimming pool, tennis courts, a sun bathing terrace and spa. Looking at the physical attributes of the product it is adapted to local/regional conditions whereas service attributes should be rather standardised as the hotel tries to target mainly international customers. <heading>9.3.3 Distribution</heading>The key target markets for The Victorian Châteaux Hotels are generally international tourists. For that reason it is assumed that the most effective distribution channel for delivering the product might be the Internet. This could include booking options via the own homepage or virtual intermediaries. However, as the product also aims at seniors the traditional distribution channels such as travel agency or tour operator may be included as well. Even though the penetration rate of Internet use is very high in the UK there is an unequal distribution in favour of younger people (see PESTE). This trend can be also observed in other countries (European Travel Commission 2004). Therefore, it is necessary to market the hotel via traditional and electronic channels in order to reach the target groups. It might be also chosen a rather adapted approach due to slightly different booking behaviour in the favoured target countries (ibid). <heading>9.3.4 Pricing</heading>All three competitors distinguish rates according to the different room categories they offer. Price differentiations owing to seasonality are not provided as well as there are no discounted rates during weekdays when the demand might be lower. This again, may result in the fact that it is not common in France (Lewis and Chambers 2000). Therefore, the prices of The Victorian Châteaux Hotels applied in the UK needs to be adapted to national conditions and cannot be transferred from the UK where a differentiation between low and high season as well as bargain rates during weekdays is made (see Appendix 9). Objectives of the pricing strategy are revenue and profit driven. The Victorian Châteaux Hotel should apply the same pricing strategy for the UK and the French market. It includes a rate orientation according to market leaders but prices are always below their offers. This may contribute to achieve higher sales figures but also to gain in market share and name recognition (Bowie and Buttle 2004). <heading>9.3.5 Marketing Communication Strategy</heading>The major intention of the marketing activities of The Victorian Châteaux Hotels is to inform and draw potential customers' attention to this brand. It needs to be beard in mind, however, that one of the main differences between both countries is the language. For that reason, it can be argued that adapted marketing activities are necessary. The product should be communicated with the help of printed media including brochures and other promotional material. However, although this is more cost-intensive it seems to be important to translate them into the languages of the main key markets. Here it can be followed Wolfe (cited in Usunier 2000 p. 195) who points out that: <quote>"it is very easy for English business-people to see English as the language of Europe... But a pack printed only in English would be understood by at most 2 out of 5 consumers in the EU, and in other languages by even fewer."</quote>Another reason can be seen in the objection towards English as common language. This may apply especially for French people (Usunier 2000). So, even the French are not focused on as the main target market it should be paid attention to it. Other countries may feel the same and in particular older people who did not have the chance to learn English properly. If this is underestimated it may hinder a successful marketing abroad. Moreover, an own homepage and placing the hotel on websites of regional and national tourism organisations can be seen as further tools to market the product effectively and reach the aimed clientele. Mostly those platforms offer information in various languages what again makes a contribution to overcome potential language barriers. <heading>10 Conclusion</heading>Marketing research has shown that France is an attractive country to set up further business for a UK hospitality organisation. Although, there are dissimilarities similarities dominate due to the geographical proximity and the EU membership of both countries. Guidelines and legislation overlap in some fields that again facilitate entering the French market. The EU principle of Freedom of Establishment plays an important part here. It sets the framework for EU companies to cross borderlines and operate abroad. However, it has to be mentioned, too, that it enforces competition among market players. In addition to that, a common European currency creates a certain price transparency between Euro zone countries which can be evaluated in a positive and negative way at the same time for both service provider and consumer. Therefore, all elements of the marketing mix have to be selected carefully. As the analysis has shown the area around Epernay, Champagne, would be a suitable location for the first unit of The Victorian Châteaux Hotels in France because major competitors are not present in this particular place. Furthermore, the proximity to the key target markets and to Paris could be other advantages. The capital city can be accessed very well from abroad and France in general offers a well-developed transportation and road network which enables tourists from neighbouring states to enter the country and travel around easily whether by train or car. Even though, there are many statistics available from the different governmental bodies including national and supranational level it can be stated that data looking at the different nationalities and their preferred activities are lacking. However, tourist arrival statistics provide information about the countries of origin which again can be used as a basis when deciding what markets to target. But further research might be carried out in order to obtain more detailed data about the different nations and their consumer behaviour. This again, could help to adapt the product better to the key target group(s) and improve service and marketing mix strategy. According to the findings it can be recommended to enter the French hospitality market but it should be also paid attention to the risks mentioned above. Only so, The Victorian Châteaux Hotels can compete and be successful in the long run. 