<heading>Business of international publishing: BookSurge's acquisition by Amazon</heading><heading>References</heading><heading>1. BookSurge rides wave , article from "Printing World", by Tom Hawkins, January 20 th 2005</heading>BookSurge has shown rapid expansion in 2004, doubling unit sales Its growth strategy is aggressive, aiming to have a global distribution and production network Strengths are technology, expertise and partnerships <heading>2. BookSurge and ebrary® Join Forces to Offer Expanded Delivery Services for Digital Content , press release from the BookSurge website ( URL ), January 10 th 2005</heading>Joint venture initially focused on the library market Partners are compatible both in mission and values Integration of BookSurge's POD technology, and distribution network, with ebrary's content and software <heading>3. Comeback Kid? Amazon Revival Could Shake Up Industry , article from "Publishers Weekly", by Steven Zeitchik with Jim Milliot, April 11 th 2005</heading>Acquiring BookSurge, Amazon can attempt exclusive publishing in response to business pressure Sound business logic based on low unit profit/high volume combination Opportunity for Amazon to compete with existing POD publishers, thanks to its strong marketing <heading>4. Amazon.com, Ebooks, and "Chump Change" , article from Kuro5hin - technology and culture, from the trenches - website ( URL ), by Robert Nagle, May 16 th 2005</heading>Amazon could offer a complete publishing solution to authors, alternative to traditional ones If it successfully supports the affirmation of a single format, Amazon will profit from ebooks' long-awaited sensation Prices might fall, but Amazon as a new middleman will profit <heading>Reasons for choosing the referenced articles</heading>The four articles give an overview of what BookSurge's mission and strategy were in the beginning of 2005, point at why Amazon decided to acquire them, present hypotheses on what the medium-long term consequences of the operation might be, which seem confirmed by the latest developments of POD. In all, they also reflect a time of change for publishing: innovative entrants, new products being developed, affirmed players entering new markets, and - of course - acquisitions. <heading>Bibliography (numbers continue from references) </heading><list>5.  The Long Tail, article from "Wired" ( URL ), by Chris Anderson, October 2004 6.  Vault Employee Surveys: Amazon.com Employees Optimistic, but Expressing Concern as Well, press release from "Business Wire" ( URL ), February 9 th 2006 7.  How to Sell Your Book, CD, or DVD on Amazon: Micro-niche, long-tail publishing, article from Kevin Kelly's blog on "cool tools" ( URL ), February 22 nd 2005 8. Amazon Vaguely Bullish on Digital, article from "Publishers Weekly", by staff, February 6 th 2006 9. New blood at Scholastic, article from "The Bookseller", by Gayle Feldman, April 29 th 2005 10. Amazon buys print on-demand book producer BookSurge for single sales, article from "Printing World", by Gareth Ward, April 7 th 2005 11. Amazon buys print specialist, article from "The Bookseller", by Fiona Fraser, April 8 th 2005 12. Amazon Moves To Sell More Niche Titles With BookSurge Buy, article from "Book Publishing Report", April 11 th 2005 13. Amazon Acquires BookSurge LCC, article from "Business Wire" ( URL ), April 4 th 2005 14. Customers' satisfaction with e-retailing goes up again, article from "Internet Retailer" ( URL ), February 24 th 2006 15. The Book World Snapshot: Looking Back - and Ahead - in Publishing and Retail, article from "The Book Standard" ( URL ), by Kimberly Maul, January 19 th 2006 16. All press releases from the BookSurge main website ( URL ) 17. Up the Amazon, article from "The Author", by Danuta Kean, Summer 2005 18. Amazon.com Expands eBook Business, news segment from PalmZone website ( URL ), April 16 th 2005 19. Click, download, publish, article from The Guardian website ( URL ), by Victor Keegan, March 2 nd 2006 20. Keeping books alive using on-demand printing, article from "Pira International - Profit through printing", by David Taylor, March 2006</list><heading>Comment</heading><heading>Terms of the acquisition</heading>News of the acquisition was downplayed by the companies involved, with spokesmen expressing generic enthusiasm, but details remaining undisclosed (perhaps because Amazon, a publicly listed company, has to maintain confidentiality with all commercially sensitive information 17). The only information given was BookSurge would keep "its name, complete staff, and headquarters in Charleston." 12 At the time of the acquisition, BookSurge had been profitably selling its POD books through Amazon's website for years. This probably contributed to the non-applicability of some of Reuer's four 'Is', namely Information asymmetry and Investment options, which could have made a less risky alliance preferable to an acquisition. (As concerns the other two 'Is': Infeasibility wasn't an issue, since there were no legal barriers to the acquisition of an American company for Amazon, nor anti-trust regulations etc. The vertical integration resulting from the operation, finally, posed no problems of Indigestibility: according to the few details we have, BookSurge was not requested to alter much, and Amazon obviously had the capacity to absorb the incoming structure). At about the same time of the BookSurge acquisition, Amazon - already offering over 100.000 e-books - also bought e-book software company Mobipocket. Clearly, the e-retailer's strategy was to enter the promising POD and e-book markets, exploiting synergies between the two 4. At about a year from the acquisition, Amazon is considered a key player in self-publishing 19, currently booming in America  20, which relies equally on POD technology, visibility and distribution systems. The e-book business is growing, but not at the rates enthusiasts expected. <heading>Shared vision and values</heading>BookSurge is an innovative and aggressive company  1, like most Amazon has acquired since the late 1990s. Amazon itself is technologically innovative, and always expanding into new businesses. Both companies are American, have worldwide local subsidies, and pursue a global strategy aiming to make their products available in the whole world in the same way. Both are successful thanks to the implementation of the "long tail" business model  5 through internet, and to consistent customer care. BookSurges's mission is "to print any book in any language and in any geography within two business days or less" 2, which is perfectly compatible with Amazon as "Earth's most customer-centric company: a place where people can find anything they might want to buy online". Focusing on range for the end-buyer, neither makes a point out of editing the offer. Authors self-publishing with Amazon don't receive a personalised service (which, I found out talking to people from Indepublishing, is an important competitive advantage of POD independent publishers). <heading>Strategy</heading>Apart from being structurally and culturally compatible, by joining forces Amazon and BookSurge have created for themselves profitable opportunities they would not have had on their own. This obviously is the strongest motive behind the operation. BookSurge already had been involved in operations, such as the ebrary joint-venture, with the objective of exploiting another company's networks. The acquisition allows BookSurge to increase market leverage and visibility (one of POD's main weaknesses  4) in a sector particularly exposed to new entrants and rivalry, and Amazon to reach higher innovation capability. Both companies become able to develop new products for a new market they are fostering (i.e., buyers of out-of-print books, self-publishers, teachers who need to print their own personalised textbooks, etc.). While BookSurge and ebrary wanted to be the missing link between publishers and librarians, Amazon, acquiring BookSurge, might become the shortest link between authors and readers. Although Amazon would have the money to invest, the brand recognition, and customer satisfaction  8, 14 to command premium price on its innovative products, its strategy has been reasonably relying on sales volume instead 3, 19, to create a revenue based synergy with BookSurge. This is a good strategy, since consumers expect, accept, and make a success of, products deriving from new technologies when they are available for "chump change" 4. Amazon is able to sustain such a strategy because of the sheer size of its customer base  3, and also because it has effectively become a "new middleman" 4 for the publishing industry, taking about half of the retail price  7, 19. Traditional publishers are not immediately threatened by this: Amazon is not competing for their signed authors, but mostly offering an opportunity to those who would have had to resort to POD anyway; in a few cases, authors have in fact moved away from self-publishing once they proved to be successful enough; by acquiring BookSurge, Amazon's goal was to offer its clients "an ever-expanding selection of titles that are not available through other channels" 13, starting with out-of-print titles. For BookSurge, becoming an Amazon company has meant routing most POD competitors 3: these are the players who suffered the most from the acquisition (though Lightning Source and Authorhouse remain the leaders  11, 19). <heading>Diversification, competition, and globalisation</heading>Amazon is trying to position itself as a technical company  6, and investing steeply in new promising businesses. This has hindered its profitability (operating margin was 5.1% in 2005  8), to the level of traditional booksellers, concerning both employees  6 and shareholders. Although the acquisition was a successful operation, it is part of a strategy that Amazon was forced to undertake because of the innovativeness and great rivalry in the industry. Most of the major players of publishing are similarly moving to riskier boxes of the Ansoff matrix, usually diversifying into different links of the value chain  3. While its (downplayed) objective was probably "diversification", Amazon might end up in "product development", depending on how successful the new products and services it provides through BookSurge are in attracting different customers from those who already bought through the e-retailer. The fact that technological innovation (which typically is fast and unpredictable), and globalisation (with the long tail of readers suddenly gaining great power in the market, and internet exposing all companies to world-wide competition), have a strong influence on the publishing industry at the moment, makes this a particularly "exciting time" 11, but also a time of "rising business pressure" 3. <heading>Social, ethical and cultural aspect of international publishing: The value of books</heading><heading>References</heading><heading>1. Newsagents make the headlines , article from "The Bookseller", by Herbert Lottman, April 22 nd 2005</heading>In France, books lead the "cultural" sector while other media decline, growing 4% in 2004 French publishers contest coupling book and newspaper sales In Italy, "allegati" publishing is extremely successful - to the point it threatens pocket books <heading>2. One city, one book: how city reading campaigns are spreading across the UK , article from The Bookseller website ( URL ), February 10 th 2006</heading>City reading campaigns - including free distribution of copies of the chosen book - are expanding to include more than one city Publishers and bookstores gladly get involved, as there are returns for them as well The extra exposure of the campaign benefits lesser known titles the most <heading>3. French PA may sue Google , article from "The Bookseller", by Barbara Casassus, March 3 rd 2006</heading>The SNE will probably sue Google soon, for scanning 500.000 French language titles under agreement with the Michigan University At the Paris Book Fair there will be a roundtable on digital libraries, with reps from Google and the Open Content Alliance consortium, and the president of the French National Library In France, book sale growth has dropped to less than 1% in 2005 <heading>4. Release a book into the wild and hope there's a catch , article from The News Tribune website ( URL ), by Dan Voelpel, February 17 th 2006</heading>The members of worldwide club Bookcrossing leave books in public places, then track their movements via the website Set up with minimum expense, it has become a profitable business thanks to the success of its original, "wacky", underlying idea One of the ways the website makes money is by selling advertising and click-through links to booksellers <heading>Reasons for choosing the referenced articles</heading>The chosen articles are originally about completely different subjects, but I saw them in relation to the topic of the value of books. I think it is interesting to see how this issue arises in different contexts, muting into a different form but constantly recurring, probably because the book is intrinsically dual in nature as a commercial and cultural product. In this light, the articles give some insight about what would be considered "appropriate" to market books and foster sales in different countries, or targeting specific segments of the market. <heading>Bibliography (numbers continue from references) </heading><list>5.  Up the Amazon, article from "The Author", by Danuta Kean, Summer 2005 6.  Copyright and Open Access - contradictory or complementary? , article from "Logos", by Graham P. Cornish, 2005, vol. 16, issue 4 7. The Italian Bookmarket 2005, report from the AIE - Associazione Italiana Editori - website ( URL ) 8. College signs environmental pledge, article from "The Miami Herald" website ( URL ), by the Miami Dade College media relations staff, February 9 th 2006 9. Bookcrossing media kit, downloadable .pdf file from the Bookcrossing website ( URL ), 2004 10. Buona idea per promuovere la lettura. A patto di non essere troppo scolastici, (Good idea to promote reading. If you can avoid being too scholastic), interview of Paolo Giovannetti, from the IULM website ( URL ), by Maria Carla Rota, June 15 th 2004 11. Libri allegati ai giornali: un esempio per gli editori, (Books attached to newspapers: an example for publishers), article from the IULM website ( URL ), by Maria Carla Rota, June 15 th 2004 12. Italian book publishing trends, article from "Industries Graphiques", March 2005</list><heading>Comment</heading><heading>Introduction</heading>Books have always been made accessible at no cost, on a regular basis, in parallel to sales. Since ancient times, libraries were considered valuable with no relation to economic logics: they represented the culture of a certain time and place, made available to people of the present or of the future. This stems from the unique nature of the book as both a commercial and a cultural product, which can be evaluated according to two independent criteria brought together only in the market, in the consumers' decision to pay a certain price for both the ink on paper and the ideas in print. When deciding on the pricing, distribution, and promotion of books, marketers should be aware of the irresolvable culture-commerce debate, and of on what side does their target readership stand. Libraries are only the traditional alternative to buying a book: new models emerge, bending the market's logics, and succeed depending on the readers' inclinations. <heading>"Allegati" publishing</heading>Soon imitated by others in Italy, "La Repubblica" began offering books, at a small additional price, in March 2000; the list was marketed as an essential collection, which every household should have, but at the same time was made up of enjoyable best-sellers. This idea was extraordinarily successful in boosting sales in a country where only 43% of the population reads at least one book per year  7: in 2003, 46% of trade books were sold through this new distribution channel  11. After increasingly conservative literary classics  10, recently newspapers have been coupled with tomes composing encyclopaedias, which the buyer must obviously collect without exception. Some considerations can help explain the phenomenon: "Italians are less keen to visit bookshops, and are more interested in the social status of the book than actual reading" 12 partwork publishing, typically sold through newsagents as well, is an established business in Italy, targeting the same lower-class segment who wouldn't enter a bookstore or perhaps even read a book (but is fascinated by its cultural appeal). In France, the SNE condemns "allegati" publishing because "it encourages the notion that books can be given away" 1. The issue mirrors, in some respects, the controversial sale of books in British supermarkets, at hard-discount prices. Although in 2005 rates dropped to less than 1% 3, at the time of the article book sales in France were growing at 4-5%: strong enough (compared to Italy's 1-2%) that risking a new strategy wasn't necessary. Since culture is protected and fostered more strongly in France than in Italy, I can't say the French miss out on a profitable, however short-lived, opportunity: readers would probably be put off by cheap "allegati", as much as the publishers. <heading>Google print</heading>The SNE is obviously more defensive of the tradition and culture of books than the Italian AIE: it will probably soon act against Google for scanning French titles  3, although putting content online has improved sales  5 in similar situations. Apart from the reaction of the publishers in different countries, international marketers must consider how readers view the opportunity of checking books online, and possibly downloading them (legally or not). Book-buyers will typically split into four categories, according to technological skills and ethics about books. The proportion of those categories will reflect the country's general attitudes in the culture-commerce debate: who thinks it would be distasteful to steal a book, more than any other anonymous commodity? Who thinks books are worth paying? <table/><heading>Bookcrossing</heading>"An innovative attempt to make 'the whole world a library'" 9, according to founders and fans, bookcrossing encourages book reading and buying (many members buy two copies so they have one to keep), and therefore is beneficial for sales. Some authors complain the system robs them of royalties (which they'd receive for sales of new books, or library lending rights in some countries), but most approve of this model, which strips books of their economic value and celebrates them as purely cultural objects. At least in theory, and in the small scale of a niche phenomenon, bookcrossing actually carries economic potential: like used-book stores and libraries, it's a relatively painless "entry level" for experimenting with titles peer-recommendation gives obscure authors the chance to gain visibility the website links through to booksellers' websites. Bookcrossers are a compact globalised segment of the market, efficiently reachable through the website which is the base of their community. They are book-lovers and heavy buyers, representing a goldmine for international publishers willing to target people agreeing that any money spent on books is nothing compared to their cultural value. <heading>Reading campaigns</heading>Other initiatives based on books having cultural value, but which also promote sales, are reading campaigns in the US and UK (amidst a plethora of events such as World Book Day and book prizes). The ideological affinity with the bookcrossing community is proved by the latter's perfectly integrated involvement at times (bookcrossers distribute copies of the selected title for the campaign and track them online  8). Books distributed free, or discounted, within these initiatives don't risk the devaluation feared by the SNE about "allegati", because the campaign has a recognised cultural meaning. Less-known titles are pushed into the market  2, and selected one-book campaign titles are granted a revival. Publishers obtain priceless promotion by participating in a community activity, which intelligently stresses reading instead of buying. In other words, their marketers are brilliantly using the perceived cultural value of books in order to reach their economic objectives. 