<heading>1.0 Introduction</heading>Liverpool is the European City of Culture for 2008, its tourism value and volume are expected to increase through the Liverpool and Merseyside regeneration projects. Premier Lodge Hotel, as part of the Premier Travel Inn (a merge company of Premier Lodge and Travel Inn), owned by Whitbread PLC is part of the stakeholder within the Liverpool tourism industry, located in Albert Dock, which is likely to have impacts from this event. <heading>1.1 Background of the European City of Culture 2008</heading>According to the 'liverpool08' website, Liverpool is receiving European Capital of Culture 2008 status will: <list>Create 14,000 new jobs Attract an extra 1.7 million tourists Encourage £2 billion investment</list><heading>2.0 Premier Lodge Hotel Capability and Resource</heading>In order to access the role and opportunities for Premier Lodge to develop their activity to take advantage of the opportunities offered by Capital of Culture designation, it is important to analysis their internal resource and capability, and its competitive and external environment, before evaluate their effectiveness of strategic management. <heading>2.1 SWOT analysis</heading>SWOT analysis is an analytical tool to analyse the internal and external advantages and disadvantages arise in Premier Lodge. It is able to identify the capability and resources of Premier Lodge as its strengths to be the competitive advantages to the opportunities, and identify its weaknesses in order to be improved and minimise the effects from the threats. <heading>Strengths</heading>Premier Travel Inn has its well-known brand name and it is the largest budget hotel chain - 440 hotels across the UK (Travel Weekly, March 2004), with its fixed pricing policy ( URL ). As the based in Liverpool, Premier Lodge is the newest budget hotel ( URL ) and it is one of the strategic business unit under the Whitbread PLC, it will therefore have huge financial support for further investment. Premier Travel Inn provides direct sell to customer mainly through online booking, this could relate to a reduce cost advantage for the company and provide customers the most up-dated information. Since Premier Lodge offers a standard of accommodation and facilities (Travel Weekly, March 2004), such as king-sized beds (Field notebook, 2004, pp.40-44), with emphasis on "offers customers the best quality combined with value for money" and "strong distribution and real brand differentiation" strategies ( URL ), it increases value of its services from customers' perspectives. <heading>Weaknesses</heading>Based on the Premier Lodge experience in the Liverpool trip (Field Notebook, 2004, pp.48-49), the operation and human resource management cause serious weaknesses to Premier Lodge. This may not just lead to dissatisfaction of customers, but also decrease its service value provided to customers. Another weakness procures in Premier Lodge is the lack of quality services for business people (Field Notebook, 2004, pp.40-42), from the Cater & Hotelkeeper (1997), the business development director 'believes the hotel will cater for this business sector in particular, adding: "There is a shortage of quality hotels in Liverpool". <heading>Opportunities</heading>According to the regeneration project of Liverpool and the 2008 project, this is a great opportunity for Premier Lodge to expand its business by further investment, thus build up the capacity for '08' project. With the corporation to its business expansion strategy - "that Premier Travel Inn will add 1,500 new budget hotel rooms to the portfolio every year until it hits a target of about 40,000 rooms in the next five to six years." (Caterer & Hotelkeeper, 2004) It is an opportunity for Premier Lodge to added value on its service by improving its service quality, such as business facilities, and human resource management. <heading>Threats</heading>While the opportunities offered by the Capital of Culture designation, more investors are likely to invest in Liverpool and therefore increase the competition in all sectors of tourism, this may lead to a mass tourism in Liverpool. Additionally, current interest rate is high with 4.75% ( URL ), this is a threat for investors to invest in their projects. In Premier Lodge case, this may lead to a further cost on their investment or development on their current assets. <heading>2.2 Porter's Five Forces Model </heading>With the aim of analyse Premier Lodge competition diversity in the Liverpool hotel industry, porter's five forces is one of the analytical tool to determine these factors. Accoridng to the Porter's five forces model in figure 2.2.1, it shows Premier Lodge is in a highly competitive market, as the competition diversity is high. The bargaining power of existing competitors, buyers and sustitutes are high, not just in the hotel industry but even highly within the budget hotel sector. According to the draft report - December 2003 from Mersey Partnership (App6.1), there are 10 budget hotels in Liverpool but only Express by Holiday Inn and Campanile Hotel have conference facilities, together with Premium Lodge, they are the most comparative competitiors (App 6.2 and Field Notebook, 2004, pp40-44) in the budget hotel sector and and located in the Albert Dock area. This is due to they all provide value-for-money, competitively priced and consistent quality accommondation. Therefore, it is important for Premier Lodge to develop a competitive strategy, with the purpose of competing with its rivals and take competitive advantages of the oppounities offered by the 2008 Project. Premier Lodge may also benchmark with its competition, such as Express by Holiday Inn, to 'differerntiate its products, such as upgrading its facilities, to increase loyatly and value added' (Dagmar Recklies, June 2001). Thus, to reduce the power of customers, the threat of substitute and new entrants and the competitive rivalry between Existing Players. <figure/><heading>3.0 Sustainable Tourism</heading><quote>"Sustainable tourism development meets the needs of the present tourists and host regions while protecting and enhancing the opportunity for the future. It is envisaged as leading to management of all resources in such a way that economic, social and aesthetic needs can be fulfilled, while maintaining cultural integrity, essential ecological processes, biological diversity and life support systems". (WTO) </quote>The Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, it define sustainable tourism as "the optimal use of natural and cultural resources for national development on an equitable and self sustaining basis to government, the private sector and communities." and the United Nations of Environment Program, it says: "Sustainability, has three interconnected aspects: environmental, socio-culture and economic" The context of sustainable tourism business is to concern with the macro/external environment of Premier Lodge. It is important to Premier Lodge as it is not just to contribute with Liverpool local community benefits, but also identify the factors for Premier Lodge to develop substantially and maintain growth beyond 2008. <heading>3.1 Environmental</heading>This is to deal with the quality of the environment, for Premier Lodge, it is about the physical and tangible evidence to tourists, such as its facilities and designer environment. According to Developing and marketing Merseyside talk (Field Notebook, 2004, pp.50-51), its strategy are to 'improve quality services and delivering core experiences based on improving conferences', therefore it is important for Premier Lodge to contribute with this strategy in order to maximise the benefits gain from tourism. With the intention of gain benefits from the designation and grow sustainablly, Premier Lodge may develop conferences facilities for business people. This may increase the quality of budget hotel and therefore increases Premier Lodge value. With the aim of sustainable tourism, Premium Lodge may use the policy from The Green Hotel (GHA), i.e. "offers clients in member hotels a card through which the user defines whether towels and sheets will be changed on daily bases or not" (Pineda & Brebbia, 2004), thus reduce the waste and damage to the local environment. <heading>Socio-cultural</heading>Since the '08 project' and 'more destination to fly to/from other EU cities' (Field Notebook, 2004, p.51), more EU tourists are more likely to visit Liverpool. This may lead to culture clashes ( URL ) problems, such as languages and culture differences. For this reason, Premier Lodge may need to redesign their human resource policy, in order to improve its service value providing to tourists; so that it may minimise the culture conflict arise from '08 project', and furthermore, to improve their local employees' skills thus benefits to local people. <heading>Economic</heading>The tourism demand in Liverpool is more likely to increase, as from the talk about the Tourism Vision 2015 (Field Notebook, 2004, p.50) - double bed nights to 10m, thus "Increasing demand for basic services and goods from tourists will often cause price hikes that negatively affect local residents whose income does not increase proportionately" ( URL ) However, this impact could be minimise in Premier Lodge case, providing they are contribute towards the local community benefits; as they are using a fixed price policy and this may also gain the competitive advantage during the time of 2008. Additionally, tourism is a very seasonal industry, with the purpose of maintaining the occupancy during the low season and beyond 2008, Premier Lodge may build a strong brand-awareness to overseas visitors from the opportunity of the '08 project'. <heading>4.0 Strategy Management</heading>Strategically, based on the SWOT and five forces analysis, and the concern with sustainable tourism business, it is essential for Premier Lodge to develop a strategy focus on using its resources and capaibilities in order to take the best advantage from the 08 project and become competitive - "the concentration of resources and effect upon those factors capable of providing the greatest competitive leverage" (Brotherton and Shaw, 1996) With the purpose of become successful and competitive, a tactial planning focus on the short-term actions and a strategic planning focus on the long-term objectives are important for Premier Lodge to implement. <heading>4.1 Tactical Planning</heading>Tactically, Premier Lodge needs to improve its human resource management, such as language training for exiting staffs, in order to communicate with different countries' tourists. This is vital because staffs are the main character to interact with tourists and their attitudes and behaviours all influence the tourists' perceptions. Additionally, by training staffs' skills and knowledge may improve the quality of its service, hence increase consumers' value. This improvement should be done before 2008, thus it response to the tourist demands when the '08 project' actually take part. Extensively, target to a new segment in upmarket - business people, is also tactical for Premier Lodge. By providing 'value for money' ( URL ) facility to business people, such as conference room and Internet, added value and meets its corporate objectives of "Ensuring that each of our brands is a leader in its field for customer service" ( URL ) <heading>4.2 Strategic Planning</heading>Regarding to Bob Brotherton (2004), one of the critical success factors (CSF) - "CSFs are the factors that must be achieved if the company's overall goals are to be attained" (Bob Brotherton, 2004), is to concern with the 'geographic coverage of the hotel network', which is to cope with Premier Lodge corporate expansion strategy. In order to grow substantially and even beyond 2008, Premier Lodge may expand its chain into careful evaluated and convenient locations, such as near tourist attractions. Realistically, the expansion strategy of Premier Lodge may be supported under the Whitbread PLC finance; therefore it is a superior financial resource. It is also important for Premier Lodge to persevere its core strategy - 'Critical success factors may be achieved from a reflection of a company's specific core capabilities and competencies critical for competitive advantage' (Bob Brotherton, 2004); i.e. its fixed price policy is its strength to gain sustainable competitive advantage. With the aim of maintain grow beyond 2008, it is vital for Premier Lodge to built a strong branding with long term marketing campaigns to establish higher customer awareness. Furthermore, to maintain its service quality durably, total quality management strategy should be adopted, in order to sustain its competitive advantage. <enote>Total Quality Management is a process of involving everyone in an organization in continuously improving all products and services to achieve, on every occasion, quality that satisfies customers' needs (Naylor, 1999, p.206) </enote>Overall, Premium Lodge used a cost leadership generic strategy currently, and it is critical for Premium Lodge to move forward in a mixture use of cost leadership and differentiation strategy (App.6.3), in order to gain competitive advantages, thus becomes sustainable. A detail of how Premium Lodge could implement in order to gain competitive advantage is enclosed in Appendix 6.4. <enote>Cost leadership - "company uses its resources to achieve lower costs than its rivals" (Porter, 1985). In this case, Premium Lodge use direct sale to its customer to lower its cost, and provide standardised product which also lower it cost compare to its competitors. </enote><enote>Differentiation - a firm's products is different to its rivals where customers are willing to pay for this difference (Porter, 1985). It is achieved through quality, innovation and customer responsiveness. </enote><heading>5.0 Conclusion</heading>Premier Lodge has strong resource and capability to develop its activities, through its human resource and quality management, in order to differentiate and gain competitive advantage from its rivals and therefore minimise the negative impacts. Develop action plan with continue market research may ensure Premier Lodge grow substantially and maintain its competitive advantage. Specifically, Premier Lodge needs to implement, monitor and control with its tactical and strategic plan, in order to maximise its benefits and minimise its effects. Sum of all, the critical success factors for Premier Lodge may be: <list>Product and service differentiationTotal quality managementHuman resource managementAdded valueGeographic coverage of the hotel networkResponsiveness to customer demand</list>By achieving the above critical success factors, Premier Lodge is more likely to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the Capital of Culture designation. By relating to sustainable tourism business context, Premier Lodge may minimise the negative impacts arise from the '08' designation. 