<heading>CURRENT COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT</heading>In a climate of academic controversy over political and historical upheaval in the Middle East, CUP plan to publish the postponed Illustrated History of the Middle East with an additional chapter reflecting current events in Iraq and Palestine. PEST and SWOT analysis (Appendix I) reveals multiple opportunities to exploit CUP's strength in the subject area. Despite strong market share in general Asia History publishing (where OUP's sales have been declining) CUP lags behinds both OUP and Blackwell in hardback sales. (Appendix III). OUP have been steadily increasing hardback sales in Asia History: it is essential that we bring out new hardback material in this area to compete. The new title will aim to increase our market share in hardback History, gaining competitive advantage by developing the marketing mix with a superior product and pricing. <heading>Subject Knowledge</heading>The monograph series Cambridge Studies in Islamic Civilization and Cambridge Middle East Studies have augmented our Middle East programme with publications from senior scholars and promising newcomers. Our extensive list and personal acquaintance with leading academics in this discipline creates real sales opportunities, promoting the title with experience, market familiarity and a tried-and-tested marketing plan in both the wider subject field and Histories list. <heading>Worldwide Integration</heading>Our New York office will handle marketing in North America while we concentrate on marketing the book in the UK, Europe and Australia/New Zealand. Our offices in Iberia and Cambridge enable us to respond to global marketing opportunities and local needs in a way many of our larger rivals cannot. <heading>Competition</heading>OUP, our biggest competitor in hardback History publishing, are publishing The Modern Middle East: A Sourcebook for History in February 2006. This hardback is twice as long with only 11 integrated illustrations in comparison with our 99 colour plates, giving our title competitive advantage: it will target the trade as well as academic market. The length and format of the OUP title does not allow it to crossover so easily. Blackwell's market share in Asia History publishing is increasing (Appendix III) and their hardback sales in General History exceed ours. However, to our advantage smaller academic publishers like Blackwell cannot target segments outside the specialised academic market. As a major university press, we can afford to target general readers as well as the comparatively small group of specialised academics. The marketing plan details how these benefits will be communicated to the target markets. We will emphasise to retail customers that the benefits mentioned above represent a distinct advantage over OUP's new title. <heading>OBJECTIVES</heading>Launch new title in the established CUP Illustrated History series: increase brand awareness Retain previous customers by emailing CUP's existing customer database Gain new customers by expanding the market for these books to the interested general reader, and partnering the SOAS. Gather information on these new customers for future promotions Compete successfully with OUP's new Middle East publication Stimulate trial, by including listings of other titles in the series (current and future) along with promotional material for this one Expand "off-season" sales, exploiting political timing as opposed to seasonality Increase shelf space in high street bookstores Increase CUP's market share in hardback History publishing and encourage paperback sales for 2007, increasing CUP's market share in Asia and General History publishing as a whole Bring out paperback in time to capture current public interest in the Middle East, meaning maximum sales and potential for trade crossover <heading>TARGET MARKETS </heading>This is a trade/academic crossover title, which means we will target several segments: <table/>We will use our existing customer database to target previous buyers with information about the title, and promote it to our extensive list of academics, libraries and booksellers. Our subject-based team will communicate with colleagues in other disciplines to ensure this crossover title reaches all its target readers. <heading>Understanding customer preferences</heading>Lecturers, library buyers and booksellers want a well-researched scholarly tome, prominent on the shelf. Our illustrated hardback, by specialist academic Fred Halliday, will stand out in customers' book collections and on library/bookstore shelves. Customers want an academically reputable title: our book is part of CUP's established Illustrated History series, with clear branding. We will stress to corporate buyers (SOAS, Chatham House) that the book will reinforce key messages about the company's products. General readers want a topical title: we will emphasise the chapter on recent events in Iraq and Palestine added only 6 months before publication. This product meets a new need for information about the Middle East. Emphasis on topicality means readers will purchase immediately, rather than wait for paperback publication. We are targeting upper/middle class readers of the serious press, who have relatively high disposable incomes and can afford a hardback title. <heading>MARKETING MIX</heading><heading>Product: </heading>Well-researched, edited by prestigious academic; high quality and fully illustrated with clear branding as part of Cambridge Illustrated History series. <heading>Price : </heading>£35 is competitive for a hardback (OUP's new title will be sold at £75.00) Our title should appeal to academics and the general reader: it is affordable for public as well as corporate libraries. The price point is nonetheless high enough to ensure quality. We offer sliding discounts on bulk purchases for corporate buyers, and customized jackets. <figure/><heading>Promotion : </heading>Discussed fully in the plan. Combined push and pull strategy, pushing the title down supply chains by promoting to booksellers, librarians and institutions, while promoting directly to academics and specific customers by email to pull the title down the channels. Public awareness about the war in Iraq will naturally create demand for the title at consumer level. <heading>Place : </heading>Academic and high street bookstores, university bookshops, our website and Amazon and Blackwell.co.uk. This will be expanded in the marketing plan. <heading>MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS MIX</heading><heading>Objectives</heading>Outlined above. Our campaign is geared to ensuring the new hardback title enters the appropriate channels to create awareness among both academic and trade customers. Initial planned print run will be 7,000, and we plan to sell as quickly as possible. <heading>Target Market</heading>We will target both academic and trade markets, as detailed. Design and emphasis on topicality will remain the same, building brand image, saving costs and ensuring a consistent message in direct marketing and on the high street, where both academic and general readers will buy. This is a low-risk title, penetrating and to some extent developing the market. <heading>Tactics</heading>Discussed in the advertising section of the plan. Pre-publication promotion through direct marketing to reach precise target market with personalized communication. Promotion to existing customer database encourages CRM and emphasis on Illustrated History series appeals to brand loyalty. On publication, email-alerts, review copies and conference advertising captures public hype surrounding Middle East. Cooperation with SOAS reaches specialized academic segment. CUP will not extend publicity to retail displays, as focus will be on the academic market, with a crossover to trade. The focus will be on electronic promotion, specifically direct emails: academics are embracing internet technology with particular enthusiasm due to free university internet access. We will reach the general reader outside our databases through the editor's promotions and press advertisements. <heading>Schedule</heading>Appendix V gives a full break down. <heading>Budget</heading>Marketing is provided with a considerable budget out of the gross margin (Appendix V) as publicity is essential for a topical title. The bulk of spending is directed towards expensive press advertising and developing the market at conferences: although direct marketing is our priority, it is cost-efficient. The budget is broken down in Appendix VII. <heading>Evaluation</heading>Discussed in detail below. <heading>THE MARKETING PLAN</heading>Promotion for this title will be an intense campaign, geared to sell through several different marketing channels over a short period of time. We will take advantage of current interest in the topic and the editor's reputation in Middle Eastern academia to appeal to both academic and trade markets. Whilst we hope to develop the market by introducing new customers to the existing series, we are primarily selling an existing product to the same market so the focus will be on the largest and fastest possible sales. Our marketing campaign for The Illustrated History will encompass every available market channel and technique to reach potential customers, and will include: <heading>MULTI-CHANNEL COMMUNICATION</heading>Cooperative promotion with the School of Oriental and Asian Studies (SOAS) will ensure the title is promoted on their website and through direct mail to their members (over 200 academics and 3,200 students from over 1000 countries). This means that information about the new title will directly target those with a specialised interest in the subject area. We are confident of securing this deal due to our established links with the institute: we publish their six society journals, and this year published Historia De Irak for their Department of Politics and International Studies. <heading>DIRECT MAIL</heading>Personalisation is a major part of the promotional package. By targeting both loyal customers, and new customers in the specialised field through personal emails and catalogue mailing, we will build customer loyalty to the CUP brand. Mass customisation through personal emails is effective cost per contact. <heading>CATALOGUES</heading>Sterling and Australian dollar versions of our subject catalogues will be mailed to academics, booksellers, wholesalers, reviewers, librarians, corporate buyers, practitioners and specialists worldwide. These catalogues are used by our representatives and worldwide agents to sell in advance of publication, and to arrange special promotions with booksellers. Copies of the catalogues are mailed to smaller booksellers across the globe, who are beyond the reach of our sales force. Pre-publication, the book has already featured in our Autumn mailings, and will feature in the Spring mailings of the relevant subject catalogues, ordered by academic institutions as well as booksellers- Politics and International Relations, History, Sociology and Cultural Studies, and will continue to feature for at least one year after publication. It will appear on the 'Highlights' title page of Middle East Studies in June, a month after publication. Our catalogues are also available online, in CUP's 'Catalogshop' in interactive PDF format, and will be promoted by email to our extensive customer base. <heading>LEAFLETS</heading>Leaflets will be inserted in delegates' packs, distributed at conferences, and mailed to interested academics and librarians. We rent lists from the International Academic Mailing Listbrokers' lists of librarians. Institutional members of SOAS will also be mailed. Leaflets will list the other 13 titles in the series, and show clearly the Cambridge URL where the customer can order the title. As part of the promotional package, we will offer discounts to institutions and companies buying in bulk. <heading>ELECTRONIC MARKETING</heading>The Cambridge University Press website features a full description of the book, full table of contents, and a brief biography, 6 months prior to publication. The URL for the book can be used as part of the editor's email autosignature, in order to raise awareness of the title. Our website has an integrated ordering system and offers customers the opportunity to browse catalogues online and sign up to our online mailing service. Customers can use 'DataShop' to receive one-off or regular files automatically by email or FTP. In the field of electronic marketing we have an extensive database of global email contacts profiled by subject interest and profession, to whom we regularly post targeted email messages to encourage adoptions and sales. In this case we would target journalists, academics and politicians with an interest in Middle East Studies and related disciplines. Studies of academic ordering patterns show that academics use direct e-marketing to amass information, and then order through bookstores. The focus of our direct marketing campaign will therefore be informative emails, encouraging the customer to purchase in bookstores on the high street as well as through the website. We have a fully searchable database of titles on our web site ( URL ). We can post banner advertisements for the new book on the homepages of related titles. On publication, the book will be automatically announced to subscribers to 'Cambridge Alerts', an email alerting service for academics keen to keep in touch with new publications in their fields of interest: emails will target the market precisely. Subscribers to this service can also order examination copies direct from the web, and receive special offers and newsletters. For further details, visit  URL  <heading>TRADE PROMOTION AND SALES REP SUPPORT</heading><heading>Representatives and Agents</heading>Our representatives and our specialized team of academic agents cover the UK and Europe, centralized in offices based in Iberia and Cambridge, and Australia/New Zealand. Our agents have already been promoting the book at conferences and SOAS events, such as the LMEI evening lecture series over the last 3 months. Reps will also visit universities to promote the book to academics personally, and collect data pre-publication about the number of students/ lecturers in Politics and International Relations courses and related studies. <heading>Sales Meetings</heading>Twice a year our sales teams convene at the beginning of each selling season to hear about our new books. The Illustrated History of the Middle East will be presented at sales conferences in early spring, prior to publication, so that representatives and sales agents can present the book to bookstore buyers and gain advance orders, and arrange displays and point of sale material in academic bookstores where appropriate. <heading>Booktrade/Library Promotion</heading>Our sales team works in partnership with major library suppliers, wholesalers and bookstore chains, enabling us to effectively promote the title to libraries and bookstores. We will place an advertisement in The Bookseller (right-hand side, facing text) a month before publication. We work closely with major Internet bookstores such as Amazon and Blackwell's Online Bookshop to ensure that the title will receive maximum exposure. Our network of contacts in the worldwide academic media will be sent advance information and review copies of the book. Free Proofs and Advance Information sheets target retail customers including Waterstones, Borders, Blackwells and WHSmith. <heading>CONFERENCES AND REVIEW COVERAGE</heading>We will promote and display The Illustrated History at relevant academic and library conferences, and major trade book fairs, through: <list>Manned CUP standsAdvertising in conference programmesInserts in delegates' packsPre- and/or post-conference emails to delegates</list>Upon publication, relevant media and society journals will receive review copies of the book. Our review list and a full conference listing is detailed in Appendix VIII. <heading>ADVERTISING</heading>We will place advertisements in relevant Cambridge journals (i.e. Foreign Policy Bulletin, International Journal of Middle East Studies) and in The Bookseller to generate awareness of this text in the academic community. An advertisement in The Economist and an extract from the new chapter will in The Guardian will reach the interested general reader. Our message will highlight USPs and benefits detailed in Appendix II, stressing the title's competitive superiority: lower pricing, highly illustrated, accessible and topical. We will emphasise the emotional appeal of the title to intellectual aspirations: it provides a certain scholarly image for the general reader, and keeps academics informed on the latest debates. The editor will promote the book in the press and media, conferences, and interviews on Panorama and Newsnight. Halliday's book Islam and the Myth of Confrontation (1995) has provoked controversy, which means we can take a sensationalist angle in our advertising to increase publicity. <heading>RESPONSE: MONITORING RESULTS AND FOLLOW-UP</heading>Post-publication, sales will be evaluated through Nielson Bookscan and website sales figures. Retail customers can complete a feedback form on our website, or email forbooksellers@cambridge.org to comment. Customers ordering on the website or through catalogues can email Giulia Portuese-Williams regarding the title. 'Cambridge Alerts' provides information on Cambridge websales. POS will show whether we have succeeded in reaching the general reader as well as the academic, whose response is assessed through email and institutional sales. A Nielsen comparison of our sales with OUP's The Modern Middle East will highlight the success of our title. If the title has been a success, the paperback version will be published as quickly as possible so as to take full advantage of the current interest in the Middle East. If response is poor, we may have to rethink our paperback campaign. 