<heading>Roadless Travels - A Company Profile</heading>"Making do with the natural environment" is the catch-phrase and inspiration of Roadless Travels (RT); a privately owned company keen on promoting responsible ecotourism in global areas, rich in biodiversity and natural landscapes. The name encapsulates the proverbial road less travelled with the idea of exploring areas difficult to reach by gas-powered vehicles. Founded in 1990 in Brecon, Wales, the company entered a mutual agreement with the Brecon Beacons National Park. The terms of this agreement: informally supporting the Park and simultaneously accommodating ecotourists (hikers and trekkers) and sustainable ecotourism through eco-lodges. The International Ecotourism Society (TIES) defines Ecotourism as 'responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment and sustains the well being of local people' (Wood, 2002, p. 9). Responsibility and sustainability thus form the company guiding principles, incorporated into the mission statement of the eco-lodges (consult Appendix 1: Mission Statement). Currently, the company operates six, less than 50 roomed, eco-lodges in six different countries, located in four different continents; each named in relation to its respective environment (consult Appendix 1 & 2). Roadless Travels has yet to penetrate the Asian continent and is therefore planning to apply TIES guidelines to introduce an eco-lodge to Southeast Asia, namely Pakistan (consult Appendix 2: TIES Guidelines). Years of political instability, poor infrastructure, environmental concerns, and recent natural disasters (October 2005 earthquake) have inhibited Pakistani tourism development (Lee et al. , 2005). Pakistan's government is looking to set in motion the country's still developing tourism life cycle (Lee et al. , 2005). Despite an impoverished populace, North-western territories such as Chitral, Naran, and Gilgit are rich in topography and culture. Though challenging, responsible ecotourism could benefit these areas by sustaining tourism to the region, its environment, and Pakistan as a whole (Khan, 2005; Wood, 2002). <heading>Evaluation of the Business Environment</heading>Penetrating potential markets requires an understanding of the business environment to determine the need to adapt to changing market conditions, and identify areas of sustainable competitive advantage (Gin, 2005; Lynch, 2003). PESTE analyses examine previous events and experiences and 'can be used as a forecast of the future' to evaluate the overall attractiveness of the target country (Lynch, 2003, p.93). Pakistan has lived under democratic and restrictive military governments since it separated from India in 1947; yet political tensions between the two nations continues to heighten political instability and perceived risk (Lee et al. , 2005). The UK's political stability and low perceived risk implies almost non existent corruption levels, whereas Pakistan's current level of instability results in serious cases of organized crime (Lee et al. , 2005). Under such conditions it would be advisable for multinational corporations to seek out Local Attorneys, providing useful insight on Pakistani local laws and business environments (Icon Group International Inc., 2000). The UK, one of Europe's leading businesses, contrasts with Pakistan which is considered a low-income nation which may discourage capital foreign investment; yet this may be solved though franchise or joint-venture agreements (Lee et al. , 2005). Roughly 97% of Pakistan follows Islam and collectivism, with strong family ties whereas the UK is individualistic; thus there is need for a cross-cultural approach (Usunier et al. , 2005; Lee et al. , 2005). Televised and printed media are common to both cultures, which could aid in crossing cultural barriers; however the internet would be problematic considering it is still developing in Pakistan (Lee et al. , 2005). Land transport infrastructure similarities between the two nations is evident in the form of deterioration; with Pakistan witnessing a more alarming rate in need of massive investment, affecting both commercial and personal travel (Lee et al. , 2005). Pakistani domestic telephone services are adequate for government and business use and Telecommunications have significantly progressed as new channels of communication, all of which is not new to the UK; nonetheless this could assist Pakistan in establishing stronger global communication and increase potential foreign mobile service investment (Lee et al. , 2005). Topographic differences between Pakistan and the UK are mainly arid deserts and mountainous regions; with the more temperate Pakistani areas similar to most of the UK landscape (Lee et al. , 2005). Waste disposal and pollution are serious issues in Pakistan, especially in major cities; whereas the UK has kept environmental issues to a minimum, the most urgent being vehicle air pollution (Lee et al. , 2005). In addition both nations leave room to improve energy and water consumption, with Pakistan's high usage due to inefficiencies in state-run power sector in generating and transmitting electricity across national grids (Lee et al. , 2005). Nonetheless, eco-conscious consumers continue to enter the business environment and organizations need to consider the environmental issues when evaluating future target markets (Mintel, 2003). As indicated in the preceding paragraphs, the UK and Pakistan share similarities in terms of media usage, topography, in addition to some problematic issues. These are often obscured by their differences however, which include cultural, economical but primarily political instability and perceived risk; an area requiring serious thought in terms of market attractiveness. The PESTE evaluation is not flawless however with possible biased information from Pakistani newspapers and websites. In addition, PESTE evaluations employ dated material that may skew findings and only provide a prediction of an uncertain future (Lynch, 2003). Overall, it can be argued that tourism potential exists in Pakistan; although the country has yet to establish sustained internal order and durable external peace with its neighbours, there is no shortage of cultural attractions or scenic landscapes (Iqbal, 2005; Mir, 2004; Richter, 1999). (Consult Appendix 3: PESTE Evaluation). <heading>Demand Factors in Pakistan</heading>Shifting demand inevitably affects business environments and organizations thus seek to understand, adapt to, and influence demand to capitalise on such changes (Munoz, 2005). As per Middleton et al. (2001), tourism relates to eight  determinants. Firstly, economic factors and comparative prices relate to tourism demand through disposable income and elasticity of demand (Middleton et al. , 2001). Pakistan steadily grows more elastic with added expenditure on leisure tourism, including domestic urban demand for summer mountain holidays (PKF, 2003; UN, 2004; WTO, 2003a). Many rural areas fall under the poverty line however, with income being spent on necessities rather than tourism (UN, 2004; Lee et al., 2005). Despite increasing oil prices, Pakistani prices remain economical with stable Rupee value compared to US dollar value (UN, 2004; Lee et al., 2005). Global tourism decline, due to security and geopolitical issues, has stabilized with tourism originating from Northern and Western Europe, South Asia itself, and the Americas (WTO, 2004a; WTO, 2004b; WTO, 2003a). Targeting global and domestic tourists via Ecotourism could add to sustainability thus rejuvenating local revenue and rural employment; moreover global ecotourists display a willingness-to-pay to support conservation and cultures (Diamantis, 1999; Mintel, 2003, Buckley, 2004). Demographic traits such as age, education, family income and composition may influence tourism demand (Middleton et al. , 2001). Pakistani family composition however reduces "Visiting-Friends-Relatives" (VFR) travel given average households consist of six family members from various generations (UN, 2004; Lee et al. , 2005). The average age of 20-30 marks a stage of independence and family support which lowers pursuit of higher education and tourism demand; the theory being higher education bears greater travel (Middleton et al. , 2001; Lee et al. 2005). Consequently targeting visitors keen on sustainable tourism, such as Northern Europeans and England, would be more profitable and better fit the ecotourist profile (Wood, 2002). Such g eographic factors as climate, scenery, and surrounding communities play vital roles as determinants; the theory being the more attractive the location to the target market, the greater the demand (Middleton et al. 2001). A diverse country in geographic terms, Pakistan has seen gradual domestic demand in more mountainous north-western regions (Javed, 2005; WTO, 2003a). Ecotourism in such rural areas could emphasize cultural heritage, Pakistan's scenic regions, and fulfil the 'need to enjoy nature' as a key determinant to ecotourist travel (Holden et al., 2002, p.439; Wood, 2002). Socio-cultural attitudes relate to a population's views on how to achieve a desired quality of life and so fostering similar attitudes could effectively motivate tourism demand (Middleton et al. , 2001). Social approval may overrule individual judgement in Pakistan, with devotion to family reducing leisure activities (Lee et al. , 2005). Islamic ideology is also deeply integrated into Pakistani life, from banking methods to religious holidays (Rosser et al. , 1999; Lee et al. , 2005). In such cases, the host country attitudes complicate social impacts of tourism and traversing such traditional barriers may require local support (Ryan, 2003). A niche market holding strong rural and cultural links, Ecotourism seeks to 'minimize impact on - and maximize respect for - host cultures' (Hertzer, 1965 cited in Holden et al. , 2002; Wood, 2002). Social impact might be reduced by locals modelling suitable behaviour; creating a sense of pride, community ownership, and global awareness of traditional values and crafts (Black et al. 2001; Dimantis, 1999). As per Middleton et al. (2001) cars offer greater personal mobility, an important determinant of domestic tourism demand. Poor road conditions and past decisions have left Pakistan 'locked into suboptimal transport policies', reducing demand and ease of access to tourist sites (Imran et al. , 2005, p.506; Lee et al. , 2005). Sustainable builds and upgrades to motorways and city airports have enabled Pakistan to meet domestic, global, and expatriate arrivals (WTO, 2003a). Ecotourism would thus benefit from increased international ecotourist arrivals, domestic tourist accessibility, and modes of transport meeting ecotourism guidelines (Wood, 2002). Government involvement may include transport policies, hospitality taxes, and environmental legislation; so the degree of intervention determines tourism demand (Middleton et al. , 2001). Pakistan's government acts as a facilitator seeking to enable an environment for privatized and public groups to reach full potentials; however this has implicated private destination marketing investments, and entry visas remain rigid (Lee et al. , 2005; WTO, 2003a). As a result, Ecotourism demand is in the end influenced by the governmental zoning laws, waste treatment systems, and energy resources; much of which has been problematic in Pakistan but improving (Lee et al. , 2005; Wood, 2002). The final, more recent, determinants include mass-media and IT communications, including the Web; the theory being the higher their impact the higher tourism demand (Middleton et al. , 2001). Although basic, such factors impact domestic demand through media-induced tourism and communication coverage; yet attracting global tourism through far reaching media, namely the internet, is still developing and limited to select target groups (Lee et al. , 2005; WTO, 2003b). Ecotourism is equally affected by minimal Pakistani web-presence, leaving many global ecotourists oblivious to Pakistan's scenic potential; decreasing foreign demand and investment (Lee et al. , 2005; Wood, 2002). Around the world this increasing awareness, and demand, for ecological and sustainable tourism to some degree is seen as the polarizing around the growing interest of a few global consumers (Middleton et al. , 2001) In other words ecotourism is in a sense converging towards broader, more macro, behaviour (Levitt, 1983). Yet while this may hold true to certain areas of the world, Pakistan illustrates there is a lack of understanding and awareness of this niche market; thus, globalization is much less obvious when applied on a micro, more specific level (Usunier et al. , 2005). As a result introducing ecotourism into Pakistan could give RT a considerable competitive edge. <heading>Supply Factors in Pakistan</heading>So as to develop competitive advantage, an industry analysis forms strategies to develop opportunities and protect against threats; Porter's Five Forces Model is a useful base for such an analysis (Lynch, 2003; Porter, 1980). Ecotourism, a niche market, not only attempts to reduce environmental impacts, but seeks to in due course benefit local communities and physical environments (Godde et al. , 2000; Wood, 2002). <heading>Threat of Entry:</heading>The allure of profitable market shares brings new entrants to an industry with new capacity and ample resources; yet Porter argues barriers to entry and existing competition hinder such entrants (Lynch, 2003; Porter, 1980). As suggested, government policy in Pakistan creates high barriers of entry, reducing investment opportunities for new entrants. Even so economies of scale barriers are low due to an absence of major ecotourist firms or facilities in Pakistan, heightening switching costs for customers (WTO, 2003b). Porter (1980) implies entry involves major capital investment; yet economical prices in Pakistan create a high threat of new entrants (Lee et al. , 2005). Strong branding, niche products, and expertise are exemplary differentiation barriers; which force entrants to spend more and reduces threat of entry (Lynch, 2003; Porter, 1980). Ecotourism, though vaguely defined, is quite differentiated; yet due to many unique ideas and tactics, it rarely performs the same way twice (Holden et al., 2002; Wood, 2002). Delivering quality products requires access to distribution channels which presents another entry barrier; the theory being limited accessibility bears higher barriers (Porter, 1980). Similarly, limited Pakistani distribution channels are quite basic and developing, and existing competitors may have established long-term ties; reducing the threat of new entry (Lee et al. , 2005; Porter, 1980). Overall, despite governmental influences, the analysis implies an increasingly high threat of new entrants. While there may be few ecotourism competitors from a domestic perspective, the threat of entry from other global Ecotourism companies may increase; this is of course assuming the business environment situation within Pakistan improves in the near future. <heading>Substitutes Threat :</heading>In increasingly competitive environments, substitutes can render products obsolete, limit potential returns, and level profitable pricing (Lynch, 2003; Porter, 1980). Ecotourism can be misused by firms to refer to elements of wildlife, when in fact they do little to apply basic ecotourism principles: this is known as greenwashing (Mintel, 2003; Wood, 2002). Domestic substitutes thus include small, greenwashed hotels in scenic rural areas such as the Gilgit Serena which promotes fishing and horseback excursions; among the most harmful impacts of tourism (Buckley, 2004). Added substitutes include the many budget hotels in the northern regions; attracting culturally sensitive DIY backpackers; a global form of substitution (Rashid, 2004; Richards  et al. 2004). Moreover RT faces regional substitute threats, namely India and Nepal, deemed among the most popular and earlier players in ecotourism; the latter now entering a saturated stage (Wood, 2002; MacLellan et al., 2000). Overall, assuming RT enters Pakistan a key vantage point would be the integrations of TIES standards to certify responsible ecotourism and sustainable community development. <heading>Power of Customers :</heading>The bargaining power of buyers is the impact customers have on operational functionality and profitability (Lynch, 2003). Strong customers are; concentrated, big purchasers, unaffected by switching cost, and price sensitive (Porter, 1980). As ecotourism grows in global popularity there are fewer concentrated customers, mostly singles or couples, for a largely differentiated form of tourism (Nyaupane et al. , 2004). Despite a lack of clear data, there exists a strong demand for ecotourism; which consumers willingly pay extra for, if it assists local economies and culture, reducing the issues of prices sensitivity and switching costs (Mintel, 2003; Wood, 2002). In terms of the strong customer's identity as per Porter (1980), ecotourists' bargaining powers in Pakistan are quite low. <heading>Power of Suppliers :</heading>Organisations need to establish buyer-supplier relationships, ensuring the necessary raw materials, services, and employees are readily available (Lynch, 2003). The fragmented nature and sustainability concept of ecotourism has suppliers playing a key role in delivering this experience; RT would thus be obligated to involve local staff, food, and crafts (Diamantis, 1999; Wood, 2002). This implies a win-win situation with the local vendors, dependant on RT as a buyer and supplier of high ecotourist income; while together limiting RT's switching costs and price sensitivity. Since a number of labours are employed in agriculture, it could be assumed that raw materials are obtainable, and as mentioned economical; yet skilled staff could be problematic (UN, 2004; World Bank, 2001). In brief, Pakistani supplier bargaining powers are medial. <heading>Intensity of Rivalry :</heading>Jousting for competitive advantage, firms engage one another by various means; some markets are mutually dependant while others are bitter, the latter having high competition (Porter, 1980). In Pakistan the number of tourism and hospitality firms has steadily increased; influenced by government policies to balance the industry, this slow growth bears high competition (WTO, 2003a). Despite continued stability of 55% in occupancy and 192 hotel rooms per annum, Pakistan rooms yield dropped 8.6% by 2003 and income before fixed charges also decreased (PKF, 2003). Nonetheless, exit barriers are quite low, costing only 4% of estate, allowing ineffective firms to leave the country (World Bank, 2001). Should RT enter Pakistan as a differentiated and foreign competitor, this may increase rivalry. This intensive rivalry, tied with high entry barriers bears a positive case as per Porter (1980); where entry barriers are deterred, and unsuccessful competitors would leave. (Consult Appendix 4). <heading>Market Attractiveness</heading>As suggested, a thorough analysis and conception of the business environment demand, and supply factors in diverse countries influences potential investment. To this extent, Pakistan shows mediocre market attractiveness to a UK based company. Despite its low-income label the country has shown growth in global competitiveness, yet from a global perspective it remains relatively low (WEF, 2003). Despite government facilitation of foreign investment; Pakistan suffers from political instability, lack of corruption control, and weak rule of law (Transparency Intl. 2005; World Bank, 2001) Moreover, the analysis suggests other key differences related to Pakistani traditionalistic views which remain reasonably unchanged. The currently stable demand for tourism has generated a high level of competition for a largely undifferentiated experience; providing RT the chance to launch ecotourism as a sustainable, responsible, and differentiated tourism alternative. (Consult Appendix 4: Composite Index). The question which arises relates to which entry method to utilize to effectively enter this market. In simplest terms RT could enter Pakistan by sole ownership, yet as suggested, high entry barriers and supplier powers would complicate the matter. Management contracts present another form of entry where RT would supply the management know-how and brand image to a collaborating Pakistani hospitality firm; who would provide the capital and handle value chain functions (Hollensen, 2001). This method would not be viable however, given the little control and ability RT would have in ensuring responsible and community based sustainability, moreover the risk of dissemination would quite high (Hollensen, 2001). Franchising as an entry mode would identify RT as a franchisor granting a Pakistani hospitality firm with franchisee rights; namely brand and operational systems (Hollensen, 2001). This method raises a serious issue with RT exercising minimal control of the franchisee; and should the franchised firm under-perform, this would risk RT's international, and delicate, profile (Hollensen, 2001). A conclusive market entry would be a subset form of ownership. A Contractual Joint Venture would entail a partnership between RT and a Pakistani company to facilitate market entry and in due course share the costs, risks, and profits of the endeavour (Hollensen, 2001; Child et al. 2005). Moreover an experienced partner could provide the necessary link to facilitate access to the limited Pakistani distribution channels and rural labour force (Hollensen, 2001; Julian, 2005). A local connection could inform RT on relevant government regulations and policies; which in the long run could assist in maintaining good relations with government officials and aim to provide sustainable ecotourism and rural income (Hollensen, 2001; Herbig 1997). Ultimately this venture would elevate the control exerted by RT in ensuring the ecolodge meets TIES guidelines and sustain this delicate market; while balancing the flexibility in entering this foreign environment and aiding to promote Pakistani eco-knowledge (Julian, 2005; Koen, 2005). <heading>Key Target Markets for Roadless Travel</heading>Historically linked to conservation Ecotourism continually grows in popularity; about 30% in the last decade (Holden et al., 2002; Weaver, 1998; Wood, 2002). Lodgings that support Ecotourism, ecolodges, operate small-scale tourism with less than 100 beds run by small/medium sized firms in natural areas (Wood, 2002; Cleaver, 2002). Though dating back to 1994, profiles such as one posed by HLA and ARA Consulting, are still used, and define ecotourists as: middle aged couples, of equal gender ratios, college educated, and more affluent than general tourists (Wood, 2002; Holden, 2002;). (Consult Appendix 5: The Ecotourist). As suggested, many Pakistanis do not currently fit the profile due to limited travel expenditure, but more so by family devotion; whereas ecotourists primarily travel in couples and subsequently in families (Appendix 5). A viable solution would be targeting global ecotourists from affluent nations; thus assuming sustainable Pakistani ecotourism and foreign tourism investment. Europe and North America continually show interest in ecotourism, with high demand in such areas as Germany, Norway, England, the US, and Canada (Wood 2002). Pakistan revealed a strong reliance on European travel, namely Northern Europe generating 32% per year ; with England and Norway as the top two (WTO, 2004b). Despite a decline in US entries, Canada grew by 3% to reach 54% in the last decade (WTO, 2004b). Lastly expatriate Pakistanis also formed a large portion of inbound travel (WTO, 2003a). Therefore RT would target Ecotourists as per the profile, and subsequently prioritise the global nations as per number of visits; in this case, England as primary, Norway as secondary. Tertiary markets would be Canada and Pakistan; gaining a North American reach, and meeting domestic demand for mountain holidays for Pakistani families with sufficient disposable income. Moreover, this could increase local environmental awareness and facilitate the acceptance of RT by the local people by positively contributing to the country's image and economy (Diamantis, 1999). <heading>Strategic Orientation: RT's Management Culture </heading>An effective firm not only needs to identify and prioritise its markets, it must consider how prioritised markets relate to corporate culture; avoiding 'collective unconsciousness' (Usunier et al., 2005, p.223). Thus, firms depend on a degree of multinational centricity: Ethno-, Poly-, Regio-, and Geo- (Perlmutter, 1969; Usunier et al., 2005). Adopting an e thnocentric approach would contradict Ecotourism principles, with RT regarding Pakistan's operations as inferior to those in the UK; imposing the ideology of the home-country knows best with little concern for Pakistani beliefs, values, or community sustainability (Perlmutter, 1969). A regiocentric approach, while more global than the latter, would gear RT operations toward specific continental regions, namely South Asia; yet as argued by Malhortra et al. (cited in Usunier et al. 2005) cultural and economical differences among Pakistan and bordering nations would inhibit this strategy. A more viable strategy for RT would be a geocentric approach, through collaboration with a Pakistani subsidiary to establish a truly global company adopting global and domestic practices (Perllmutter, 1969). The implication of this approach would be the adoption of other country ecotourism practices to deliver a Pakistani experience; this would require a truly borderless world, and could presumably create resentment among Pakistanis through decreased sense of ownership (Perlmutter, 1969; Usunier et al. 2005). A conclusive strategy would be a polycentric approach, whereby RT would acknowledge Pakistani cultural differences and adapt the ideology of the host-country knows its own environment best (Perlmutter, 1969; Usunier et al. 2005). As a result, this orientation would permit RT to utilize suitable corporate culture and policies to maximise local responsiveness, and legitimate concern in promoting solely Pakistani efforts in sustaining ecotourism (Roper et al. , 1997). In due course this could rejuvenate local revenue and rural employment; and global ecotourism investment in support of conservation and Pakistani culture (Diamantis, 1999; Mintel, 2003, Buckley, 2004). <heading>Brand Image and Positioning Strategy</heading>Despite various definitions of brands, a successful brand exists in the minds of consumers as a source of satisfaction or readily available options that meets their needs and personal values (Middleton et al. , 2001). Brands may thus adopt the values of local, foreign, or global consumers; yet many firms promote both global and local elements (Usunier et al. , 2005). Despite stable brand image, RT's operational units and ecotourist groups are kept undersized with the intention of targeting affluent niche eco-travellers and contributing to conservation. RT all together promotes global TIES principles of sustainable development and local ideologies; and so seeks to meet ecotourist personal needs and values. Moreover, RT's values of education, culture, and rural development are channelled by the ethnically constructed ecolodges; promoting awareness of developing countries, appreciation of cultures, and environmental protection. Although targeting the specific ecotourist markets would facilitate the development of positioning and differentiating strategies, RT would need to enforce this perceived advantage to distinguish itself within a commoditised and often indifferent industry (Bowie et al. , 2004). Moreover, innovative or progressive strategies are often copied by competitors; yet some consumers acknowledge the source of creativity, and so RT could enforce their distinctive position through a positioning strategy (Bowie et al. , 2004). A Positioning Map (PM) would provide a useful method to analyse brand strengths and weaknesses to develop a differentiating advantage over competitors (Bowie et al. , 2004). (Consult Appendix 6: Substitutes' Details & Websites). As previously discussed, the RT brand would be distinguished as the sole provider of a ecotourism experience in Pakistan, in a sense permitting the company to charge premium rates in legitimate support of sustainable development. Nonetheless, as the PM illustrates there is the potential for indirect competition by greenwashed substitutes in areas of rich natural beauty, namely Gilgit, which could just as well target ecotourists. Such criteria thus form the axes of the positioning map; price per rack rate related to the eco-integrity of a niche market versus mass tourism. The theory being, RT could justify prices by matching high eco-integrity with the benefits sought by ecotourists, enforce this strength, and underline competitor weaknesses (Bowie et al. , 2004). Assuming RT establishes a three star eco-lodge near Gilgit, an area of natural beauty frequented by many tourists (Khan, 2005); substitutes already in this area of similar ratings could offer greenwashed alternatives. The lowest-priced, 3-star, Gilgit Motel publicizes the area's scenic beauty and tourism to remote areas. Yet the motel impacts the environment with Rent-a-Jeep services (Buckley, 2004) and conveniences a mass market, given its proximity to the local airport. The Riviera Hotel, located by the Gilgit River, presumably reduces environmental impacts through guided tour-operators; yet the mid-priced 3-star firm facilitates a mass tourism with such amenities as conference and banquet facilities. The strongest substitute is the 4-star Serena Gilgit Hotel, part of the Serena chain, catering to global and local tourists by way of environmental and cultural engagement. Such features permit the hotel to charge relatively high prices, yet its fishing and horseback excursions are among the most harmful environmental impacts (Buckley, 2004). As the PM suggests, the competitive advantage of RT's, 3-star, Gilgit Grassland Lodge relates to the provision of a truly eco-integrative experience; by promoting cultural and environmental sustainability. Thus justifying RT's high prices, even if lower than the latter substitute owing to different star ratings. Overall, ecotourism qualities would imply considerable adaptation to the values of ecotourists and dissimilar environments; suggestive of a soft brand (Bowie et al., 2004). Even so, RT's venture would require an ecolodge build to TIES standards with emphasis of drawing niche target markets; similar to hard brands (Bowie et al., 2004; Connell, 1992). RT thus displays neither purely soft nor hard qualities; as with most firms it incorporates an element of standardization and adaptation (Bowie et al., 2004). <heading>Marketing Mix - Standardisation vs. Adaptation</heading>Despite evidence to suggest potential benefits of encompassing harder or softer brands, problems arise when soft brands are promoted as hard brands which often impede softer brands from overcoming a harder, more standardized, image (Bowie et al., 2004; Connell, 1992). It thus becomes important for most companies, including RT, to develop a marketing mix to control market variables and better suit to desired target markets (Middleton et al. , 2001); in summary, to standardize or adapt. The decision is complicated however, since opposing scholars present contrasting views as to which is the more suitable approach. Standardisation relates to globalization whereby even the most traditional of cultures increasingly converge in response to modernity, defined by Levitt (1983, p.93) as 'not just a wish but also a widespread practice'. Thus, successful global companies are those which seek to lower prices and standardize what they sell and how they operate (Levitt, 1983). Conversely, Adaptation claims increased adoption of modern cultures is 'erroneously interpreted as a sign of full convergence' (Usunier et al. , 2005, p.126). The view being superior performance extends from the ability to match a country's conditions to a specific market (Theodosiou et al., 2003 cited in Usunier et al., 2005). Nonetheless both views have advantages. Standardization provides firms with cost efficiencies and savings via consistency (Svensson, 2001; Wind, 1986). This enables firms to centralize decisions by means of equal global operations; thus offering the same product and services across nations (Svensson, 2001; Wind, 1986). In turn, consumers perceive minimal risk of inconsistent performance by way of a predictable, uniform, product and brand image (Bowie, 2005; Sandoff, 2005; Wind, 1986). Adaptation in contrast, provides higher flexibility in utilizing a variety of elements, unique to particular countries (Kotler, 1986; Wind, 1986; Usunier et al. , 2005). Adapting to global consumers' needs and buying behaviours leads to higher revenue through modified products and services; which can cover advertising and modification costs (Kotler, 1986). Moreover, firms can overcome environmental factors such as government regulations, climate and competition; through effective local sourcing and experience (Bowie, 2005; Kotler, 1986; Wind, 1986). Ultimately, authors agree it contradictory to strive to fully include one or the other, and while some cases may gain through standardization, there will be cases where this will hurt the company; the message is standardize as much as feasible and customize as much as needed (Kotler, 1986; Sandoff, 2005; Usunier et al. , 2005). In a word 'glocalize: think globally and act locally' (Svensson, 2001; Wind, 1986, p. 26). <heading>Location :</heading>Selecting ecotourists as a target market would require RT to establish itself in a destination providing closeness to nature and local communities; with the aim of sustaining the environment and well being of local people (Wood, 2002). A venture into Pakistan would require a similar decision, and the lesser developed north-western provinces of the country, rich in topography and culture, would be an ideal location; namely the quaint town of Giligit. The town's relatively small size would suggest a limited amount of commercialization and increased traditional culture; in addition its largely untouched natural beauty would provide the ideal starting point in exploring the northern regions (Khan, 2005). Despite its remoteness, flights to-and-from Pakistan's capital, Islamabad, could facilitate accessibility for desired global markets (consult Appendix 7). The venture however would take time. Given the lack of proper ecotourism facilities, as suggested in the analysis, RT would have to construct a new ecolodge in accordance with TIES specifications; suggestive of a harder branding strategy. <heading>Product :</heading>The company ecolodges use the Brekken Moor Lodge as a template; entailing a localised destination name and environment surroundings; in this case Gilgit Grassland Lodge. Although the core product of an ecotourism experience would be standardised, the remaining physical and service attributes would be adapted to best suit the overall Pakistani environment; modified to health and safety regulations. In accordance to the suggested minimized environmental impact, and primarily experiential nature of RT's venture, the lodge would consist of less than 50 rooms; in this case 30, double occupancy rooms. Though external design would mostly remain untouched, the lodge, as with each en-suite room, would be ethnically decorated by solely Pakistani furniture and linen; with temperatures regulated by gas burners and solar powered ceiling-fans. A joint-venture would facilitate technological transfers with RT supplying telephones with built in modem connections and global operator services. Three meals a day would be served to customers in the lodge's dining-hall, which would entail a local and traditional food buffet cooked by local chefs; ensuring necessary contact with Gilgit suppliers to determine available food inventories. Pre-arranged traditional music and dances would accompany the final evening meal, and provide a source of learning and entertainment. The adjacent lounge would provide a communal venue for all travellers, domestic and global, creating the desired cultural interaction sought by ecotourists. Both these facilities, with respect to the Islamic ideologies, would not serve alcohol or pork. In further support of communal sustainability, the lodge would only employ Pakistani nationals with major emphasis on Gilgit residents. Staff would be encouraged to use everyday phrases with guests, providing a cultural exchange through language. Hired local guides would lead trekking excursions, visits to local shops, and other ecotourism activities; providing a wealth of knowledge on traditional values and neighbouring areas. Additional communal support would be encouraged with suggestions on visiting local restaurants, craft-shops, and food vendors. <heading>Distribution :</heading>Although RT seeks to target a more global market, the limited number of rooms available could not sustain the considerable amount of bookings generated by a Central Reservation System (CRS) or Global Distribution System (GDS). Therefore, taking into account a niche market classification, RT would adapt to direct marketing through a lodge website and links through specialized intermediaries, including the TIES and Pakistan Ecotourism Society (PES) websites. <heading>Pricing :</heading>The Gilgit Grassland Lodge, if built, would be the sole, legitimate provider of the ecotourism experience which could justify charging premium prices for a niche sector; yet as mentioned, Pakistan's high threat of substitutes and economic situation would require RT to use an adaptive pricing strategy. As illustrated in the Pricing Map the closest substitute would be Serena Gilgit Hotels in terms of eco-integrity and suitable location within Gilgit. The hotel itself is a four-star, one rating above the ecolodge, and thus can permit itself to also charge premium prices; the biggest difference being the lack of a pure ecotourism concept. Even so this situation would require the lodge to charge a lower rate in comparison in order to further entice new ecotourists, unfamiliar with the RT brand; in addition the lodge could thus draw in ecotourists already using the greenwashed substitute (Consult appendix 6: Positioning Map with comparative prices). <heading>Marcom : </heading>Entering Pakistan through a joint venture could benefit RT by way of local expertise in accessing local distribution channels and marketing tools. However, culture can influence the development of suitable marketing communications; the theory being when 'home and host cultures are different, localized advertisements are more favourably viewed' (Pae et al., 2002, p. 186) To this extent brand familiarity would have to be adapted to local values through Transformational advertising; whereby RT adopts a implicit method of communicating brand image, supportive of Pakistani ideology. Thus RT would seek to standardize universal support for ecotourism while adapting to a more transformational, namely Pakistani, message. Consequently this could create traditional awareness in desired global markets, while increasing local favouritism. As mentioned the lodge website would provide a practical marketing tool with great global reach, and could ultimately provide a brand library through links to other RT ecolodges around the world; all with their own adaptive advertising methods. Global and local televised and printed adverts would be kept to a minimum, and targeted to specific ecotourist intermediaries to limit mass advertising; the reason being this could easily reach a large numbers of mass-tourists and negatively impact the ecotourism in Gilgit. Overall RT is composed of both hard and soft brand with a leniency towards a softer image. (Consult Appendix 5: Marketing Mix). <heading>Conclusion</heading>As demonstrated throughout this marketing research study, by way of the various topics discussed, the potential for ecotourism in Pakistan is indeed a feasible concept; albeit a challenging one. As suggested, if Roadless Travels decide to enter the country through a joint venture, this would not only promote the ecotourism concept as a whole, it would provide the nation with a sustainable development through foreign investment. Despite this positive outlook, it would be advisable for the firm to postpone on future market entry into Pakistan owing to a currently turbulent environment. Recent natural disasters such as the earthquake of October 8 th, 2005 have worsened infrastructure, telecommunications, agricultural lands and industrial estates (Khan, 2005). Moreover, the nation's geo-political and economical situations further increase this turbulence; some examples include the continued war on terrorism, Islamic extremism, and poverty (Ellis, 2005). To summarize, the relatively low levels of changeability and predictability underline the nation as, at this time, highly turbulent (Lynch, 2003). Implications exist in the report itself. Statistic information for ecotourism and Pakistan may be dated owing to the annual time frame required to gather such data; thus 2005 figures may be posted in the early months of the following year. Various sources, such as newspapers, were also used in the PESTE analysis which may present a certain level of bias; thus skewing the overall findings. A level of justifiable subjectivity was necessary in evaluating the market attractiveness, supply factors, and positioning map; nevertheless, this subjectivity may again skew overall findings. In spite of the study's hypothetical nature; though currently damaged and in need of aide, Pakistan presents potential for ecotourism. However, important investment will be required in infrastructure to achieve high levels of economic growth and sustainability. It would thus be advisable to reapply this research after a 5 - 10 year time period, and revaluate the future potential for this niche market in this emerging destination. 