The marketing catch phrase a picture is worth a thousand words, while in some cases true, presents a paradox related to human behaviour; while products and services may be influential, no picture truly sums up all possible perceptions (Snehota, 2004). The study of consumer behaviour thus follows a growing awareness to acquire and organize information on behavioural processes involved in purchasing, using, and disposing of products, services, ideas or experiences (Moutinho, 1987; Solomon et al., 1999; Goeldner et al. , 2000). Authors agree that improved understanding of consumers' internal, psychological, processes is important for companies to meet the needs of desired target markets (Goeldner et al. , 2000; Hudson et al. , 2000; Middleton et al. , 2001, Usunier et al., 2005). Even so the tourism industry presents a unique challenge owing to the intangibility of services, coupled with extensive periods of time travellers invest in planning and purchasing an experience; an area which in the past has been inadequately viewed as simplistic (Moutinho, 1987; Hudson et al. , 2000). As travellers become more sophisticated the question arises as to why particular groups of travellers seek a certain service X within destination Y (Goeldner et al. , 2000; Moutinho, 1987). Consequently, tourism practitioners need to effectively divide the vacation market into subgroups or segments according to the destination images held by non-residents; facilitating cost-effective marketing to current and future travellers (Middleton et al., 2001; Leisen, 2001; Solomon et al., 1999). Various authors are in agreement that in formulating such strategies, consumer behaviour models are useful tools in simplifying abstract relationships and links between numerous internal and external variables which affect behaviour (Chisnall, 1995; Cooper et al., 1998, Moutinho, 1987; Swarbrooke et al. , 1999). Models also provide micro-level insights into travellers' thoughts, choices, and events occurring during actual trips (Woodside et al. , 2001). This essay begins with an introduction to Shakespeare's Globe Theatre and evaluates the benefits of Woodside & King's consumer behaviour model in understanding future student travellers' behaviour. Founded by American actor/director Sam Wanamaker, the Globe Theatre offers a unique global and local resource committed to the exploration of Shakespeare's work, and the playhouse for which he wrote, by way of education and performance. The Globe Theatre is located a short distance from Southwark Bridge in London and is open from May to September. Accessible from both the Visit-London ( URL ) and, the Globe's interactive website ( URL ), the reconstruction of the 1599 open - air playhouse, exposes visitors to the same ambience as that of 400 years ago. Visitors may attend several performances by booking gallery seating or standing as groundlings in the yard. Moreover, guests benefit from formal and informal dining facilities, on - site and online shopping, and exhibition halls of various Shakespearean artefacts. Yet one of the more intriguing services the Globe Theatre offers is a vast selection of educative programs, taught jointly with King's College London, targeting students of all ages and nations. It would thus be reasonable to assume that this group of travellers forms a significant segment of the Globe Theatre's visitors; which may consequently be segmented by purpose of travel; namely university students seeking educative events in the performing arts and Shakespearean heritage. In the past decades, progressive changes in education and tourism have seen a convergence of these industries into educational tourism, an area recognized from both an economical and social perspective (Ritchie  et al. , 2003). Even so, travelling to learn is not a new concept, dating back to when Greek and Roman elites travelled to increase their understanding of the world (Ritchie  et al. , 2003; Swarbrooke et al. , 1999). Today, education and learning are important and recognised components of travel, and to this extent it can be argued all manner of tourism may be educational; thus, research in this broad and complex area remains minimal (Smith et al., 1997 cited in Ritchie et al. , 2003). Still smaller, more identifiable, market segments exist within this broad tourism field. University students are one such segment, yet a chronological definition has been a discussion topic owing to changing demographics; the traditionally accepted age limit of 15 - 25 has been replaced by 18 - 30 (Carr, 2003; Seekings, 1998). This definition has only increased the already considerable number of student travellers in the last decade, which some researchers predict will 'quadruple to 100 million by 2025' (Carr, 2003; Mintel, 2005; Smith et al. , 1997, p. 64). The UK has witnessed increasing numbers of not just the general population entering university, but continues to be one of Europe's most successful educational destinations; owing to the global importance of the English language (Carr, 2003; Smith et al. , 1997). Moreover, a strong correlation is evident between educational visits to-and-within the UK, and theatre attendance in such cities as London; owing to increased search for learning and enlightenment (Gilbert et al. , 1998). In fact, the majority of visited attractions are located in the centre and south bank of London (Virdee et al. , 2003). Even more intriguing is the steadily increasing numbers of students entering higher educations to study history and other related degrees; namely Heritage Studies (English Heritage, 2003). Despite the considerable size and growth of university students, little research has been conducted to understand this segment's needs, desires, and behaviour (Carr, 2003). However, what is known is this segment displays a range of similar educational motives as other tourists travelling to learn; subsequently illustrated in the following page (Ritchie  et al. , 2003). Furthermore, studies of this segment have covered the general student population relative to specific issues including hedonistic behaviour; thus, to an extent distorting the image of university student holidays (Carr, 2003). One such widely held misconception relates to expenditure, the belief being that students and younger tourists spend less than other market segments (Carr, 2003; Seekings, 1998; Smith et al. , 1997). Arguably, trips abroad are indeed high items on a student's annual budget, and many may be price sensitive; yet they are prepared to pay what is a relatively high price for their trip because they place high value on the experience (Seekings, 1998). In some cases a student's parents bear the cost of educational trips, while in other cases, even if rare, students in full-time employ can cover costs (Carr, 2003; Smith et al. , 1997). In a study of British university students, Carr (2003) found that despite living in financial debt, this did not deter students from local and global Travel. This supports the theory that students are gradually more accustomed to borrowing money, be it form banks, student loans, or relatives (Davies et al. , 1995 cited in Carr, 2003). In fact, 2002 estimates saw an average student debt of £10,000 upon graduation (Anon., 2002a, cited in Carr, 2003). Nonetheless, students tend to stay longer and have higher total average spending than average adults (Seekings, 1998). Though preferring independent travel, some students travel as part of a degree or by ERASMUS and other such language exchange programmes (Carr, 2003). Technology has also impacted the segment by way of virtual and distance education; offering the benefits of travel without the leaving home or the university (Carr, 2003; Holley, 2002). Studies show however, that while students believe such virtual excursions provide useful learning opportunities they can not, and should not, replace real excursions (Spicer et al. 2001 cited in Carr, 2003). In fact, students use formal and informal holiday information sources; that is, they rely on friends, family, and personal experience more than the web, travel agencies, and other tourism media (Carr, 2003). In summary, despite rising monetary issues, the number of university students is increasing and an eventual aim of tourism managers should be to better understand this major segment. <figure/>The model proposed by Woodside & King (2001) is a depictive sequence of mental and observable sequences which consumers consider when buying and using several interrelated products or services; which in some cases may lead to further purchases. As subsequently shown, the model entails three major boxes, which are further subdivided into nineteen variables related to consumer travel and tourism purchase-consumption frameworks. The eight variables in Box 1 influence thinking and planning actions prior and during travel; that is influence of family, friends, peers and groups have on a consumer's information gathering, problem solving, and overall decision making (Woodside et al. , 2001). The eight variables within Box 2 relate to specific destinations and/or actions that make up the actual trip; in other words, the readily available choices to travellers including attractions, lodgings, and dining establishments (Woodside et al. , 2001). Box 3 is a vital evaluative stage of the framework relating to event - specific and global - specific evaluations, and possible implications, expressed upon concluding travel experiences (Woodside et al. , 2001). Indeed such findings form the Feedback Loop connecting Box 3 to Box 1; an indication of the level of consumer satisfaction and probable intentions to return to the destination (Woodside et al. , 2001). Throughout the model, various direct and indirect predictors have interrelated affects on tourists' choice decisions; hence linking arrows imply direct influences, with multiple-step linkages implying indirect influences (Woodside et al. , 2001). Overall, the framework 'shows three stages of pre-trip, during - trip, and after - trip information exposure, comprehension-acceptance, and decision to buy or reject (Woodside et al., 2001, p.10). The question arises how to use the model to understand desired segments; in this case, how can the Globe improve its understating of university students. One such area of application includes the ability of the host-country and institution to provide desirable quality of reputation and lifestyle; deemed important incentives, or pull factors, to university students (Mazzarol et al. , 2002) and the subsequent topic of Box 2. <figure/>While limited research on university students may complicate the application of a behaviour model, under the assumption that such travellers search for similar motives as other educational tourists, the task is not impossible. To begin with, the analysis suggests England's reputable and educative characteristics; continue to attract both local and global students. Furthermore, as mentioned, the city capital of London is considered among the country's major hubs and tourist destinations. Thus Mode/Route to Destination, and the Globe Theatre, may be gained by both local and global university students by various methods of transportation; generally speaking London is accessible by land, sea, and air. Similarly, a choice of  Mode/Routes in and Around the city facilitate the means for students to reach the Globe Theatre; which in fact provides web-links to Transport for London ( URL ) allowing students to independently plan their own transportation. Even so, there is only one Shakespeare's Globe Theatre which inevitably limits students' Destination Options/Choices; thus, the segment's propensity of seeking cultural and social experiences is restricted. Still the Globe Theatre offers a variety of educational Activity Choices. From interactive lectures and workshops, to fencing classes, to performances and exhibitions; this vast selection can effectively enable the Theatre to meet the social, cultural, physical, and to some extent fantasy motives earlier mentioned. The Globe Shop could further add to the experience, albeit minimally, by offering Self-gifts and other Purchases including Globe music CDs and Performances on DVD or books; thus not only providing a reflective gift with which to remember the trip, but a cultural "proof" of visit as an Ego-enhancer. While three classes of on-site dining facilities meet the social and cultural motives sought by students, the Globe Theatre's lack of information on Dining Out Choices available in London impacts the overall experience. On the one hand students may insight into English cuisine and table-etiquette, yet the cultural dining experience is thus confined. Ultimately, despite the provision of various activities, this does not mean the Globe Theatre would be the main attraction to students. Once again the propensity to seek further knowledge through travel would impact the Attraction Choices available in the destination, possibly making the Globe Theatre one of many stopovers. In addition, while not as relevant as other variables, the Globe Theatre's lack of Accommodation Choices could seriously impact the possibility of attracting students; particularly overseas students wishing to enrol in the theatre's one-year MA courses. Overall it is evident that the application of the proposed consumer behaviour model can generate an increasing awareness of what could motivate potential students to visit the Globe Theatre. Furthermore, the model indicates possible existing limitations which can positively or negatively impact the student segment. To some extent it can be argued that in some cases the affects of such limitations are only assumptions, and yet this raises a further issue relative to future trends; that is to say, what behavioural trends can be expected from university students in the next ten years. <figure/>It is widely recognized that the pace of societal change impacts trends, be they economical, social, or lifestyle, and inevitably these trends impact tourism and other businesses (ETC, 2005; Middleton et al. , 2001). Authors agree one trend is consumers becoming better educated and interested in continuing education by way of further schooling or educative tourism (ETC, 2005; Middleton et al. , 2001; Ritchie  et al. , 2003). Yet this behavioural trend can be interrelated to other trends thus making it nearly impossible to isolate development into a single element (ETC, 2005). As suggested, an accurate definition of university students has yet to be formulated due to changing social environments; and so it is advisable for the Globe Theatre to review its "student" target market (Ritchie et al. , 2003). As depicted in the following table, such changes have broadened the definition of students to include pension-able adults and professionals; thus, targeting "older" generations, empty-nesters, and DINK couples, could increase the appeal of the Globe Theatre to a broader, educational tourism market. The additional impact of technology and the web is also expected to grow, increasing demand for travel information, online bookings, and overall computer literacy (ETC, 2005; Middleton et al. , 2001; Holley, 2002). As suggested, students remain unsure on the benefits of virtual seminars and distance learning. While the Globe Theatre provides such programmes, stressing the social and cultural benefits of more dynamic teachings could increase the attractiveness of learning through travel. Transportation in turn is developing faster, economical, and direct travel to desired destinations; and yet, road congestion and reduced coach travel is expected to be problematic (ETC, 2005). Although, the Globe Theatre is accessible by various modes, it would thus be suitable for the theatre to facilitate tourists' travel with suggestive comments on preferable modes of transport; namely trains, and the underground. In order to meet the predicted behavioural trend of increased university student enrolment, the Globe Theatre would need to further improve on the Model implications previously indicated. In tackling the issue of Destination Options/Choices it would be advisable for the Globe Theatre to cooperatively promote Shakespearean performing arts with other cities, including Plymouth and Stratford-Upon-Avon. Such a cooperative venture would increase the cultural and social elements available to students, while at the same time expanding into other student markets in other cities. Providing more Dining Out Choices is also recommendable, as this could increase students' perception of the Globe's efforts to meet the cultural motives for educational travel. Moreover, publicising dining locations throughout London could generate increased awareness of the Globe Theatre; that is by way of socializing, students would spread word of mouth to locals and foreigners. Similar impacts could be witnessed by way of providing further Attraction Choices. A recommendation would therefore be to form a marketing alliance with other cultural heritage sites in the vicinity such as St. Paul's Cathedral, Tate Modern, and Tower Bridge. This could increase the perceived educational attractiveness of both the Southwark area and the efforts of the Globe Theatre in facilitating students' learning opportunities. While it is true the Globe Theatre's main purpose is to provide an educational experience through theatrical performances, the lack of accommodations could quite possibly affect students' perceptions. A final recommendation would hence be to provide information on neighbouring lodging facilities including hotels, hostels, and guest houses. This would benefit the Globe Theatre in the long run, assuming the growing number of university students would require somewhere to stay if enrolled in a year-long MA, or short period programme. Not only would the students gain a social and cultural experience by interacting together, they could learn to habituate themselves with living in England, albeit for a short period of time. An illustrative interpretation of such proposed recommendations is subsequently included on the final page of this essay. As already noted, the study of consumer behaviour ultimately seeks to gain information to enforce the comprehensive understanding of tourists' decision - making processes. Such information ultimately benefits both the political and tourism aspects of a destination by way of facilitating, and improving, industry planning (Woodside et al. , 2001). Moreover, by way of predictive consumer behaviour models, marketers may study the intricate relationships of consumer behaviour on a micro level; the theory being the relative findings, once overlaid on to a macro level, aid in developing more effective marketing to desired segments (Woodside et al. , 2001). As discussed, the aim of the essay was to provide an evaluative extract as to how the successful use of a consumer behaviour model, could help to enhance a tourism manager's understanding of a particular segment. In the case of the Shakespeare's Globe Theatre the goal of providing an overall educational experience, can be positively linked to the university student segment. As indicated however, the lack of specific behavioural information regarding students may complicate the relevance and overall findings of such a study. Nevertheless, the findings would suggest that in an effort to better meet the predicted behavioural trends of a growing education inclined tourism market, the theatre stands to generate considerable profit. With world tourism predicted to grow to include added elements relating to the arts, culture, and history; the Globe Theatre looks set to gain a significant advantage, by way of effective marketing, and in becoming a component in a complex decision-making process. <figure/>