<heading>Introduction</heading>Working within partnerships is a crucial and central dimension of health and social care practice, and one that entails creativity, diplomacy and communication skills to function effectively. A vast range of skilled professionals collaborate to provide health and social care, from doctors and nursing staff to specialist nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, ward clerks and housekeepers to name but a few. The patient's experiences and outcomes will benefit enormously from effective communication between these practitioners, as well as from the patient's own understanding, input and responsibility towards his or her own treatment plan. This essay will endeavour to uncover the complexities of different perspectives of health and well being, and how these might impact on communication in practice. In particular the widely acknowledged World Health Organisation definition of health will be discussed and evaluated. Barriers to good practitioner/patient relationships and to multidisciplinary teamwork will then be considered, and research and experience used to suggest strategies for improvement. <heading>Part 1: Responding to different perspectives of health and well-being</heading>Various attempts have been made to define the key concepts of "health" and "wellbeing" in order to establish a foundation from which practice and communication might begin. Such a starting point is clearly necessary for the benchmarking of health and social services offered and to inform and facilitate interdisciplinary and practitioner-patient relationships. The most widely recognised attempt is the World Health Organisation's definition of health as "a state of complete physical, mental and social well being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity" (WHO, 2005). Whilst this definition is often cited however, it is questionable to what extent it informs current health care practice, and also to what extent it is amenable to practical application. One criticism of the WHO definition is that it describes an optimum, and therefore perhaps unattainable or abstract concept. Does it, for example, exclude the perspective of anyone living with chronic illness? Might such a person's concept of wellness be different - possibly characterised more by their success in adapting to/living with disease (whether it is physical, mental or social in its repercussions)? Is there too little flexibility in terms such as "complete" and "absence"? A recent qualitative study carried out in Montreal (Jutras et al. 2003) interviewed children with type 1 diabetes along with their mothers and siblings to identify what their understandings of health and wellness are and how these compare to the WHO definition. Several interesting strands arose from the results, such as how a child's perceptions might differ from those of an adult, how the perceptions of those with experiences of living with chronic illness might differ from the perceptions of those without such experiences, and how psychological and social factors - and in particular the family dynamic - have a large bearing on the perception of wellness in families of chronically ill children (if indeed it is appropriate to generalise the study's findings in this way - the limitations of the study are clear and acknowledged by its authors). Perhaps surprisingly, the results and analysis of the interviews conducted showed clear concurrence with the WHO definition (Jutras et al. 2003). Whilst the perceptions of wellness held by the children were observed to be "more concrete" and "less abstract" than those of their mothers (Jutras et al. 2003:576), the participants were unanimous in highlighting mental and social factors along with the absence of physical symptoms as criteria for "wellness", inspiring the authors of the study to commend the WHO definition for its holistic scope. A different criticism of the WHO definition of health is articulated by Rodolfo Saracci (1997), who objects to the scope of the definition not in terms of what it excludes, but in terms of what it includes, of its sheer unrealistic vastness. He asserts that "a state of complete physical, mental, and social wellbeing corresponds much more closely to happiness than to health" (Saracci, 1997:1409), and so poses an entirely impossible and inappropriate challenge for health authorities and health care practitioners alike. This leads into further problems when such a definition of health is used to evaluate health services, to promote equity, and to inform the public of their "rights". No health service can possibly possess the resources to take on this level of responsibility, and any attempt to do so would not only fail but also pose a threat to the autonomy of individuals. Interestingly, Saracci's proposed definition of health as "...a condition of well being free of disease or infirmity and a basic and universal human right" (Saracci, 1997:1409) seems to be a regression to a much more archaic understanding of health as a physical - or at most physical and mental - state of being, divorced from social and emotional factors. It removes from the WHO definition exactly that which was regarded as such a positive and progressive inclusion by the authors of the Montreal study: namely the holistic understanding of health. Clearly health is a difficult subject to delineate, particularly when it has such subjective connotations for individuals. Perhaps a constructive way forward would be to separate more explicitly the two terms "health" and "wellbeing"; a differentiation which, as Saracci (1997) shows, the WHO definition itself fails to acknowledge. One positive suggestion might be that what the World Health Organisation describes as "health", and Saracci calls "happiness", be more usefully encompassed by the term "wellbeing." Using a subtle extension and reshuffling of the WHO definition of health, this "wellbeing" might be defined as "a state of physical, mental, social, emotional, spiritual and sexual health, the absence of imbalance, and the absence or successful management of disease and infirmity." This definition affirms that a human being is a holistic entity, an interconnected whole. For this reason it is appropriate to speak of "spiritual health" and "emotional health", even though these things are not the sole and direct responsibility of any so-called health service. The definition of health for the purposes of establishing equity and honing the aims of healthcare provision must however be more specific, even though it must retain the holistic perspective. A provisional attempt might be something like "the absence or good management of disease or infirmity, where disease and infirmity are understood within a wider model of contributing factors, and human beings recognised as holistic and individual." This definition is admittedly clumsy, but at least makes the subtleties and difficulties of any description of health transparent. Furthermore it is openly a starting point rather than a delineation, which is doubtless a more positive approach to definition. It presents a reasonable ideal for organisations to work towards and leaves room for further inclusion. <heading>Part 2a: Responding to others - the practitioner-patient relationship</heading>The challenge facing the health or social care practitioner in light of this range of perspectives on health is how to respond and communicate effectively with others to form partnerships, be they with patients, colleagues, or members of the wider multidisciplinary team. As the role of the nurse has developed away from that of assistant or 'hand maiden' to the doctor, the nurse-patient partnership has come to adopt a far more central role, with care given becoming increasingly recipient-focussed (Payne 2000). The skills and autonomy of the modern nurse have engendered a move into the role of patient advocate, alongside other skilled professionals such as physiotherapists and occupational therapists. In many care settings these practitioners have a great deal more patient contact time than doctors, an advantage that allows them to build relationships of trust and reciprocity. A number of recent studies have focussed on the structure of practitioner-client communication in a health care setting, with interesting results. Brown (1995) collates extant literature showing that nurse-patient communication, and particularly the patient admission process, often takes a traditional format similar to that frequently implemented by physicians: a structured interview which is directed by one participant (the nurse or physician) through the use of closed questions. Brown argues that while this technique is an efficient way of gathering data, it may promote misunderstanding and, crucially, does little to establish a rapport. The very notion of partnership is undermined by the blatant imbalance of power, where one participant in the encounter drives communication and the other adopts a merely passive role. Within this role the patient is prompted to compromise their contribution to fit into the narrow opportunities offered and the confines of the practitioner's often technical and unfamiliar language. As a result the patient's fears, concerns, and level of understanding remain undisclosed. Such an approach takes little or no account of the subjectivity of perspectives on health discussed above. Subset experiences from interviews conducted as part of the Partnerships in Practice module confirm these drawbacks. Participants experienced both the role of questioner and that of the person being questioned, and reflected afterwards on their impressions. It was interesting that even with foreknowledge of the questions to be asked there was a palpable imbalance of power, with the interviewee adopting a very passive role from the outset. Where more open questions were asked, and the interviewee was encouraged to elaborate on answers, the imbalance was less extreme and the tone more conversational. Even in these instances however the interviewer directed the themes, pace and duration of the conversation to a large extent, and the interviewee was offered only a narrow window at the close of conversation within which to ask questions themselves. Incidentally, the roles and distribution of power being well established by this time, the opportunity was almost always declined. Within the practitioner-patient partnership there will always be a certain delineation of roles, this being an appropriate and necessary aspect of professional conduct. There will not, for example, be an even exchange of information; patient-centred care requires that conversation will centre on the needs, concerns and health perceptions of the patient, and obviously not on those of the practitioner. Nonetheless, partnership is possible, and is promoted by a move towards a more conversational approach. A practitioner with good communication skills will be able to gather data needed for an admission using a conversational style of interview, and will probably begin to acquire the trust of the patient and a great deal of extra relevant information besides (Brown, 1995). A similar technique for use in gathering qualitative research data, the "Discovery Interview Process", has recently been discussed by Wilcock et al (2003). The technique aims to highlight ways in which care might be improved by encouraging patients to "tell" their "stories", with as little prompting or direction as possible by the interviewer. This information can then be dissected and interpreted by skilled researchers to inspire changes in practice. While this technique is designed for research purposes, its benefits may be pertinent to the development of a practitioner-patient partnership. By allowing the patient to freely direct the information he or she gives to an even greater extent than in the conversational approach, the discerning practitioner will gain an understanding of where the patient's priorities lie, and, crucially, what health means for them. <heading>Part 2b: Responding to others - multidisciplinary teamwork</heading>The patient-practitioner relationship is by no means the only partnership within the health care setting. Even within one skill-team good communication must take place in order to ensure quality and some degree of continuity to the care given - and the patient's overall experience is greatly improved if good communication and a shared sense of responsibility exist amongst the entire multidisciplinary team contributing to the patient's care (Payne 2000). Unfortunately in practice there are many barriers to ideal communication. One study carried out in 1998 (Coiera and Tombs) highlighted the levels of distraction and interruption and the incidence of poor communication between hospital staff in a busy ward. The reasons for this appeared to be a preference for interruptive methods of communication, such as bleeps, and an underlying lack of support and understanding where different roles were concerned. In his commentary on Lingard et al's study of communication failures in the operating room, Firth-Cozens (2003) cites "team instability" (Firth-Cozens 2003:327) as another factor detrimental to the formation of partnerships in practice. In other words the lack of resources that leads to under-staffing or minimal staffing levels and a heavy dependence upon non-permanent agency-employed staff contributes to higher levels of stress in practitioners and less room for communication improvement. It is very difficult for partnerships to be established when there is no constant "team", rather an ever-changing collection of practitioners with no long-term commitment to the staff or patient relationships (Firth-Cozens 2003). It would seem that the problems highlighted in the various studies are deep-rooted in modern health care practice and often a result of waning resources, making improvement difficult. Perhaps the picture is not as bleak as it at first appears however. Experience of working in a ward setting suggests that good management is crucial to the formation of relationships and can overcome a number of the constraints to best practice that stem from a lack of funding. In a ward where practitioners feel valued, where protected time is offered for feedback and support, and where high standards are modelled by experienced staff and expected from more junior members, there can be a dramatic improvement in staff and patient morale. Perhaps most important is the promotion of a 'team' feeling, which arises both from socialising together outside of work and from the valued inclusion of all team members in ward meetings, decisions, studies and education opportunities. These factors lead quite naturally to a better understanding of the different and complementary roles and skills shared by a multidisciplinary team, and open the lines of communication for effective collaboration in patient care. They may even lead to a greater retention of permanent staff. It is the small changes that give rise to these big improvements - structured tea breaks in an environment removed from the ward where different staff can relax and recoup together, for example. Or perhaps a photo board with a picture of every member of staff from each skill discipline and not just photos of the ward manager and senior staff, a tiny move which not only acknowledges each team member as important to the running of the ward but also communicates to patients and their visitors something about who will be actively involved in their care. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The constraints of this essay have necessitated a very brief overview of just a few of the salient points relating to the complicated practice of building professional relationships. Research and experience used, for example, relate almost exclusively to communication in hospitals, even though this is where only a minority of patient care and contact takes place. Hopefully however this essay reveals something of the importance and complexity of effective communication, its hindrances, benefits, and some means by which it might be established. The Partnerships in Practice module and the relationships built within a smaller, subset context have provided an invaluable introduction to interdisciplinary teamwork. Working together and sharing resources has helped to break down barriers between the different areas of study to lead to a better understanding of the different professions collaborating in a healthcare setting. Subset members contributed evenly and shared openly, and supported one another both academically and personally. This positive experience of teamwork and the skills and knowledge gained from it will doubtless be beneficial to healthcare practice and, hopefully, lead to higher standards of patient-centred care. 