It has long been recognised that the ever expanding human population, and the destructive way in which we utilize the planet's resources are having a negative impact on wildlife across the globe. Of great concern is the destruction of the world's tropical forests. This is of particular relevance to non-human primates, as approximately 90% of all primate species are restricted to tropical forest habitats. It has been demonstrated that human population growth is linked to global deforestation and that 'human population pressure is the best predictor of tropical deforestation rates'. However, there are non-anthropogenic factors that influence non-human primate distribution and abundance, and these natural species characteristics are important too. This essay will therefore focus on natural determinants of primate distribution on a global scale. It will examine both patterns of distribution and the processes that may be responsible for those patterns. <fnote>Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000, pp. 196 </fnote>Primates are largely restricted to Central and South America, Sub-Saharan Africa, Madagascar and Southern Asia (Fleagle, 1999). Geographical ranges of primate species tend to show a lognormal distribution; in other words, more species have small ranges than large ranges. Cowlishaw and Dunbar (2000) classify a species as rare when their distribution falls below 170,000 square kilometres. This follows Gaston (1994) who defines a species as rare in relation to the rest of its taxonomic group. In this way rarity is defined as a relative property. This might be instructive as it could illuminate processes operating at different spatial scales. Similarly, Dobsonal. (1995), explain that methods, which aid identification of species that may be at risk, are vital conservation strategies and that assessing relative rarity is one of those methods. Rare species tend to be concentrated on islands and within equatorial regions. Cowlishaw and Dunbar (2000) point out that in only two of the nine major primate groups are most species rare. These are the tarsiers of Southeast Asia and the lemurs of Madagascar ( two groups largely restricted to islands). The tendency for species near to the equator to have small ranges will be discussed later, in relation to 'Rapoport's rule'. It is also worth noting that the terms 'rarity' and 'endemic' are not always corresponding characteristics. Although islands tend to have endemic species, there are also country and regional endemics, and these species are not always rare. For example, the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) has a relatively large distribution, but yet it is only found in Brazil (Wolfheim 1983). Wolfheim attempted a comprehensive guide to the status of all known primates, looking at factors such as distribution, abundance, and ecological flexibility/specialisation. Wolfheim highlights the relationship between island species and restricted geographic ranges. Of the 34 species that she identified as having a tiny range (smaller than 100,000 square kilometres), 24 of these species were island forms. Islands that contain primate species are often those islands that were, until relatively recently, joined to the mainland. For example, in Southeast Asia, the islands of Sumatra, Java, Borneo and Sulawesi, which were connected up until approximately 10,000 years ago, accommodate primate species, whereas New Guinea, which has been isolated for much longer, does not. Rapoport's rule (as explained by Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000) examines whether there is a relationship between species range size and proximity to the equator. In general, species range size increases with latitude. Rapoport's rule is a common pattern for terrestrial taxa and for South American primates. However, interestingly, African primates only obey this rule consistently when they exist south of the equator. Cowlishaw and Hacker (1997) examined the relationship between distribution and latitude in African primates in some detail. They conclude that geographical ranges of African primates are actually correlated with their 'exposure to climatic variation' and that the relationship between range and latitude, described by Rapoport's rule, is not an inevitable outcome of the relationship between range and climate. In short, Cowlishaw and Hacker acknowledge that primate range size increases with latitude north of the equator, but it increases with the seasonality of rainfall both north and south of the equator. <fnote>Cowlishaw & Hacker, 1997, p511 </fnote>Range size is also affected by a variety of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Intrinsic factors include body size and ecological flexibility. Extrinsic factors include interspecific interactions and dispersal ability - often limited by constraints such as geographical barriers. Over a period of time, habitats can be subject to modification. For primates, and indeed other species, this may mean the modification of a habitat from suitable to unsuitable. Specialised species may be particularly at risk, because of their lack of ability to adapt. Species that exploit a variety of resources are likely to be both more abundant and more widespread. Dunbar and Barrett (2000) highlight the genus Macaca as having a particularly broad ranging distribution. Their range stretches from the mountains of Morocco to the temperate forests of Japan. The Barbary macaque is the only non-human primate found in Europe and the Japanese macaque is the most northern primate, adapted for life in harsh, snowy winters. Macaques spend time both in the trees and on the ground and have an omnivorous diet. In contrast, a species like the gelada baboon (Theropithecus gelada) is highly specialised. Their diet is restricted to the highlands of Ethiopia and they cannot cope with grasses growing below approximately 1,500 metres as they are too fibrous. Ecological specialisation may also indicate the gradual decline in density towards the borders of distribution. Another potentially important intrinsic factor is body size, and the possible link between body size and distribution can be illustrated in three ways. The first is that larger taxa may have higher energy requirements and therefore have populations with low densities and wide distributions. However, this fails to explain the correlation with climatic variability. Many studies show that species have larger distributions where rainfall is more seasonal. This supports the second possible link between body size and distribution, niche breadth. In simple terms, this refers to the idea that larger primates have greater ranges because they tend to be ecological generalists. In addition, larger species may be able to cope better with fluctuations with regard to food availability. The third factor explaining the apparent link between body size and distribution supposes that body size is not the causal factor at all, but rather that it is an indirect measure of another life history trait. One possible example is reproductive rates (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). The most important constraint on possible expansion is barriers. Island taxa are particularly affected here; they cannot extend their range because an impassable barrier, the ocean, surrounds them. However, there are other types of barriers. Major river systems, for example, may affect the dispersal ability of some species. However, the effectiveness of a river as a barrier depends on its geographical location, its size and its flow. Rivers may particularly affect small and/or forest-dwelling species. Ayres and Clutton-Brock (1992) confirm that 'rivers play an important role in constraining the dispersal of Amazonian primates'. They also found that body weight is positively correlated with geographical range size and that larger primates in the Amazon have fewer subspecies relative to their range size than smaller primates. They explain that this is because the larger species are better able to cross rivers and other environmental barriers. Colyn (1988) concludes from his study of primates in the Central Zaire Basin that the dense network of large river systems plays an important part in the distribution patterns of guenons. <fnote>Ayres & Clutton-Brock, 1992, p535 </fnote>Examples of other types of barriers include the topography of the land and changes in vegetation. As mentioned previously, most primates are limited to tropical forests and therefore boundaries between forest and savannah form particularly important barriers. Whatever the type of barrier, it normally forms the edge of a taxon's range, thus restricting it and limiting its distribution. Barriers either limit the spread of a species from its evolutionary centre of origin, or split a species range, eventually causing allopatric speciation to occur. Another potentially important extrinsic factor is interspecific interactions. In fact, very little is known about the ways in which interspecific competition might affect primate distribution. However, Cowlishaw and Dunbar (2000) identify three ways in which this dynamic may be significant in some cases. These are: smaller primates being excluded from food resources by larger primates, closely related taxa with similar ecological requirements competing for the same resource, and the presence of predators and parasites. M.D Pagel et al (1991) discuss geographical distribution in relation to mammalian species and explain that species ranges are not only likely to be affected by parasites, but moreover by parasites that they share with other species. They suggest that species with broad ranges displace species with narrow ranges when a parasite common to both has a varying impact on the two species and conclude that 'the effects of parasites may be greatest in areas of high density and small range sizes'. <fnote>Pagel, M.D et al., 1991, p813 </fnote>As Cowlishaw and Dunbar (2000) explain, both range (distribution) and abundance (population density) are good indicators of the health of a species. These two factors are interlinked because if a species has both a restricted range and low population numbers, then we are likely to refer to that species as rare and possibly vulnerable to extinction. Geographic distribution and population abundance are good indicators of global population size and therefore global extinction risk. In terms of an actual casual link between distribution and abundance, the relationship has been described as triangular rather than strictly linear. In simple terms, while species that have large ranges often also occur at low densities, species with small geographical ranges occur at both high and low densities. This essay has attempted to show that there are a number of broad-scale, biogeographical patterns in relation to primate distribution. Eeley and Lawes (1999) examine these patterns in the continents of South America and Africa and confirm that they are consistent for both continents. In summary, species range size appears to increase with latitude, although this may be linked to climatic variability (particularly in Africa, see above); ecological generalists tend to have broader ranges than specialists and larger species tend to be widespread, although small species can have small or large ranges. More primates have small ranges than large ranges and most primates are forest dwelling. Small range size is associated with forest biome, and the few species that inhabit savannah or woodland habitats tend to be more widespread. Primates of Southeast Asia and Madagascar follow different general patterns, and are dominated by island effects. As illustrated by Wolfheim (1983), many island primates have restricted ranges. Island primates have impassable boundaries and consequent limited opportunities for dispersal. The somewhat weak correlation between abundance and distribution, and the fact that the majority of primates occupy small ranges clearly has implications for conservation. Pagel et al (1991) show that a relatively small environmental change may affect and threaten a relatively large number of species. As explained, primates are associated with tropical forests and this is a habitat that is under severe pressure from activities such as logging, agriculture and plantations, mining, and hunting. Moreover, forest cover is linked with species richness and endemic species. Wolfheim's (1983) comprehensive and ambitious study shows that both anthropogenic and natural characteristics influence the status of primate populations. Wolfheim refers to natural characteristics as ultimate causes, which include density, habitat, body size and original geographic range. She refers to anthropogenic factors as proximate causes. In the absence of human action, proximate factors would include spontaneous events such as climate change. However, human activities are now overshadowing natural processes, and thus Wolfheim refers solely to habitat alteration and human predation in relation to proximate factors. Both proximate and ultimate factors work together in a precarious balancing act that tips species toward either survival or extinction. This essay has attempted to outline patterns of distribution and to discuss the processes that are responsible for these patterns. It is essential that we understand these patterns and processes, because, as Wolfheim explains, geographical range is the most important ultimate cause of the status of primate populations. Moreover, other ultimate causes identified by Wolfheim are degree of ecological specialisation, abundance and body size, factors that interact in various ways with range size. This essay has demonstrated that highly specialised species tend towards restricted ranges so that habitat alteration and/or predation can rapidly tip the balance towards extinction. Larger primates face similar risks, because although they may have relatively larger ranges they often also occur at low densities. What is clear is that distribution and abundance are complex and important issues, which need to be carefully assessed in the development of conservation strategies, aimed at saving primate species at risk. 