This essay will start with a history and definition of operant conditioning. It will outline how this technique can be used as an animal care and management tool for non-human primates within captive environments including: veterinary care, husbandry procedures, maternal care, and behaviour modification. Specific applications will be outlined, within both laboratory and zoological settings. The essay will finish with an overview of the value of operant conditioning in terms of a quantitative assessment of its effectiveness and a discussion of any potential costs of training. Operant conditioning has begun to be recognised as a valuable animal management tool to gain the voluntary cooperation of the animals in question (Laule et al., 2003). Underlying operant conditioning is the principle that behaviour is determined by consequences (Laule et al., 2003). This involves two basic alternatives - positive and negative reinforcement. In simple terms, positive reinforcement involves rewarding an animal for an appropriate response to a cue (Pryor, 2002; Mellen and Ellis, 1996). Negative reinforcement involves an animal giving a correct response to avoid something unpleasant (Mellen and Ellis, 1996; Pryor, 2002). The essay will focus on positive reinforcement training (PRT) as an option that should be exhausted before negative reinforcement is considered (Laule, et al., 2003). Operant conditioning is far more widely applied in North American as opposed to British Zoos (Prescott, pers. comm.). PRT is still not used as widely as it could be (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). This may be due to lack of information on how to train (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003) and a lack of quantitative assessment regarding time investment, costs and benefits of training (McKinley, et al., 2003; Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003; Schapiro et al., 2003). These issues will be returned to later in the essay. PRT has provided alternatives to invasive veterinary procedures. Reinhardt (2003) documents its use for the acquisition of blood samples from rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) within a laboratory setting. Traditional methods involved enforced restraint, which raised normative levels of a range of hormones, enzymes and blood readings (including cortisol, Reinhardt, 2003). The macaques were therefore trained to cooperate during blood collection and voluntarily offer their leg for the injection, reducing cortisol levels significantly (Reinhardt, 2003). PRT has also been used to acquire urine samples. This technique may offer an alternative to the blood sampling outlined above, in which the crush cage was still used for the early stages of training (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). McKinley et al. (2003) refined, through training, the species-specific behaviour of scent marking in common marmosets (Callithrix jaccus) in a laboratory to obtain urine samples on demand. Once they were trained to scent-mark on designated areas within the cage, holes were drilled at these sites to allow for the insertion of collection vials. PRT has also been incorporated into a range of veterinary procedures within zoological settings. Colahan and Breder (2003) document the use of PRT with primates at Disney's Animal Kingdom (DAS). Where immobilisation is necessary, primates have been trained to receive injections or to take oral anaesthetics (Colahan and Breder, 2003). However, training to present body-parts and desensitisation of medical treatments and instruments has negated the need for immobilisation in many cases. For example, a mandrill was trained to position an injured hand for a portable x-ray, avoiding immobilisation through anaesthesia (Colahan and Breder, 2003). General husbandry techniques have also been improved and modified through the use of PRT. In the past, weighing required immobilisation or capture and separation from conspecifics (McKinley et al., 2003). An operant conditioning program at the Bronx zoo trained a variety of Neo-tropical primates to station themselves on scales that were temporarily placed in their enclosure (Savastano et al. 2003). McKinley et al. (2003) trained common marmosets to climb onto a scale placed in their home cage and remain stationed until their weight was obtained. PRT has also been of value for monitoring pregnancies and other issues regarding maternal care. Keepers at DAS have trained primates to accept ultrasounds (Colahan and Breder, 2003). A white-cheeked gibbon at DAS was trained in nipple desensitisation and genital presentation to facilitate the monitoring of her pregnancy (Richards et al., 2001). Bonobos at Milwaukee County Zoo accept 45-minute ultrasound examinations and one individual allows the use of a breast pump (cited in Rodgers, 1997). PRT can also reduce the need for hand rearing, even with inexperienced mothers, and aid in early reintroductions in cases where initial hand rearing is necessary. The white-cheeked gibbon at DAS showed evidence of improvement in her maternal behaviour, but the infant had to be removed after 25 days (Richards et al., 2001). However, PRT allowed keepers to train the mother and older sibling to feed cooperatively and ignore the presence of a baby bottle. PRT was also used to train the infant to come to the mesh for feedings when a bell sounded. The success of this training allowed the infant to be reintroduced at 4.5 months of age (Richards et al., 2001). Infant care training is recognised as a priority at DAS, focusing on mothers who have either a poor history of maternal care, or who are first time mothers (Colahan and Breder, 2003). Techniques such as training the female to retrieve an object and bring it to the front of the enclosure, can allow an infant to stay within its social group, even when the female is unable to feed her infant (Colahan and Breder, 2003). Many of the examples outlined above involve a technique known as 'refinement' in which a procedure that is already being carried out within animal care institutions is modified (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). However, PRT techniques can also be employed to tackle a range of complex problems that without its use might remain unsolved. One such example is behaviour modification (Schapiro et al. , 2001; Bloomsmith et al. , 1994). This is a particularly relevant term with regard to primates, who often live in complex social groupings. Social dynamics can be problematic within the confines of a captive situation (Bloomsmith et al. , 1994). Bloomsmith et al. (1994) used PRT techniques to tackle the problem of excessive aggression during feeding time in a group of chimpanzees. The dominant male was very aggressive and often gave chase to subordinate individuals. For the exclusion/reduction of undesirable behaviours, PRT is used to reinforce a behaviour that is incompatible with the undesired behaviour (Bloomsmith et al. , 1994). In this case, the male chimpanzee was trained to station while the other members of the group were fed (Bloomsmith et al., 1994). Schapiro et al. (2001) demonstrated how affiliative behaviours within socially housed groups of rhesus macaques could be manipulated through the use of PRT. Female rhesus macaques were divided into groups of high and low affiliators. High affiliators were reinforced for stationing at targets; these targets were set up at increasing distances from other group members. Low affiliators were reinforced as their targets were moved closer to another monkey (Schapiro et al., 2001). In response to the previous lack of quantitative assessment regarding the value of operant conditioning, recent work has attempted to document time-investment and effectiveness. A symposium at the Nineteenth Congress of the International Primatological Society (China, 2002), was organised to bring together individuals involved in operant conditioning in both zoo and laboratory contexts (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). Following the conference, a special issue of the Journal of Applied Animal Welfare Science was published (Prescott, 2004). Articles focused on quantifying the costs and benefits of training and providing guidelines for application (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003; Schapiro et al. , 2003). Thus, many of the articles outlined above provided information regarding time investment and level of success. For example, the number of training sessions required for rhesus macaques to cooperate in blood collection varied from 2-27 sessions; a mean time-investment of 38.5 minutes (Reinhardt, 2003). Only one member of the animal care staff is needed for this technique, whereas traditional restraint methods required two individuals (Reinhardt, 2003). Training the chimpanzee to sit during feeding times took one week for him to sit reliably on command; and after three weeks he remained seated even when preferred food items were fed (Bloomsmith et al., 1994). Behavioural data showed that antagonistic behaviours (defined as displays, submission, aggression and reconciliation) were significantly lower after the training had been implemented (Bloomsmith et al., 1994). McKinley et al. (2003), document a mean time investment of an hour and four minutes per pair of common marmosets for target training and a mean of 52 minutes per pair for urine training. No sex differences were observed during McKinley's study. However, Bloomsmith et al. (1998) document significant sex differences regarding training chimpanzees to move from their outdoor to indoor enclosure on request. A mean of 16.1 training sessions were required for all chimps to reach reliable performance levels (defined by the authors as complying with 90% of requests). However, the female chimpanzees required significantly fewer training sessions than the males. The training programme at the Bronx Zoo discovered significant species differences in response to a range of training procedures. Shyness made golden lion tamarins (Leontopithecus rosalia) slow to respond to training. Other tamarin species responded more quickly than the marmosets, but required frequent, short sessions, as they tended to lose interest during longer sessions. Common marmosets were slower to respond to early training sessions - 60 sessions to hand-feed - but subsequent behaviours were learned very quickly, often in less than 10 sessions (Savastano et al. 2003). One major benefit of PRT is that it negates the need for invasive and stressful techniques, such as darting, capture, restraint and separation from conspecifics (as outlined above). In addition, PRT also facilitates health monitoring (Schapiro et al. , 2003), gives captive animals more choice and control over daily events (Bloomsmith et al. , 1998), mitigates social problems (Bloomsmith et al., 1994; Schapiro et al., 2001), and reduces abnormal behaviours (Laule et al. , 2003). Although animal welfare benefits are the priority, there are other notable positive outcomes of PRT. These include: improved reliability and quantity of data collection (McKinley et al., 2003; Reinhardt, 2003), positive attitude changes among staff (Savastano et al. , 2003) and positive experiences for zoo visitors, who see visible, interactive animals while learning the importance of low-stress animal husbandry (Savastano et al. , 2003). Potential costs involved with PRT require exploration. Many researchers show that the initial cost in terms of time investment is recouped within a short period of time (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003; Reinhardt, 2003; Colahan and Breder, 2003). In addition, once the first behaviour is trained, animals respond quickly to subsequent training (Savastano et al. , 2003). Potential animal welfare costs include physical problems from performing tasks too frequently. For example, excessive scent marking could lead to urinary tract infections in marmosets (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). Moreover, scent marking has been associated with stress in marmosets (Bassett et al. , 2003), highlighting the issue of rewarding a stress-related behaviour (McKinley et al., 2003). Saliva samples may prove a viable alternative to urine samples in the future, which might solve such issues (McKinley et al., 2003). Within laboratory environments, training should not be seen as a substitute for housing of a high standard and enriching environments, as this could compromise welfare (Scott et al., 2003; Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). There are also concerns around habituation (Prescott, pers. comm.). However, exposing primates to positive human interactions may increase welfare, especially when frequent human contact is necessary (Bassett et al. , 2003). O'Sullivan (1999) explores the issue of training in relation to re-introductions. In this context, PRT can have both positive and negative effects on an animal's behavioural repertoire. Increased human contact results in animals losing their fear of humans, which could be dangerous in a post-release environment (O'Sullivan, 1999). However, training can be used to teach skills and appropriate reactions necessary for survival in the wild (O'Sullivan, 1999). Institutions embarking on PRT programmes must plan to equip keepers with the necessary skills (Colahan and Breder, 2003). Consistency is important; otherwise the wrong behaviours can be accidentally reinforced (Prescott, pers. comm.). Changes in behaviour can occur outside of training (Prescott, pers. comm.). Schapiro et al. (2003) demonstrated that training altered the overall behavioural repertoire of the low affiliators in their macaque study, which was a positive outcome as affiliation has been linked to psychological well being (Schapiro et al. , 2001). The chimpanzee trained to station during feeding (Bloomsmith et al. , 1994) retained normal levels of aggression and dominance outside the training sessions (Bloomsmith et al. , 1994), so that the overall hierarchy of the group was not disrupted. These examples illustrate the importance of quantitative data to ensure that training objectives are carefully monitored and ultimately met. This essay has outlined the various ways in which PRT techniques can play a valuable role in the care and management of primates in captivity. Recent attempts to quantify its value in terms of time-investment and its successfulness have helped to clarify this. As demonstrated, some of the more complex potential costs are yet to be properly assessed and the advantages and disadvantages involved deserve more extensive and scientific exploration (Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). These may vary between species and even individuals, as some studies show significant differences in responses to training. However, these factors should not be used as an excuse for institutions not to implement PRT programmes for standard techniques that are tried and tested, as these present viable alternatives to procedures which are necessary but which traditionally involved handling, restraint and solitary confinement - stressful experiences for the primates involved. There are very few institutions in which PRT would not be useful and beneficial to both the primates and the animal care staff (Schapiro et al. , 2003; Prescott and Buchanan-Smith, 2003). Moreover, institutions that have incorporated PRT into their management practices have found it an indispensable tool (Colahan and Breder, 2003). 