The ability to census primate populations is a vital conservation tool. Primates that occur at low densities are of particular conservation concern, but low densities and cryptic behaviours make some primates difficult to census (Sutherland, 2000). It is thus imperative to develop the right census method prior to data collection; these methods are often species and site specific. This essay will outline four different techniques for four different primate species and attempt to compare and contrast methods used. The first study surveyed Alouatta pigra at a site in Mexico. A combination of two methods was used: triangulation of dawn and dusk choruses and subsequent follows of the identified groups within the existing 8km trial system. This gave information on group size and composition. 70% of the survey was spent counting troops on the terrain; the remaining 30% was spent conducting triangulations. The second study estimated the population status of Pongo pygmaeus in primary peat swamp forest, Borneo. Researchers used a non-encounter method of estimating orang-utan density from nest counts. Transects spaced 1km apart were cut through the 500 square kilometre study area. Perpendicular distance of nest to transect was noted, and densities were calculated using the software programme, DISTANCE. A number of parameters were added to the equation in an attempt to correct overestimation of density. The third study surveyed Eulemur fulvus in southeastern Madagascar. Authors provided population density estimates for two subspecies. Densities were obtained by dividing the number of animals seen by the total survey area (total survey length multiplied by transect width). Width was calculated using perpendicular distance of transect to group, with a 50% criterion for falloff distance. Botanical plots were used to assess habitat quality. The fourth study estimated population density of Tarsius spectrum at a site in northern Sulawesi. A combination of two methods was used: quadrat census and a modified form of the fixed-point count. The 1 square kilometre site was divided into 100 one-hectare plots; 25 plots were selected using random block design and surveyed. A vegetation survey was also conducted. Tarsier groups were located by vocalisations and traced to sleeping sites. Prior to dusk, observers would count the number of individuals leaving each sleeping tree, noting age and sex. Home range size was estimated through radio telemetry devices. Tarsiers were captured and radio collars were fitted. Full night focal follows were conducted on thirteen individuals from five different groups. In all four surveys, researchers gained essential prior knowledge regarding habitat, topography and species-specific behaviours in an attempt to utilize the most appropriate and reliable method available to them. Two of the surveys used one method; the other two used a combination of two methods - the distinctive calls of Tarsius spectrum and Alouatta pigra allowed researchers to use vocalisation to locate groups. Tarsius calls also aided sex identification. All four methods provided information in addition to density estimates, including home range size, habitat preference, group size and composition and vegetation quality. The Pongo pygmaeus survey used the only non-encounter method (nest counts), and was the only study using the transect method which cut trails, the other two using existing ones. This was an advantage because it allowed researchers to sample the three principal forest sub-types in the area. Correction factors were required to avoid overestimation of density. Nest density (divided by proportion of nest makers in the population, multiplied by rate at which nests were produced, multiplied by time a nest remains visible) equalled orang-utan density. Unfortunately, these parameters were not site/study specific. This meant that their density estimates had a huge range, because they analysed data based on the maximum and minimum range of published values for each parameter, for each habitat type. However, the authors estimated a mid range density of 5671-8951, based on the knowledge of parameters at their study site. They also point out that more than 2000 individuals is a self-sustaining, viable orang-utan population. Moreover, this method allows a rapid survey of a very large area, without attempting the long process of habituation. The other three surveys covered much smaller areas. The tarsier's small body size allowed researchers to sample 25% of the study area (39 individuals multiplied by four, equalling density of 156 individuals within one kilometre square), producing accurate densities and information about home range and group composition. Similarly, the howlers were followed, repeatedly counted and age/sex noted. The results of the howler survey were stated as preliminary, although their density estimates did compare with other sites. The lemur survey was the shortest in duration, and the least convincing in terms of accuracy. Non-linear, existing transects were used due to time constraints and damage limitation, but authors confessed that densities might have been underestimated due to disturbance, causing cryptic response behaviours. However, they did conduct a test survey at a site where densities were known, and achieved similar results. Assessing the validity and reliability of rapid census methods is important, as time constraints are common. The three smaller surveys multiplied up from the sample results to achieve density estimates, whereas the orang-utan survey offers a density estimate range, based on correction factors. For any one study, it is difficult to determine accuracy. Only through continued monitoring of primate populations does accuracy, validity and reliability increase. Census techniques are required for assessing the conservation status at the initial phase. Baseline data on density is needed for the development of conservation strategies. Authors of all four articles call for the need for follow up studies. Through repeated use, census methods are refined to incorporate correction factors and then the statistical analysis of variance can assess the significance of the data. The development of non-encounter techniques is useful for large areas and non-habituated individuals. In this sense, the orang-utan survey may not be entirely accurate, but it does give a vital density estimate of a large orang-utan population, highlighting the importance of peat swamp forest type in terms of orang-utan conservation (Morrogh-Bernard, 2000). The tarsier study emphasises the usefulness of trapping techniques for accurate density estimates, home range size and information about group composition, (although this technique is clearly only possible for smaller primates). Vocal primates allow for triangulation, which can be useful for locating groups and/or identification. The lemur survey presents preliminary data. However, it does attempt a comparison between two threatened subspecies of brown lemur, concluding that Eulemur fulvus albocollaris occurs at very low densities in areas surveyed, a result of forest fragmentation and loss. In each of the four articles consulted, researchers made clear attempts to select the method that was best suited to their study site and the species in question, either through the combination of two methods or by the modification of an existing method. 