Based on the critical age hypothesis for L1 learning, the article Three Misconceptions About Age and L2 Learning by Stefka H. Marinova-Todd, D. Bradford Marshall and Catherine E. Snow questions the widespread belief that there is also a critical period for the acquisition of a L2. As age seems to be the most important factor for successful L1 acquisition, many people believe that this is also true for the L2. Thus, they claim that adults are not able to acquire a L2 to nativelike levels whereas children can achieve this aim. With the help of various studies, the article analyses three of the main arguments - or what the authors call "misconceptions" - about L2 learning and concludes that "age differences reflect differences in the situation of learning rather than in capacity to learn". First, the article questions the belief that children learn a L2 faster and more effortlessly than adults as studies have proved the exact opposite: In the first stages of L2 acquisition, older learners perform better than younger ones. The second "misconception" is based on the fact that the localization of L1 and L2 in the brain and the way how L2 information is processed differs between late and early L2 learners and that this supports the critical age hypothesis in L2. The authors argue, however, that differences in localization and processing do not automatically result in differences in L2 proficiency. Third, they criticize that researchers have not drawn enough attention to highly proficient adult L2 learners and instead of studying these cases, have focused on unsuccessful learners. After a critical analysis and reexamination of the above mentioned widespread beliefs, the authors identify a main difference between L1 and L2 language acquisition. Although there seems to be a critical period in L1 acquisition, they argue that there is no such period for SLA. Whereas case studies of so called "wolf children" like Genie have highly supported the critical age hypothesis in L1, "the cases [...] of L2 learners who encounter obstacles to high-level achievement are entirely different and [...] the critical period that limits the learning of the first group (wolf children) is irrelevant to explaining the shortcomings of the second." However, the authors do not deny that age influences L2 learning. But instead of believing that adults are biologically incapable to learn a L2 successfully as a critical period hypothesis would suggest, they argue that age "is associated with social, psychological, educational, and other factors that can affect L2 proficiency." Thus, such factors as the motivation and the need to learn the language, the language anxiety and self-confidence of the learner and the language environment play a crucial role for the successfulness of a late L2 learner and are more important than age. These aspects show that, in contrast to L1 acquisition, a L2 is learned more consciously. The role of motivation and the self-image, for example, are not crucial in L1 acquisition. Babies are automatically motivated to learn the L1 as this is their only means to become a fully accepted member of the society they live in. They also do not have developed a complete self-image yet which could influence their L1 proficiency. Besides these two differences, there is one aspect that seems to be similar in L1 and L2 language acquisition: The importance of linguistic input of the target language. In L1 acquisition, this is displayed by the poor language development of isolated children (Genie, Chelsea); for L2 languages, the authors present a study by Riney and Flege that shows that "living in an environment where the target language is standard has a positive effect on older L2 learners´ global pronunciation." Findings as the one above are very useful for foreign language teaching and thus this article has some relevance for students who are going to be foreign language teachers. Especially the findings of the studies by Champagne-Muzaral. (1993), Neufeld (1979) and Riney & Flege (1998) which show that special phonological training improves the pronunciation of the L2 learners are very helpful as the nonnative accents are often a main problem of L2 learners´ pronunciation. Thus, by making students aware of the successfulness of such trainings, they could use them when teaching later. The only negative aspect that limits the usefulness of the article is that it does not describe in detail how such trainings are designed. It also does not answer the question how exactly to motivate the pupils and how to support their self-confidence to make their L2 learning more successful. That both aspects are very important for efficient L2 acquisition will probably not be new to students who want to become foreign language teachers. However, the claim of the article that there is no critical period for SLA is highly relevant for them because if there were, this "would have serious implications for foreign language teachers working with older students" and new teaching methodologies would have to be created. The article has once again underlined that the critical age hypothesis - especially in L2 language acquisition - is still a very controversial topic. The differences in the results of the various studies have made clear one great limitation in the understanding of research. Experiments always only investigate a sample and some studies only included ten (Table 3: Johnsonal. (1996) )or even two (Table 3: Ioupal. (1994)) people. Furthermore many studies only focused on the results of different groups of subjects (for example children vs. adults), but did not pay attention to the results of some individuals who differed from these general findings. (Table 1: Johnson & Newport (1989)) Thus, the findings of many experiments provide only generalizations and tendencies and highly depend on the interpretation and beliefs of the experimenters. Furthermore, one has to take into account that different modalities of tests, for example oral vs. written tests, also influence the subject´s performance. To conclude, it is very important to be cautious with the results gained in research experiments. Only by comparing different results of various experimenters, a differentiated knowledge about the critical age hypothesis can be gained. 