One aspect psycholinguists are interested in is to know how words are stored and retrieved in the brain and how speech production works. Thus, to get an insight into the mental lexicon and into the processes taking place there, researchers make use of various experiments. One of these experiments is the so called TOT (Tip of the tongue) experiment. Here, researchers try to artificially create a state in which the subjects feel that the word is on the tip of their tongue, but they cannot quite remember and express it or to put it in Brown´s words, they are left with "a disembodied presence, like the grin without the Cheshire cat" (Brown, 1970: 234). Being in the TOT-state, the subjects are asked different questions about the word´s meaning, its form, its syllable structure and its relation to other words. These data then are used to form or back up hypotheses about word retrieval and production. Thus, this essay is going to focus on the question what the TOT experience tells us about the way words may be retrieved in the brain and about speech production. First of all, the TOT experience shows that we seem to have different dimensions of word knowledge in our mental lexicon and whereas the retrieval of some dimensions may be blocked in a special situation, others may be available. A very good example for this is the TOT experiment by Brown and McNeill (1966) which is described in Jean Aitchison´s book Words in the Mind. In that experiment, definitions of relatively uncommon words were read out to students such as the definition "navigational instrument used in measuring angular distances, esp. the altitude of sun, moon and stars at sea". (Aitchison, 2003: 24) Though some of the students did not quite remember the word "sextant", they could answer many or even all of the other questions described above. Thus, they could name words of similar meaning, such as "astrolabe" and "compass", and sound, such as "secant", "sextet" and "sexton", they could determine the word class and their guesses about the rhythm and the number of syllables were also correct most of the time. This shows that although the phonological knowledge about the word could not be retrieved completely, other dimensions like syntactic, morphological or semantic aspects of the word were not affected. In short, this finding supports the view of multidimensional word storage in the mental lexicon. With respect to these different dimensions, TOT experiences further support the hypothesis that a word is like a coin in the mental lexicon with its lemma, the word meaning and word class and thus the semantic-syntactic dimension, on one side and the word form (phonological dimension) on the other because of two reasons. First, the fact that in TOT guesses, the word class is mainly maintained, with verbs and nouns retaining their word class 90 per cent of the time and adjectives about 60 per cent according to one researcher, supports the view that the word meaning and word class have a strong relationship and thus form the lemma. (Aitchison, 2003: 104) Second, the somewhat looser relationship between word form and meaning can be seen from the fact that in TOTs, people seem to have the concept or the idea of what they want to say in their mind but they cannot retrieve the appropriate word form for it or as William James puts it, they cannot find "a sound to clothe it". (James in chapter 5 "The internal lexicon" from presentation reading) This second finding also suggests that "lexical retrieval takes place in two stages. The meaning of the word enables us to make contact with some kind of meaning code (i.e. we recognise that a word exists that has the meaning we are aiming for). We then go on to determine (or sometimes fail to determine) the form of the word." (Field, 2003: 63) But TOT experiences not only support the idea of a dual stage retrieval process, they also provide researchers with data which help to tell something about how this retrieval process actually works and how words seem to be stored in the mental lexicon with respect to meaning and form. When examining the answers "astrolabe", "compass", "secant", "sextet" and "sexton" for "sextant" in the TOT experiment described above more closely, it becomes clear that whereas the first two are words with similar meaning as they also describe navigational instruments, the latter are similar sounding words. They are all two-syllable words with a similar beginning and ending and except for "sextet", the stress pattern (a stressed first syllable and an unstressed second one) is the same as well. These answers imply that we do not store words independently but that there seem to be many links between them and that "the organization is closer to a web of interconnecting nodes" (chapter 5 "The internal lexicon" from presentation reading). TOT-experiments show that links between words of similar meaning and especially between coordinates, words on the same level of detail as the different terms for navigational instruments above, are particularly strong. They also support the bath-tub effect hypothesis which says that beginnings and endings of words as well as the stress pattern are more prominent in storage and that words are identified as similar-sounding if these features are equal or similar. (see examples above) According to one study, initial consonants were remembered 51 per cent of the time, final consonants 35 per cent and guesses about the number of syllables were also correct more than half of the time. (Aitchison 2003: 140) Probably most important, the TOT experience displays the parallel activation of words in the mental lexicon during word retrieval. When searching for a word in a TOT-state, many other words which are linked to the target word because of sharing the same outline features either with respect to meaning or with respect to form are activated in the speaker´s mind. This seems to happen automatically and unconsciously and often the speaker then either denies them or uses them to describe the word he or she is searching for by explaining for example that the required word is similar sounding to "sexton". Thus, the TOT experience provides evidence for the spreading activation theory. In that theory, massive parallel activation takes place in both, the semantic-syntactic component containing the lemma and the phonological component containing word forms, at the same time. In both components, a number of possible word matches with respect to meaning or form are activated with the more likely matches receiving higher activation. This process then goes on whereat both components interact and influence each other until one word - the best match - finally "wins" and is uttered. For people in a TOT-state, this last stage, the retrieval of the final candidate, fails. One reason might be for example that another highly similar candidate, one which is similar in meaning and sound, blocks the retrieval of the target word as in: "I know it is something like Robert (Rupert)" (from lecture notes week 10, page 8) where Robert is similar-sounding to Rupert and also a proper noun for a male person. Such cases as blocking underline the competitive nature of the interactive activation model as different words compete for retrieval. But also the exact opposite can take place. By priming people in a TOT-state with similar-sounding words for example, sometimes, the TOT-state can be overcome and the target word finally uttered. Thus, the links between words in the mental lexicon can help as well as block successful retrieval. Another important aspect concerning word retrieval that is displayed by the TOT experience is the influence of frequency. Words which are used less frequently are more likely to cause a TOT-state in a speaker. As a TOT-state is only induced when the word searched for is hard to retrieve from the mental lexicon, this finding implies that "the words we use most are the ones that are easiest for us to retrieve. This is because the connections to them are more often used." (Field, 2003: 59) Similar to frequency, the recent use of a word also reduces the probability that this word will induce a TOT-state. This shows that the memory also plays an important role in word retrieval. This might also be an explanation for the fact that age seems to negatively influence the occurrence of TOT´s as older people´s memories often work less well than that of younger ones. Burke et al (1991) found out for example that older people experience 1.65 TOT´s per week, whereas in the speech of younger people only 0.98 TOT´s per week occur. (TOT-presentation handout week 10) In general, the TOT experience tells us a lot about speech production. First of all, it becomes clear that speech is planned in advance and that there are other stages before the actual articulation of a word. If articulation was the first stage, then TOT-states would not exist. But as those states, where you already have "a kind of mental image of it [of what you want to say] but cannot retrieve its form" (Field, 2003: 63), occur, it seems as if the first stage is one, where the concept of what shall be said is being formed. Willem Levelt calls this stage the conceptualisation. (lecture notes week 10, page 1/17) This conceptualization also shows that speech production begins in the semantic-syntactic component of the mental lexicon as we first have an idea of what we want to say (the meaning) and we then look for the respective phonetic form. This is a contrary process to word recognition which seems to work the other way round. According to Levelt, the second step is then the formulation where the preverbal message (the idea) is transformed into a phonetic plan. In his model of speaking, he splits this transformation into two parts, the grammatical encoding concerning the lemma and the phonological encoding concerning the word form. TOTs provide evidence for this kind of splitting up as in them, the grammatical encoding, finding the word with respect to meaning and word class, works, but the phonological encoding, the finding of the right word form, fails. As a consequence, the speaker cannot proceed to the third stage, the actual articulation. The fourth and last stage of Levelt´s model, the self-monitoring of the speaker, is also reflected in TOTs. Thus, when speakers in a TOT-state come up with words similar to the target word in sound, meaning or both during their search, they are most of the time aware of the fact that these words are only similar but not identical to the required word. This can be again seen in the example: " I know it´s something like Robert. (Rupert)" (lecture notes week 10, page 8). Thus, the TOT experience shows us that speech production is a process working with selection and repression of words before the actual articulation and then with checking and if necessary correcting of what one has said after or during the actual utterance. All in all, TOT experiments tell us a lot about the way words may be retrieved in the brain and about speech production. First, they show that words are stored in different dimensions in the mental lexicon and that the syntactic and semantic dimension seem to be very closely related and thus form the lemma. Concerning word retrieval, TOTs suggest a two stage retrieval process which starts, in word production, with the retrieval of the lemma and after that the word form is chosen. Further, TOTs support the view of a retrieval process that makes use of massive parallel activation and thus they provide some evidence for the spreading activation theory. Here, frequency, recency and the memory also play an important role. In general, the TOT experience displays that production is a process which needs careful planning and which seems to be subdivided into different stages: the conceptualization, the formulation, the articulation and the self-monitoring. Besides the TOT experiment, on which this essay focused, there are many other experiments and "a good experimental strategy, in general, is to use several different methods to explore a given phenomenon and look to see whether the different approaches converge on similar conclusions." (chapter 5 "The internal lexicon" from presentation reading) 