"In practice, no population survey or census is completely bias free" (Ross and Reeve, 2003, p90). In comparing several papers I will assess survey procedures. Human observers are fallible. Mitani et al (2000, p269) concede that in their study "different observers may vary significantly in their estimates of sighting distances of animals during censuses, thus rendering the use of measure of absolute densities problematic". The observers were never recording data at the same time in the same place so no tests of inter observer reliability were performed, meaning the team calculated a 'relative density' by noting sighting frequencies instead of sighting distances. In his 1970s studies Struhsaker attempted to confirm distance lengths by calibrating estimates of sighting distance against actual measurements, but this was not true for the other two observers. Hall et al. (1998) acknowledge that observers may not have detected all gorilla (Gorilla gorilla graueri) and chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii) nests on the centre line of their transects, which distorts results as probability should be 1.0 on this line. Human error was to blame for the 18% of gorilla nests they estimate were misidentified as chimpanzee nests, needing a manual correction of statistics, rendering the results as dubious. In a census of Goeldi's monkeys (Callimico goeldii) Christen (1999) describes how three species of callitrichids answered tape-recorded calls and acknowledges that the long calls of these species are very similar, leading to the accusation of misidentification. She acknowledges that "Goeldi's monkeys are generally shyer and quieter than sympatric tamarin species", raising doubts about the suitability of a vocalization study. Sutherland (1996, p 271) also points out that censusing using vocalizations "only determines the number of territorial individuals or groups". Christen (1999) strongly asserts that the study area is affected by human activity, and Davies (2002, p107) warns against vocalization surveys in hunting areas because primates tend to call less and are more wary. Christen fails to elucidate on her survey sites, and gives no explanation of her methodology. A more robust procedure should have been used instead. Christen (2000) is re-performing her own presence/absence census. In Senegal, Pruetz et al. (2002) follow up research dating back thirty years, making it difficult to correlate methods and results. Nguyen (2000) visits an area that was subject to one previous short study. In DRC Congo, Hall et al. (1998, p229) found considerably higher density estimates in the same area as a previous study by Yamagiwa et al. (1989) and they assert that "differences in sampling methods may account for this discrepancy". Pruetz et al. (2002) replicate Yamagiwa et al. (1992) who used maximum party size recorded from bed counts to represent 60% of the community. However, they use figures for the minimum group size instead, and they admit they have a limited sample of visual sightings, so accuracy is limited. Mitani et al. (2000) claim their six month study compares favourably with their 18-month surveys (although this is with the same sample area being observed 20-30 times). Indeed, Greenwood (2002, p20) suggests that "if one uses one of the methods appropriate for a closed population, it is important to minimise the chances of losing or gaining individuals by conducting a survey over a short period". However, Mitani et al. (2000) only conduct their surveys in the mornings, despite the fact that many primate populations are also active in the late afternoon. The same study also uses three week rapid-assessment censuses, but these utilised very small sample sizes and the authors caution that comparisons should be interpreted guardedly. A short research period characterises Nguyen's (2000) study of Tonkin snub-nosed monkeys (Rhinopithecus avunculus) in Vietnam. The eight week study period is split between sites, with one site only receiving five days of observations and no target animals. Little information is given about the methodology or study sites. The effort and data yield is not enough to draw significant conclusions, and the census contributes little. Hall et al. (1998) miss out their Site 5 completely in their search for Grauer's gorillas and chimpanzees, though they do acknowledge this failing. Pruetz et al. (2002) concede that the survey length depended on the amount of area it was possible to cover in a days hike, meaning a wide range of 1.8 km to 8.1 km outside the national park. They used a combination of systematic line transects and opportunistic surveys, which seems to be a more comprehensive method. However, inside the national park the transects followed water courses and were only 2km in length, using the four cardinal compass points, perhaps leading to blind spots. The use of parallel line transects may have been preferential. Their sites are also biased towards woodland and gallery forest habitats. In Vietnam, Nguyen (2000) states that line transect surveys were not possible because of the terrain. Therefore she conducted peak-top observations and opportunistic surveys on pre-existing paths, leading to biased and incomplete results. Hall et al. (1998) also used forest reconnaissance using existing or abandoned tracks to avoid dense vegetation. While this reduces damage to the environment, Ross and Reeve (2003, p107) advise that transects should "not follow contour lines, water courses, or run along established paths or tracks, as these are unlikely to be representative". Davies (2002) also cautions that primates may change their behaviour in relation to a road or path, particularly if the track is used by hunters. Christen's (1999) study of Goeldi's monkeys also uses survey excursions rather than transects, in twelve different localities that appear rather closely clustered. She does not give more details about her observation methods, which is a critical failing. A more widespread selection of points may have been preferential, along with more systematic observations. Christen's (1999) study also censuses many other primate species, which although providing a more comprehensive overview may distract from the primary objective of finding Goeldi's monkeys. Mitani et al. (2000) also survey multiple species, and Hall et al. (1998) census gorillas and chimpanzees, and allowing for the misidentification of gorilla nests recalculates the number of chimpanzees. None of the studies is able to provide an absolute density of primate species, though some are more upfront about their limitations than others. Several studies should only declare whether a species is present or absent, and refrain from attempting a density estimate. The terrain caused problems for all of these primate censuses, as most primate habitat is difficult to access. However, this should not be an excuse for abandoning robust sampling methods. 