<heading>Introduction</heading>Consumptive utilisation of wildlife includes subsistence hunting and harvesting for biomedical research, which impact upon primates. I shall focus on trophy hunting which generally does not. However, hunting other species affects people's perception of wildlife in general, may have secondary negative or positive repercussions on primates and their habitats, and may influence the procedures of conservation organisations which work with primates. There are arguments for and against such practices in their own right, and mixed views about whether they can coincide with other conservation efforts. Appropriateness of consumptive wildlife utilisation needs to be addressed in terms of; appropriate for conservation organisations if there is a conflict between consumptive wildlife use and other forms of conservation, appropriate for local people in whether it brings the proclaimed benefits, appropriate for wildlife in terms of ecological sustainability and finally, appropriate for conservation in terms of environmental ethics. <heading>Background to wildlife utilisation</heading>In the IUCN (1980) declaration, conservation is defined as the management of natural resources "so that they may yield the greatest sustainable benefit to present generations while maintaining their potential to meet the needs and aspirations of future generations". This was justification for many people that sustainable wildlife utilisation was an appropriate way forward. The idea is not new. Utilitarian thinkers in the 19 th century proposed the "wise use of natural resources for the benefit, especially the economic benefit, of humans, balancing long-term preservation with short term use, benefit and enjoyment" (Baker, 1997, p 307). Economic commentators now attribute a total economic value (TEV) to wildlife, which takes into account the consumptive and non-consumptive uses (Swanson & Kontoleon, 1998). <heading>Moral position</heading>Oates (1999) believes the IUCN and WWF have moved away from protecting nature for its own intrinsic value, towards integrating conservation with efforts to satisfy basic human needs. Some commentators do believe wildlife has an intrinsic value. According to Warren (2001, p315), it is "morally appropriate to extend special protections to animals of species that, in addition to their ecosystemic value have a special aesthetic, scientific or spiritual value". This contrasts with Aristotelian and Cartesian philosophical attitudes epitomised by Kant that "animals are not self-conscious, and are there merely as a means to an end. That end is man" (Kant, 1963, p239). Whilst Wrangham (2001) believes in the intrinsic value of wildlife, he also raises the ethical question about whether the sacrifice of some animals for the preservation of others justifies the loss. This concept facilitates the notion of consumptive utilisation, and De George (1978, p9) claims it is not necessary to avoid every immoral practice since some bad practices are not as bad as the alternatives. In agreement, Du Toit (2002) proclaims a conservation project successful if the decline "is significantly slower than the rate predicted under alternative management regimes (p 1414). <heading>Trophy hunting</heading>Trophy hunting is perhaps the most controversial form of consumptive wildlife utilisation. Parker (2005) describes recreational hunting as the principle form of tourism in Kenya up to the 1960s. Indeed, Wilkie & Carpenter (1999) assert that "many national parks were set up to preserve remaining populations of trophy animals not wiped out by trophy hunters" (p 339). Proponents of consumptive wildlife utilisation argue that while wildlife is generally recognised as a renewable natural resource it is not seen in the same way as other renewable resources and "typically in Africa it is surrounded by emotional and often irrational sentiments" (Child, 1991, p159). Adams and McShane (1996) believe opposition to utilisation comes from wildlife preservationist attitudes stemming from the colonial era. As these notions put animals before people they elicited accusations of imperialism, and Oates (1999) believes the IUCN was trying to deflect such criticism by entwining financial development and conservation. Many schemes have tried to merge the two aims, for example ADMADE in Zambia and CAMPFIRE in Zimbabwe. Both use money from hunting safaris and tourism to finance development projects. They have been criticised primarily for alleged corruption in the distribution of funds (Oates, 1999). However, Lewis and Alpert (1997) say that in both, "the major demonstrable benefit for wildlife conservation has been a positive change in community attitudes about wildlife conservation" (p67). For example, under CAMPFIRE, a significant amount of the anti-poaching enforcement was done by local communities (Fischer et al., 2005). In the Sandwe district of Zambia community leaders approached the National Parks and Wildlife Service wanting to join ADMADE, promising to reduce illegal hunting in return for hosting a trophy-hunting operator. (Lewis & Alpert, 1997). The local community evidently felt that wildlife utilisation was appropriate for them, in that it brought about a financial gain. At other times, communities can receive financial benefits as a by-product of utilisation. Wilkie & Carpenter (1999) report Congo Safaris gave US$ 1200 to a local school and health clinic as part of a special trophy hunting tax designed to benefit local communities, though nobody could claim that is a proportionally large amount. Supporters of trophy hunting claim other benefits: 1) Hunters often belong to organised clubs, which may improve communication between hunters and wildlife administrators. Therefore, "hunters may be instrumental in promoting new reserves or experimental hunting areas" (Ojasti, 1996, p45). However, this suggests that hunting areas are established with hunters, rather than local communities, in mind. 2) Hunting companies can offer protection to wildlife by deterring poachers (Coogan, 1995). Although, in at least one example in Cameroon most safari hunting companies are present only during the hunting season, so are ineffective at controlling poaching. Therefore Wilkie & Carpenter (1999) suggest "it may be that the costs of protection are not rewarded by increased trophy hunting revenues" (p 341). Under CAMPFIRE, poaching initially fell with the help of local community anti-poaching units (Gunn, 2001). However, Fischeral. (2005) report that in some areas poaching fell only temporarily, and the situation deteriorated again when communities did not receive the promised benefits. It should also be acknowledged that if blanket prohibitions are in place then poaching also becomes the sole option for sport hunting enthusiasts (Ojasti, 1996). 3) Hunter tourists are claimed to be less destructive than photographer tourists so fewer are needed to bring in revenue(Lewis & Alpert, 1997, p64). Presumably the aim should be for respect of habitats and no destruction at all. 4) Hunting is viewed as a way of controlling animal populations, particularly in areas of overpopulation where a habitat can be damaged (Baker, 1997). Gunn (2001) suggests "the available habitat for animals such as elephants and lions is limited by the human population, so that 'surplus' animal populations will have to be culled anyway" (p 71). However, I feel this should not be blithely accepted as appropriate, because habitat destruction is a human activity that does not have to be the norm. Gunn (2001) goes on to make the additional point that nobody truly knows what a 'natural population' of any given species should be. There will also usually be a certain amount of unreported off-take which is difficult to assess. This can also lead to confusion when setting quotas. 5) Baker (1997) cites the Africa Resources Trust that specimens taken are usually older males who contribute little to the genetic population. However, both Coltman et al (2003) and Whitmanal. (2004) in their assessment of rams and lions, warn of the decline of populations with the selective effects of sport hunting on prime males. 6) Supporters claim hunting has a minimal effect on wildlife numbers. Jeffrey (1991, p 164) asserts that legitimate hunting in Zambia removes an "insignificant proportion of the standing populations of wild animals (usually much less than 1%)". However, for opponents, any proportion is a significant proportion. As well as moral opposition to legalised hunting, there are also practical objections. In an economic analysis, Swanson & Kontoleon (2005) warn that supporting such utilisation may not be appropriate for conservation organisations, as wildlife non-use values (like donations) may be in conflict with certain consumptive uses of the species (such as hunting). They found that wildlife supporters resisted consumptive utilisation and would be prepared to donate more to avoid it. It may damage conservation organisations when people who donate money for non-consumptive projects, may withdraw support if the organisation backs consumptive wildlife uses. Bodmer and Lozano (2001) describe economics and wildlife as a circular relationship, in that economics plays a large role in determining how rural people treat their wildlife resources, whilst at the same time "the fate of wildlife populations will often depend on the mandate of rural-development projects" (p 1169). It is worth debating whether sheer numbers of hunted animals is of importance, or whether the focus should be on which particular animals are targeted. According to Humavindu & Barnes (2003), in 2000 Namibia hosted 15 540 hunter days, and 13 310 animals were killed, making $11.2 million. In the same year in Botswana, $12.6 million was made from 5570 hunter days killing 2500 animals. However, 21% of the animals in Botswana were high-value key species as opposed to 3% of the take in Namibia. So, fewer total animals were taken but the animals were larger trophies. There is a question over whether it is appropriate to take a large number of high-value species in exchange for a lower total number, or whether a larger total loss is more damaging to wildlife populations, biodiversity and perhaps perception. <heading>Facilitating conservation</heading>Though trophy hunting is not a new concept, the idea that it can be appropriate for conservation via development is new to many people, even conservationists. Indeed, inexperience can mean "ill-focused efforts to promote the sustainable use of natural resources as a means to development in inappropriate settings may condemn the poor to lives of poverty" (Rao & McGowan, 2002, p 581). The link between conservation and development was reconfirmed when the IUCN World Congress defined conservation as both the protection and sustainable use of natural resources (IUCN 2000). There is also an IUCN Sustainable Use of Wild Species Specialist Group, suggesting it is viewed as an appropriate conservation strategy. Some see wildlife utilisation as a sacrifice to facilitate other forms of conservation. For example, in supporting the CITES 2004 decision to allow Namibia to offer hunting permits to kill black rhinos, WWF praised the country's rhino protection efforts over the last 20 years and said "the income to be generated is designed to provide benefits to local communities for their protection efforts and provide incentives for continued and enhanced protection" (WWF, 2004, p4). Environment officials in Namibia certainly viewed the decision as a reward,, stating; "We appreciate this recognition of our conservation achievements" (Stoddard, 2004). Other conservation organisations do not see consumptive use as appropriate and opposed WWF's position, stating that "the pressure from the pro-utilisation movement, the hunters and the traders to increase quotas or re-open trade was plain for all to see" and "was hard to swallow" (Travers, 2004). Child (1991, p160) says often there are intentional efforts to undermine consumptive utilisation by linking it to poaching problems, particularly with endangered species. This link was been seen in the debate about rhino hunting in IFAW's (2004) response that; "This was a poor decision which may well lead to increased poaching of threatened populations". Despite these concerns and objections, Koro (2005) reports that the CITES 2004 meeting approved all proposals to hunt or trade in species that were 'scientifically proven' to be out of danger, even if not always in full. Therefore CITES evidently views consumptive utilisation as appropriate within its remit to control trade in endangered species. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Consumptive wildlife utilisation is here, and is probably here to stay as long as the economic benefits from wildlife are greater than from competing land-uses (Du Toit, 2002). So, it seems to be appropriate for local communities who can financially benefit from it. However, it may not be an appropriate tool for conservation agencies which rely on goodwill for donations, and may alienate supporters with consumptive utilisation. On the question of whether it is appropriate for wildlife, there are those who believe the hunting rates are low enough to be sustainable. However, the consequences are uncertain, as "without better information on harvest rates and the impact on trophy species population densities over time, it is unclear whether safari hunting is ecologically sustainable" (Wilkie & Carpenter, 1999, p 343). 