<heading>Introduction</heading>Michelle James has had difficulties with food and eating since she was 13. She is now 18 and has been referred to the Community Mental Health Team. The Canadian Model of Occupational Performance is being used to work with Michelle, as it is highly client-centred (Hagedorn, 2004). The Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM) has been carried out with Michelle, as well as a risk assessment and an Interest Checklist. I will now address the following questions: <heading>Presenter B: Questions to address:</heading>What needs and strengths does Michelle have? What interventions are appropriate to meet her needs? Which frames of reference and approaches will you be using? What clinical reasoning is underpinning your decisions? <heading>Needs and Strengths</heading>Michelle's needs: To engage in meaningful occupation to take her mind off her problems and work on her skills. To have a long term goal to aim for, e.g. going to university, to feel she has something to look forward to and not feel like she 'doesn't know where she is going in life'. To continue social interaction with people of her own age in order to keep and build on her social and communication skills and build confidence and self esteem. To maintain an appropriate body weight to improve her physical and mental health. To improve her relationship with her mother. The occupational therapist (OT) will involve Michelle's mother in her treatment and discuss things with her (after getting Michelle's consent to do so). Michelle's strengths: Michelle... Did well with her GCSEs. Has friends who she sees regularly. Enjoys helping her father with his paperwork as it 'takes her mind of things'. Wants to 'get over the anorexia and just be normal' - positive attitude to getting well. Enjoys reading and would have studied English Literature at A-level. Is a tidy person, cleans her own room and does her own washing and ironing. Is a good cook and often cooks for family. Is eating more now and slowly gaining weight (but could easily relapse according to the mental health nurse) Is doing more now and her confidence has improved since she has been doing work for her father and seeing her friends. Engaging in meaningful occupation and social interaction has had a positive effect on Michelle's confidence and motivation. Interventions with Michelle should therefore focus on finding more meaningful occupations for her to achieve a more balanced lifestyle, and take into account her sociable nature. <heading>Interventions appropriate to meet Michelle's needs:</heading>The main treatment for anorexia nervosa is psychological, including cognitive behavioural therapy, family therapy and counselling. These interventions will usually be carried out by a psychologist (Abraham & Llewellyn-Jones, 2001; Gilbert, 2000). As Michelle's care co-ordinator, the OT will ensure she is referred to the psychologist in the Community Mental Health Team, to cover this aspect of her care. The complicated nature of the illness requires a sound, multidisciplinary approach, the role of the OT playing a vital part (Institute of psychiatry, 2004). Eating disordered patients are often dysfunctional not only in their attitudes and habits related to eating and weight control, but also in their occupational engagement (Barris, 1986; Martin, 1998). Michelle spends much time at home reading or watching television and has expressed how she feels she 'hasn't done anything for the last two years'. The role of the OT in multidisciplinary care for eating disordered patients is focusing on dysfunction in occupational behaviour and working with the person to engage in meaningful activity that will help to bring about change in the individual (Martin, 1998). There is a great importance for the OT to develop a good rapport and build a solid therapeutic relationship with Michelle if her treatment is to be productive. It is common for conflicts to arise due to the differing viewpoints of client and therapist and this may inhibit her continuing engagement in treatment and the process of change (Orchard, 2003). The OT must be empathetic towards her problems and try to understand her feelings, emotions and behaviour (Martin, 1998). The focus on OT intervention is on enabling Michelle to feel in control of, and satisfied with her participation in meaningful occupations (Barris, 1986), and the choice of using the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM) has started this client-centred approach to intervention. It would be unethical and ineffective for the therapist to decide which interventions would be best for Michelle, as she would lack motivation and would lose trust in the therapist (Shelley, 1997). Specific interventions have been established following COPM and the Interest Checklist being carried out. Michelle has identified that she would like to continue her education with a long term goal of going to university, so the OT will eventually help Michelle to look into doing a course of her interest at the local college. Michelle has also identified interest in starting a yoga class and doing more cooking, which she says she finds makes her less depressed and anxious, which is a common, but somewhat bizarre declaration of anorectics (Martin, 1998; Shelley, 1997). <heading>Cooking </heading>It is essential that meal planning and cooking are incorporated into Michelle's treatment plan, due to her illness being centred around food and eating (Harries, 1992; Martin, 1998), and as Michelle enjoys this activity already, and has expressed an interest in developing her skills, it may be a good starting point for intervention. One to one treatment sessions will be carried out, involving choosing and purchasing food and cooking meals at home, with emphasis on the acceptance of cooking, and more importantly eating, healthy, balanced and well proportioned meals, with varying nutritional and caloric content. Practicing cooking and eating in this way can also reduce the chance of relapse (Martin, 1998). The OT will work with Michelle to cook meals she is familiar with, and build up to more complex meals, and talk with her about any difficulties in doing this (Stockwell, Duncan & Levens, 1988). She could also build up to cooking a meal for friends. The OT will also encourage Michelle to 'eat-out' with friends or family in cafés or restaurants, or go for a snack in a coffee shop, to develop a spontaneous and relaxed eating pattern and get used to eating in different environments (Martin, 1998). <heading>Yoga</heading>Michelle has expressed an interest in starting a yoga class, which the OT agrees is a suitible activity for her to try. The OT realises that is it common for anorectics to exercise compulsively as another way of losing weight (National centre for eating disorders, 2005; Abraham & Llewellyn-Jones, 2001), but following assessment, does not feel that this is something Michelle has done in the past, or will start to, so yoga as a form of exercise will not be inappropriate. Martin (1998) says that several authors have recommended movement groups such as yoga to help patients become happier with their bodies. According to Harries (1992), 'Yoga is an appropriate activity (for stress management in anorectics) (...) it can be used as a method to reduce tension without requiring much energy' (p.335). A yoga class would involve gentle stretching exercises as well as meditations for relaxation. Joining a local yoga class could benefit Michelle in many ways including: To develop positive body image (relaxation and physical activity increase body awareness) (Stockwell, Duncan & Levens, 1988; Martin, 1998) For stress management and relaxation For gentle physical exercise To meet new, like-minded people (as a step to going to college and meeting new people) To develop social and assertiveness skills (through starting something new and developing more extensive peer networks) (Barris, 1986) A recent article in the Journal of Alternative and Complimentary Medicine describes how 'Kundalini Yoga includes a vast array of meditation techniques (...) including a technique useful for treating depression, focusing the mind and eliminating self destructive behaviour' (Shannahoff-Khalsa, 2004 p.96). Yoga practice and meditation could therefore potentially improve Michelle's depression. Michelle could attend one or two yoga classes with the encouragement of the OT, to see if she enjoys it. The activities she engages in must be of her choice and benefit. If yoga is not for her, the OT can explore other choices related to Michelle's interests and the local amenities. The therapist should provide as many realistic opportunities as possible (Stockwell, Duncan & Levens, 1988), and not cease to find something appropriate if the first option fails. <heading>Frames of reference and approaches appropriate to Michelle's intervention</heading>Various theoretical approaches can be integrated into the treatment of patients with anorexia nervosa, due to the complexity of this client group (Martin 1998). Specific frames of reference and treatment approaches have not been clearly established or validated, but there appears to be an emphasis on the psychoanalytical and cognitive behavioural frames of reference when working with eating-disordered patients (Henderson, 1999; Martin, 1998; Lim & Agnew, 1994). The cognitive behavioural frame of reference emphasises the link between faulty ways of thinking and feeling, with various mental disorders. A primary assumption is that if negative thoughts can be challenged and replaced by positive ones, the individual can regain a sense of control, solve problems and start to feel good (Hagedorn, 2004). In the Canadian Model of Occupational Performance, cognition is identified as a performance component which contributes to a person's ability to function competently and to their own satisfaction in a given occupational area (Gardner, 2002). Therefore, if Michelle can change her thinking patterns from not being able to think clearly, to being able to understand her negative thoughts and alter her behaviour, the belief is she will be able to function better and feel better about herself and her situation (Martin, 1998; Hagedorn, 2004). The therapeutic method for this approach will be one to one discussion and use of cognitive behavioural therapy techniques (Harries, 1992), and the use of activity to explore cognitions, for example, during cooking sessions. The style of relationship used between client and therapist in cognitive behavioural intervention strategies is the therapeutic alliance approach. This is related to the client centred frame of reference (Hagedorn, 2004). In this approach the client is seen to be the expert of their own situation and the therapist is a resource who can contribute by means of 'special knowledge, skills, and access to information or resources' (Hagedorn, 2004 p103). This links with using the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM), which is designed to be used in client centred OT practice and focuses on occupational performance. The therapist can use this assessment tool and work with Michelle to identify and explore problems, negotiate goals and decide on an action plan. Changes are measured in a client's perception of their occupational performance over the course of OT intervention (Law et al., 1998). Outcome measures for the therapeutic alliance approach are evaluated by both partners using a pre-arranged format appropriate to the situation, in Michelle's case, COPM (Hagedorn, 2004). <heading>Clinical reasoning and conclusion</heading>Clinical reasoning is present throughout the OT process, the OT has been constantly observing Michelle and her situation, making judgements about her performance and factors that positively and negatively affect it, and choosing and modifying goals and strategies according to Michelle's response (Cortellini Benamy, 1996). The OT has used her training, experience, values, theoretical foundations and subsequent clinical reasoning, to gather information and make appropriate decisions with regard to finding suitable interventions and activities for Michelle. The OT has worked with her to establish and meet goals, keeping the intervention client-centred throughout. Michelle's goals will be graded and adapted accordingly and the intervention evaluated once complete. 