<heading>Introduction</heading>In this essay I am going to define the concept of professional skills. I will look at the difference between generic and profession-specific skills. I will then focus on two specific areas: teamwork and reflection, and explore how they contribute to practice. I will draw upon my current knowledge and experience as an undergraduate Occupational Therapy student professional and will also look from a multi-professional viewpoint. <heading>Professional Skills</heading>Before I define 'profession skills', I will first give the definition of a 'professional' in the sense of the subject being talked about here. Professional means to 'display a high level of competence or skill'; something that is 'undertaken or performed by people who are paid' or 'a professional person'. A health professional is 'a person who helps in identifying or preventing or treating illness or disability'. (Collins Concise Dictionary and Thesaurus, p.762 and  URL ) 'Professional skills' are skills undertaken by a professional and encompass many various practices such as: teamwork, communication, reflection, clinical effectiveness, evidence based practice, problem solving and decision making. The list is extensive and there are many areas to consider in professional practice. The areas mentioned here are generic to all health and social care professions, whilst other areas are relevant to specific professions. For example, in a team, all professionals need good communication skills to be able to share information about a client or situation or idea, so all team members are informed and the team can work efficiently. Communication is therefore a generic skill. In comparison, a therapeutic radiographer must have the skill to be able to administer accurate doses of radiation to a tumour, whilst minimising the dose received by the surrounding tissues. This is a profession-specific skill, and is a skill only particular of a therapeutic radiographer. There can sometimes be problems due to professionals feeling under pressure to focus on both generic skills and profession-specific skills. For example, a recent article in the British Journal of Occupational Therapy describes how there have been huge changes in mental health services with the development of community care and there is a challenge for OT's to meet the needs of the clients, as well as participate in the work of the team. The Capable Practitioner (Sainsbury Centre for Mental Health, 2001, as cited in Harrison D. 2003) acknowledges that practitioners need to combine shared core competencies with profession-specific skills. OT's are clear that their role has a focus on occupational performance, but they feel pressurised by the multi-professional team to undertake generic work. (Harrison D. 2003) I will discuss this problem of overlapping roles further in the following section on teamwork. <heading>Teamwork</heading>Team working is an essential component of the effective delivery of health and social care. (Department of Health, 2001) Multi-disciplinary teams, or multi-professional teams, are common in health and social care settings. They are when groups of different professional people work together to provide a direct client-care service (Creek, 1990). It is important to work as a team, and to do this, good team working skills are required, such as communication, trust and initiative. In practice, the client is seen as being at the centre of the team, and must be involved in every stage of the service provided for him/her. Health professionals and carers should then all share equal contributions to the total service, with free flowing communication happening between all the members of the team. It is important that good communication occurs between the client and the health professionals, and also between the different professionals so as to be able to provide an efficient service. Professionals involved can include doctors, nurses, social workers, occupational therapists, physiotherapists, speech and language therapists and creative therapists. Friends and family should also be included as they are an important part of the team, providing emotional and practical support to the client in the home setting. (Creek, 1990). Individual professionals bring many attributions to a team. As well as their profession-specific skills and knowledge, they bring their values and personality, which includes personal views, characteristics and history. (Payne, 2000). All of these traits and abilities are useful skills to enable them to work in a team and bring new knowledge and ideas to it. <heading>Problems in Teamwork</heading>There are sometimes problems associated with working in a team. Kneafsey and Long (2003, p.24) describe how 'effective team working is essential to the delivery of consistent and goal-directed rehabilitation.' They look at the nurses' role in multi-disciplinary rehabilitation teams, and problems with teamwork. They talk about a two year study in which nurses and other health professionals were observed in practice and interviewed, and clients and carers were also interviewed. Three different areas were chosen for the nurses to work in, which lead to variations in the role of the nurse. The study showed that a number of challenges arose, both for the way the nurse worked with the client and for the interrelations between nurses and other team members. The study concluded that the nursing contribution to rehabilitation was well recognised by other nurses and some other team members, but nurses do not always feel valued by their colleagues. This is an example of lack of teamwork due to professionals not appreciating other team members, which may make them feel incompetent which could go on to have a negative effect on their work. As well as this, further issues and challenges for effective team working were identified, including lack of time and staff, difficulties in communication within the team and role tensions between nurse and therapist, often caused by lack of availability of therapy team members. <heading>My own experience of Teamwork</heading>I have experienced working in a team when I had full time employment in a special school, working as a learning support assistant in the special care class. The pupils were all wheelchair users with physical and learning disabilities. This was not work in a multi-professional team, but good team working skills were required. Communication between staff members was an important factor to be able to share information about the wellbeing of the pupils and about the activities they undertook. The class teacher was the leader in this situation, and it was important to listen to their instructions and advice so the school day had structure and organisation and the pupils received the correct care. Teamwork was an important skill and the staff had to work together constantly to get things done, for example, all participating in the organisation of an art activity and gathering the materials, making sure the pupils were in the correct positions in their standing frames and so on. Teamwork was also essential in practical situations such as hoisting a pupil from their wheelchair to a changing bed, since two people are always needed for this action. As mentioned above in the 'Problems in Teamwork' section, there was also a lack of availability of therapy team members in the special school. Occupational therapists and physiotherapists only visited the school one or two days per week, meaning that staff not trained in these professions had to carry out their activities. <heading>Teamwork skills</heading>Adair (1986. Cited from Payne M. 2000) argues that individuals work must meet their own needs, in addition to satisfying the team. I think the points the author mentions are good examples of skills for teamwork and sum up areas I have previously mentioned: Trust - health professionals must trust in themselves and in others in the team. Autonomy - members need to be part of the team and also have distinctiveness from it. Initiative - members need to feel that they can act on their own decisions in their specialist area of work. Industry - the team members want to work, and have profession-specific activities and skills which are valid and worthwhile. Integrity - people want to act consistently according to beliefs and values they have. Security - team members need others to understand their role and that they are making a valid contribution to the team. They also need to understand other professionals' roles in the team. These points sum up the importance of being an individual within a team and sharing personal attributes and skills, and also the importance of having knowledge about, and trust in, other professionals within the team. All team members should practice these points and skills to make an effective team. Payne (2000) also makes the points that: team members should be prepared to learn from others specialist skills and share their own; be prepared to take on and share responsibility for managing particular aspects of work; allow authoritative figures to give orders where necessary and possibly move around the team members. They should also be prepared to learn from their mistakes, and reflect on their practice so as to improve and develop it. (I will discuss reflection further in the next section). Teamwork has many aspects and skills attributed to it, which a team must carry out to be an effective one. <heading>Reflection</heading>'Reflection' and 'reflective practice' have become common terms in healthcare settings in recent years. Taylor (2000) describes life as a source of reflection, and says how human life is about day-to-day existence and the choices people make in relation to their lives and other people and events. Reflection relates to both our own everyday lives and professional practice. We often reflect on events and occurrences by looking back on them, thinking about them, and about what we could do better in the future. We may reflect by thinking about things autonomously, writing a reflective log or diary, or speaking with others. Ghaye et al (1996, p.7) say that ' we believe that more work needs to be done on...ways of reflecting on practice to the quality of patient care...we need to consider the impact of reflection on the quality of practice and the benefits it offers caregivers' clients. The authors stress their belief that more thought needs to be put into reflection in practice, and emphasise the importance of reflection on the quality of practice. <heading>Models of Reflective practice</heading>Ghaye and Lillyman (1997) talk about five models of the reflective process. I feel that the first model, 'Structured', gives a good overview of professional reflective practice. It describes reflective practitioners accessing, making sense of, and subsequently learning through their experiences to become more effective in their practice. (Johns, 1994a. Cited from Ghaye and Lillyman, 1997). The 'Iterative' models also give a good picture of the concept of reflection. They are based upon the idea that 'the reflective process is most appropriately described as a 'cycle' ' (Ghaye and Lilliman, p.26). The reflective cycle by Gibbs (1988. Cited in Ghaye and Lilliman, 1997) is often used: <figure/>Health professionals can use the models of reflective practice I have mentioned to actively think about, evaluate and make practical changes in their work. However, the process is not always systematic, or like the cycle illustrated above and can be muddled at each stage. One should not expect it to be straightforward as health and social care can be complex and multifaceted. <heading>Reflection in Decision Making and Problem Solving</heading>Health professionals have to constantly make decisions in practice to reach clinical or practical goals, and they may face problems on the way. According to Wilkinson (as cited in Taylor, 2000) the cognitive skills required for critical thinking include decision making and problem solving methods. 'Problem solving involves assessing, planning, implementing and evaluating the best course of action in given situations so that the most effective care can be negotiated' (Taylor, 2000, p.14) Reflection is an important process in all of these stages. When assessing, a Health Care Professional may need to reflect on the information given to gain a better understanding of the client or situation. When planning, they may need to reflect on anything that may have not gone to plan in previous similar situations. When implementing, they may need to reflect on their practice as they undertake it. Evaluation is reflection in itself, in looking what has happened, what could be improved and what went well. <heading>My own experience of using Reflection</heading>I have had experience of reflecting in module workshops for my Occupational Therapy course. For example, we did an arts and crafts activity making cards and gift tags, and then reflected on the experience afterwards: I found the exercise interesting, and as well as getting ideas for activities we could do with clients in the future when we are qualified OT's, we were able to experience how it felt to do the activity for ourselves and think about how it feels to do it. Reflecting made me think about what parts of my body I used for the activity, how I was creative with the materials available and got involved and absorbed in the activity. I became aware of how accidents can be developed into new techniques, and that simple designs and materials can give effective outcomes. This process of reflecting was a useful skill to use to think around the activity and look at it from different angles. It made me consider how I felt, what the environment was like and what I needed to do for the activity, physically and cognitively. Thinking about these things enabled me to make sense of why we undertook this activity, and to learn through the experience. <heading>Conclusion</heading>In this essay I have discussed the concept of professional skills, including generic and profession-specific skills and problems associated with professionals feeling under pressure to focus on both of these areas in practice, and feeling their roles often overlap. I then focused on two specific areas of teamwork and reflection, defining and explaining them with examples from other authors and from my own experience. In the teamwork section, I looked at the importance of good teamwork and what individuals can bring to a team. I then went on to look at problems in teamwork and specific skills professionals within a team should take on. I concluded that there are many different aspects and skills involved in effective teamwork. In this section, I also mentioned in two places how there was a lack of availability of therapy team members. As an undergraduate Occupational Therapist I feel concerned about this area and I hope that I can help to change the outlook of this situation, and that therapy team members will be more widely accessible and better represented in the future. In the reflection section I explained how reflective practice is now common in health and social care, and illustrated the reflective process with models, including the commonly used reflective cycle by Gibbs (1988). I looked at reflection in practice; in decision making and problem solving, and used an example of my own experience of reflecting in a module workshop for my Occupational Therapy course. Writing about reflection has enabled me to gain a better understanding of the subject, as it was previously new to me. I found researching and writing this essay interesting and informative, and the points I have covered will be useful for my future practice as a health professional. 