Form is the opposite of 'paraphrasable content'; it means how something is said as opposed to what is said. It can also be interpreted as genre or literary type, in this case the novel form. That said, in his 'Ulysses, Order and Myth' T. S. Eliot dismisses the novel form as 'simply the expression of an age which had not sufficiently lost all form to feel the need of something stricter'. The quote from Eliot in the essay question refers to the 'mythical method' - a form that consists of parallels linking the ancient past and the chaotic present. He argues that the novel form is unsuitable for accurately representing the experience of modern life, 'because the era that made it possible is undergoing a crisis and has been transformed into 'a panorama of futility and anarchy''. In part agreement to Eliot, this essay proposes that during the modern era fiction began to abandon imposed form in an attempt to express the freedom of contemporary life. But it does not reject all form per se; Alan Friedman notes that 'since the taut and highly conceptualized structures of James, we are often confronted by a fiction whose frames, while mattering greatly, are largely hidden'. In the essay I am going to consider: 1) logical progression and conclusion (or lack of), 2) choice of narrator, 3) the motif, 4) stream of consciousness and 5) form as genre in Conrad's Heart of Darkness, Ford's The Good Soldier and Joyce's A Portrait. <fnote>T. S. Eliot, 'Ulysses, Order and Myth', The Dial, 75.5 (1923), p. 483. </fnote><fnote>Franco Moretti, Signs Taken For Wonders, (New York: Shocken Books, 1983), p.211. </fnote><fnote>Alan Friedman, Multivalence: The Moral Quality of Form in the Modern Novel (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1978), p.90. </fnote>A more encompassing definition of form includes structural and textural form. Structure is the plot, story or argument of a text, while texture refers to diction, syntax and metre. 'Since structure is a matter of arrangement, it includes the formal ordering of the content in time', and this leads us to examine form as a means of ordering the experience of modern life. E. M. Forster's definition of a story as chronological, a 'narrative of events arranged in their time sequence', renders it the most basic method of ordering experience. In contrast, modernist texts tend to reject the simple form of the story. Instead many employ a non-chronological or fugal time sequence - this is certainly true for The Good Soldier and A Portrait. Although the latter traces Stephen's life experiences chronologically, from childhood through adolescence to maturity, these are punctuated by flashbacks and reflections. The Good Soldier meanwhile deliberately disorders the experience of modern life. Its structure is best described as random and fragmented, as Dowell forewarns in chapter 2; <fnote>Peter Childs and Roger Fowler, The Routledge Dictionary of Literary Terms (Abingdon: Routledge, 2006), p.92. </fnote><fnote>E. M. Forster, Aspects of the Novel (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 1927), p.87. </fnote><quote>I don't know how it is best to put this thing down - whether it would be better to try and tell the story from the beginning, as if it were a story; or whether to tell it from this distance of time, as it reached me from the lips of Leonora or from those of Edward himself.</quote><fnote>Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier (London, Penguin Books Ltd, 2002), p.19. </fnote>In fact he attempts both simultaneously, resulting in confusion and obscurity. But rather than being a sign of Ford's inadequate authorial skill, this illustrates that modern life is too chaotic (in Eliot's terms an 'immense panorama') to make sense of by attempting to order it. Likewise, the structural and textural form of A Portrait is broken up by allusion and documentation, for example extracts from nursery rhymes, songs, or from the bible, and references to Shelley and Nash. At one point there is a letter format, as Stephen imagines writing a short letter to his mother, and his diary extract in the last chapter is not to be forgotten. Therefore Aristotle's notion of a linear beginning-middle-end plot sequence is absent from all three texts. Conrad and Ford criticise the novel form for being 'straight forward, whereas in your gradual making acquaintance with your fellows you never do go straight forward'. Alternatively Conrad, Ford and Joyce express the experience of modern life as a continual cycle. Heart of Darkness is in its most literal sense a journey that ends where it starts. The crew on board the Nellie are stationary throughout and consequently do not make any progress. Although Marlow progresses psychologically through a journey into the self, his physical journey is still mapped by a cycle, from the Thames to the Belgian Congo and back. In The Good Soldier the reader is told the final outcome at the beginning; we are informed of Florence's death no later than in the second paragraph, of Edward's in the fourth, and of the affair by the fourth page. In this respect the beginning-middle-end structure is reversed. Towards the end of his narrative Dowell remarks 'so here I am very much where I started thirteen years ago', indicating that despite all that has happened he has made little if any situational progress. The cycle structure adopted by the texts is significant, as it reflects Eliot's concerns about the futility of contemporary history. The only meaningful progression, if any, is personal and psychological, perhaps at the expense of societal progress. <fnote>Ford Madox Ford, Joseph Conrad: A Personal Remembrance (London: Duckworth, 1924), p.129. </fnote><fnote>Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 2002), p.185. </fnote>A cyclical pattern is clear in A Portrait, as Stephen's process of self-realisation is structured by a series of epiphanies - recurring flashes of intellectual clarity linked to a sense of light. Each chapter builds up to the epiphany as a final climax, only to be undermined in the next chapter. For example in a prostitute's 'warm and lightsome' room at the end of chapter 2 Stephen feels as though 'he had suddenly become strong and fearless and sure of himself'. Yet at the beginning of chapter 3 we are told that 'the stars began to crumble' and 'a cold lucid indifference reigned in his soul'. The fact that the truth is only seen momentarily (in this case during an epiphany), and that it can turn out to be false, supports the concept of partial reality. Similarly the message integral to Heart of Darkness, 'The horror! The horror!', is described as 'the appalling face of a glimpsed truth'. Partiality is a significant issue in modernist texts, and is foregrounded by the use of first-person narrators. <fnote>James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd, 1965), p.106. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.108. </fnote><fnote>Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 1973), p.101. </fnote>For example The Good Soldier's narrator John Dowell is considerably unreliable and one of the least knowledgeable characters in the story he is telling. By using an unreliable narrator Ford dissociates both himself as author from his protagonist and us as reader from the story, an effect Conrad also reaches, but by different means. The opening of Heart of Darkness is spoken by an anonymous frame narrator to distance the reader from Marlow's story, including its implied message from Kurtz. In both cases the reader is placed further from the truth, and on a more general note this amplifies concerns about certainty in modern society. The lack of resolution in the texts has a similar disconcerting effect. A Portrait has no definite ending, as Stephen is preparing for exile, but it starts with one of the most clichéd openings; 'Once upon a time...'. The Good Soldier finishes moments before Edward Ashburnham's death, something Dowell seems to add merely as an afterthought. Heart of Darkness ends by returning to the darkness - 'the tranquil waterway...seemed to lead into the heart of an immense darkness'. Conrad's ending is disconcerting, particularly as he uses darkness to symbolise obscurity and uncertainty. The light/dark contrast runs throughout the novel, and it is to the concept of theme as a means of structural cohesion that we will now turn. <fnote>Ibid., p.111. </fnote>A motif - a recurring theme, image, idea or symbol - can be an aspect of structural or textural form. Joyce uses many in A Portrait, such as the epiphany that has already been discussed. Another is water; in the first chapter Stephen plays with the hot and cold taps, and remembers the cold, slimy water in the square ditch. The aromatic motif of the 'smell of air and rain' (p.13) is repeated much later in the phrase 'fair rainfragrant hair' (p.248), and in the last chapter a cup of tea reminds Stephen of 'the dark turfcoloured water of the bath in Clongowes'. The motif links ideas thematically rather than logically, and it closely coincides with the stream of consciousness technique that can be identified in The Good Soldier and A Portrait. <fnote>James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (Middlesex, Penguin Books Ltd, 1965), p.188. </fnote>Ezra Pound's instruction to 'make it new' led to the emergence of experimental literary forms, a defining feature of modernism. An example of an organic form to originate from the modernist era is stream of consciousness; a technique that aims to capture the 'incessant shower of innumerable atoms' (thoughts, images or sensations) that are caught by 'an ordinary mind on an ordinary day'. The form's emphasis on an interior monologue is related to Freud's theory of psychoanalysis at the time, particularly the concepts of the unconscious mind and free association. For example, A Portrait opens in medias res (in Stephen's memory) with the beginning of a nursery story. Stephen then recalls that 'his father told him that story: his father looked at him through a glass: he had a hairy face'. The sentence is broken up by colons into snatches of information that resemble rapid flashes of thought. These sentence fragments cannot be located in a time or place, but are instead connected by their subject (Stephen's father), and succeed in creating a rough sketch of his appearance and relationship to Stephen. Yet as there is no instruction from an omnipotent narrator to the reader, it is harder to separate Stephen's internal perception from the external action. <fnote>Virginia Woolf, 'Modern Fiction', The Common Reader (1925) cited in Peter Faulkner, ed., A Modernist Reader (London: B. T. Batsford Ltd, 1986), p.108. </fnote><fnote>James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd, 1965), p.1. </fnote>The absence of a controlling narrator leads us to modernism's preference for showing rather than telling, or in other terms; 'dramatized narration compared with the renarrating Plato called pure diégesis'. Plato and Aristotle contrasted diégesis with mimesis - eliminating narratorial commentary so that 'readers feel they are being shown the events and the characters, not merely being told about them'. Henry James held this as an ideal in modern narratology. In some respects Conrad and Ford do not conform to this ideal, as the reader is constantly aware of the narrator's presence. Conrad uses a layered frame narration and significantly breaks the frame on more than one occasion. This foregrounds the act of story-telling, something Ford does through the self-conscious narration in The Good Soldier. Dowell frequently refers to his position as narrator and explicitly directs his story to a narratee; 'You, the listener, sit opposite me. But you are so silent. You don't tell me anything'. Imposing a story on a silent listener might seem more in tune with the concept of telling (diégesis) rather than the theory of mimesis. But at the same time Heart of Darkness and The Good Soldier use a first-person character-as-narrator, meaning they play integral roles in the stories they tell. This is important, as the immediacy of this type of narration is truer to our experience of life. <fnote>Arne Melberg, Theories of Mimesis, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), p.17 </fnote><fnote>Chris Baldick, The Modern Movement (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), p.157. </fnote><fnote>Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 2002), p.21. </fnote>Another point to make here is that the first-person narrator is able to articulate his or her personal experience of modern life. An emphasis on the self rather than society is a key feature of modernity, and this manifests itself in the modern novel through 'psychological realism' as opposed to 'social realism'. Conrad, Ford and Joyce concentrate on the inner minds of their protagonists, often in isolation from their social circumstances. On returning from his journey Marlow recollects; <quote>I found myself back in the sephulchral city resenting the sight of people hurrying through the streets... They trespassed upon my thoughts. They were intruders whose knowledge of life was to me an irritating pretence, because I felt so sure they could not possibly know the things I knew. </quote><fnote>Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 1973), p.102. </fnote>These lines suffice to highlight the tension between the individual and society in Conrad's Heart of Darkness, an opposition marked by the separate pronouns 'I' and 'they'. Not only is Marlow alienated from others by his knowledge, he sees society as a threat, describing anonymous passers-by as trespassers and intruders. Similarly, in The Good Soldier Dowell tells us he has exempted himself from social interaction; 'I don't like society - much... No one visits me for I visit no one'.. And finally in the closing pages of A Portrait Stephen affirms to Cranly; 'I will not serve that in which I no longer believe, whether it call itself my home, my fatherland, or my church'. As a result of disillusionment he no longer sees himself as a part of these social structures. <fnote>Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 2002), p.197. </fnote><fnote>James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd, 1965), p.269. </fnote>An importance on the self rather than society is also reflected in the egoistic language present in all three texts. The term could be applied to the last quote taken from Heart of Darkness. In The Good Soldier Dowell imagines that his experience is on the same scale as 'the sack of a city or the falling to pieces of a people'. And during the sermon on hell and punishment in A Portrait, Stephen feels as though 'every word of it was for him. Against his sin, foul and secret, the whole wrath of God was aimed'. However, perhaps the aim is not merely to be egocentric, but to accurately represent what it feels like. <fnote>Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 2002), p.14. </fnote><fnote>James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd, 1965), p.121. </fnote>Finally, Conrad, Ford and Joyce emphasize character rather than plot. Proceeding the modern era many realist texts exhibit a carefully structured plot, but often at the expense of their characters. Here Forster's separation of character into 'flat' and 'round' is helpful. Round characters are a closer representation of real people, and capture our multiple or fragmented identities in modern life. The protagonists of the three texts in question all fall into the 'round' category. In Heart of Darkness one of the central themes is the alter-ego or the dark side of the self. Like society as a whole, character is no longer static or absolute. It is left up to the reader to decide if characters can be labelled as good or bad for example. In the decline of a moral code in modern society, the distinction has become blurred. In The Good Soldier Leonora is called the 'slightly deceitful' heroine, an antithetical phrase considering a hero or heroine is defined by noble qualities. The same issue is present in Heart of Darkness, as neither Marlow nor Kurtz embody the traditional heroic figure. In many respects Kurtz can be seen as an anti-hero, for he is described to us as being in a state of fatal self-destruction. It is interesting that Joyce discarded his title Stephen Hero, an earlier draft of A Portrait. Perhaps this is because the hero is inextricably linked to the epic or re-telling form of narration. Let us look at form in relation to genre, for example the classifications of tragedy/comedy/satire or the modes of lyric/epic/dramatic. To structuralist critics each genre has a specific set of codes and formal characteristics, and these help generate reader expectations. That said, modernist texts deliberately aim to break reader expectations. In the modern era traditional rigid forms, and this includes genre codes and characteristics, are seen as constraining and unhelpful in expressing reality. This literary anarchy is justified by Virginia Woolf in her essay on 'Modern Fiction', she states; 'if a writer...could base his work upon his own feeling, and not upon convention, there would be no plot, no comedy, no tragedy, no love interest or catastrophe in the accepted style'. Significantly in The Good Soldier Dowell rejects the title of 'The Ashburnham Tragedy'. He calls his narration instead 'The Saddest Story', 'just because it is so sad... There is about it none of the elevation that accompanies tragedy; there is about it no nemesis, no destiny'. Here he stresses that the story is not planned or structured, unlike fictional tragedy, into acts of exposition, rising action, climax, falling action and dénouement or catastrophe. Instead The Good Soldier consists of the coincidental tragedy of real life. <fnote>M. H. Abrams, A Glossary of Literary Terms, 7th ed, (Massachusetts: Heinle & Heinle, 1999), pp.109-110. </fnote><fnote>Virginia Woolf, 'Modern Fiction', The Common Reader (1925) cited in Peter Faulkner, ed., A Modernist Reader (London: B. T. Batsford Ltd, 1986), p.108. </fnote><fnote>Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 2002), p.132. </fnote>Texts can also be separated into the sub-genres of lyrical, epic and dramatic forms. Joyce experiments by using all three in A Portrait to create a multi-faceted reality. Through his protagonist Stephen Dedalus, Joyce describes the dramatic form as an artistic ideal; 'the esthetic image in the dramatic form is life purified in and reprojected from the human imagination'. In this form 'the personality of the artist...finally refines itself out of existence, impersonalizes itself, so to speak'. In comparison, Stephen sees the lyrical form as simply 'an instant of emotion' (p.233), similar to the emphasis on sensations and emotional states at the beginning. In contrast the middle of A Portrait closely resembles the epic form. There is more of a focus on external action, such as the full sermon on hell, but importantly Stephen is still at the centre of this. On a textural scale, the sentences become more complex and fluid, rather than the short fragments of the first chapter. By manipulating form and style Joyce traces Stephen's intellectual and emotional progress, through lyric, epic and finally dramatic form. The diary section at the end of the last chapter attempts to reach Joyce's ideal form of art. It is interesting that his idea of the dramatic form differs from its established definition - traditionally in drama the characters do all the talking, but in Stephen's diary extract there is no recognisable direct speech. Nevertheless this first-person, organic form functions as a precursor to the stream of consciousness technique Joyce perfected in Ulysses. <fnote>James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd, 1965), p.233. </fnote><fnote>Ibid., p.233. </fnote>All the aspects of form this essay has considered relate to an ideological contrast in the break from the stable past to an uncertain future. This brings us back to Eliot's 'mythical method' introduced in the question. In particular Heart of Darkness links the ancient past and chaotic present; Africa is like 'the earliest beginnings of the world' (p.48), whereas in the 'sephulchral city' 'people are hurrying through the streets' (p.103). The immediacy of the closing diary format of A Portrait separates past from present by grounding the rest of the story firmly in the past. It makes sense then, if the modern present is so different from the past, to use a different quality of form to express our experience of it. Imposed form is inept for ordering or articulating life as it is now understood - 'a mysterious arrangement of merciless logic for a futile purpose'. <fnote>Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness (London: Penguin Books Ltd, 1973), p.100. </fnote>