Since the late of 1990s, the merger and acquisition has been a trend and popular operation of media industry, including international publishing to expand its business and markets. Big media giants, such as Time Warner, are all built on a principle that size matters in media businesses. <heading>The fate of Time Warner Book Group (TWBG) </heading>At the beginning of the new millennium Time Warner and America Online (AOL) announced a $250bn (£171bn) merger. AOL represented the Internet media, Time Warner represented the traditional media, including publishing. This 'millennium marriage' aimed at creating the world's biggest online media company by bringing together dominant players from the worlds of old and new media. However, with the Internet bubbles burst, the shining star, AOL, like a comet, dropped off from 'the heaven' sooner after the merger. Its market value was deadly shrunk, which led the new company in a heavy debt. Balancing the debt became one of main tasks after the foundation of new company. TWBG became an earlier disposal section. From the earlier of 2003 TWBG was posed to sell and this deal was not traded until 6th Feb. 2006. Before further discussing the future of TWBG, it is necessary to review why this merger got an unexpected result from the view of international business: The culture clash: New-media and old-media grew up from different environment of economy and technology, which resulted in different operational idea and behaviour, i.e. AOL featured as over-enthusiastic, aggressive but Time Warner was staid, persistent etc. AOL was a rocket company with few tangible assets while Time Warner was a long-term accumulated company with real, calculable assets such as a cable network, a film library, publishing, and television stations. The article attached shows that traditional media has sustainable and profitable form of content than anything to be found online. The book, Merger of Titans, Clash of Culture, also presented a very detailed analysis of this case. (Business Week;7/14/2003, p20-20, p1 graph1) New media dominated operation was risk-taking. Once Time Warner bidding with other 3 companies for North Americans rights of memoirs by Jack Welch, the chief executive of General Electric, at an advance of $7.1 million (Pounds 4.7 million). 'The deal is thought to be the biggest signed for a non-fiction book' (The times, Jul 15, 2000 pg24). Lack of an overall strategy for development of various business divisions with synergies of internal resources. TWBG '...has not spelt out how it could use AOL. While much has been written about the impact of online distribution on the publishing world through websites such as Amazon.com, ...' (The Guardian, Jul 24, 2000 pg. 54). The bad business led discrepancy and frequent change of senior managing staff. This is why Mr. Carl Icahn, a veteran corporate raider, keeps accusing of various issues on business strategy and management and giving his suggestions to top managers in Time Warner. <heading>The future of Time Warner Book Group in Hachette Livre</heading>With the announcement of Arnaud Nourry, Chairman and CEO of Hachette Livre, TWBG will join the Hachette Livre Group which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Lagardère SCA, one of France based companies. It mainly publishes in three key languages, i.e. French, Spanish and English. TWBG US will become a subsidiary of the newly formed corporation, Hachette Livre USA. TWBG UK and Australian businesses will become subsidiaries of Hachette Livre UK. Compared with working under the shadow of spinning off, joining Hachette Livre would be, theoretically, good to TWBG. The reasons are: Both sides can benefit each other. Hachette Livre is ambitious to be one of leading international publishing groups and overtake its rival - Random House in UK. The acquisition of TWBG will increase its core competition and market share in UK, and also provides a platform to expand in USA market. Under the support of new parent company, TWBG will recover its strengthen as one of leading trade publishers; and enhance its market reach and finance in order to exploit the greater potentiality of brand. A friendly and loose working can be secured environment. There are not any significant changes as a result of deal. Hachette has a reputation for benign parenting. Hachette has a policy of operating its worldwide businesses in a devolved, federal structure, supportive of existing management and staff. (interview with Terry Jackson, LBF, Mar 7 2006) Business is based on the continuation of Imprint individually. But it calls for competing over books. Possibly this will be a way to encourage staff working innovatively. Administration and logistics will be controlled centrally. This is taking into account of Economies of scale. Hachette is a France-based company, but TWBG is UK- and USA-based companies. Culture difference exists avoidably. Facts show that Continental legal system is different from Anglo-Saxon system, which results in a big difference on copyright law. From this point of view, it is wise for Hachette to take the federal structure in order to secure the development of business and reduce the ineffectiveness from culture clash. TWBG has been changed its parent companies twice passively. Once his direct parent took him into a new company, it looked safe and secured; however, he was spun off by the company partially created by its parent. Now he was adapted by his step parent. Who can predict its future? Times are changing. It is not the time to judge successful or unsuccessful operation according to the size in media business. This is why Viacom took initiatives in splitting its company into two parts. Just as Mr Redstone said: 'Sometimes divorce is better than marriage' (Economist, June 18 th - 24 2005, pg68). No matter which model is chosen, no matter it is bigger or not, as long as it is suitable to develop the relevant business with sustainability and make profits, it will be good. 