Deirdre is 65 years old and has depression after the death of her husband a year ago, from cancer. She did not respond to anti-depressant medication but has responded well to ECT (Electro-convulsive therapy). However, ECT is frequently helpful in the short term, although relapse rates are high over the long term (Fave & Rosenbaum, 1995, cited in Richards & Perri, 2002). <heading>Gathering and analysing information</heading>I would need to interview Deirdre and the other health professionals who have already been working with her. When interviewing Deirdre I would ask her opinion of how she is doing and how she feels she is responding to the ECT treatment. I would use both standardised and non-standardised tests with Deirdre to vary the ways I could gather information. Standardised tests would be helpful when measuring Deirdre's levels of depression and performance, for example the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (Law et al., 1994, cited in Turner et al., 2003). Non-standardised tests would be helpful as they are more flexible, involve less administration and allow me to focus more on functional ability in her home environment. For example, observing her daily living skills in her home or an ADL lab, co-ordination, attention span, concentration and memory. This would help me with assessing how soon she can reach her overarching aim of going home. I could also use instruments such as the Modified Interest Checklist (Kielhofner & Neville, 1983, cited in Kielhofner, 2002) to learn more about which leisure activities Deirdre would be interested in, to help her re-establish some interests and roles. <heading>Defining problems</heading>General areas of problem and/or need for Deirdre include coping with grief after the death of her husband, possible relapse after her ECT treatment, living alone and having no family nearby. In addition she is having memory and concentration difficulties after the ECT and needs to establish some more interests and roles. From the COPM I would be able to identify her difficulties with self-care, productivity and leisure, for example, difficulties in social circumstances, problems in self-care routines and household management. As her memory and concentration are an issue, consideration of her environment would be very important. This is because she lives alone and if her memory is hazy and is having difficulty with her concentration, she could potentially put herself in dangerous situations without even realising, for example leaving the gas on. As the case study states Deirdre is in the church choir, therefore I have assumed she may uphold some religious beliefs which, as a health professional, I would need to be sensitive to. In 1998, Koenig, George and Peterson, studied 87 medically ill older adults, many of which also suffered from serious depression. They found the highly religious patients were more likely to have a quick recovery from their depression, possibly due to the "meaning and purpose of life" concept. <heading>Planning and preparing intervention</heading>An appropriate overarching aim for Deirdre would be being discharged home. This is an aim she has expressed openly that she wants and I feel it is achievable once appropriate measures have been taken to ensure Deirdre will be able to cope alone and live as independently as possible. The main approach I would use with Deirdre is the rehabilitation approach. Deirdre's long term aim would be to have an independent self-maintenance routine to prepare her for going home. To reach this long term aim, I think appropriate short term goals would be: Be able to prepare and cook a meal for herself, within three weeks Have a self-care routine, within four weeks Be able to expand her leisure time and interaction with others by going to the library and spending more time with neighbours and church friends, within five weeks <heading>Implementing intervention</heading>I would ask Deirdre about any problem areas she has with cooking and focus on those, for example cooking for two instead of one or forgetting how long food has been cooking for. I would then make adaptations for these things, for example, scales and timers. If Deidre lacked motivation to concentrate I could use grading by beginning the task and letting her finish it to give her a sense of satisfaction. This goal would improve her memory and concentration as well as allowing her to be independent in her home and hopefully it will help her to feel better about living on her own and only cooking for herself. Ask Deirdre what her usual self-care routine consists off and possibly observe her if I needed to. With Deirdre I would then make a detailed, easy to remember plan. I would put the plan into stages with time allocations. I would also make a copy for Deirdre to keep in her bathroom/bedroom, to help her remember. I would work with Deirdre daily to help her gain a regular routine and encourage her to take pride in her self-care. This is a very important aspect of self-concept, which she has already begun to develop by getting her hair done. I would encourage Deirdre to pursue her interest in reading and take advantage of the people she has around her. I would go with to the local library to encourage her to find a new book to read. Reading would help increase her concentration and also be intellectually stimulation which will help her. This could lead onto Deidre joining a book or other local club which would help her expand her social circle. Deirdre's neighbours seem to be very supportive and friendly, which I would advise Deirdre to make use of. Possibly by gradually inviting them over if it didn't cause too much distress. Also beginning to resume roles within her church would be advisable. <heading>Evaluating outcomes</heading>To evaluate the effectiveness of my intervention for Deirdre I would complete another COPM assessment after approximately five weeks to see if she has reached her long term aim. I would do activities that involve remembering sequences and information to evaluate her memory. I would also see how she responds to situations that involve concentration. I would also liaise closely with the other health professionals working with Deirdre to gain their opinion. I would also like to keep having brief regular contact with her until I feel she is able to be living as independently as possible. 