<heading>Surf and Phone on POTS (Plain Old Telephone System)</heading>Computers are today communication devices which hold promises of shaping all our day-to-day tasks; the Internet opening up huge potential. It is possible, over standard telephone lines, to simultaneously chat and surf at the same time. How? My main sources used were "How the Internet works" by P. Gralla, published by Que in the USA in 2001 and "How DSL Works" from WebReference First, data is divided into packets. Earlier technology used the modem to convert that from digital to analogue and vice-versa, to be transmitted over POTS. Today, technologies such as DSL and ISDN both send and receive information in digital signals via another modem found in the telephone company. Standard, analogue, voice calls use only a small portion of the potential bandwidth of a copper wire. DSL 'divides' the line into 3 channels. This is not of course a physical division, but simply the use of modulation techniques to separate the signals: voice communication, sending, and reception of data; thus allowing a phone call and surfing to take place simultaneously, 24/7. DSL technology, however, requires the computer to be in a specified radius (dependent on the speed and type of DSL implemented) from the telephone company and its DSL modem. This is not usually a problem in urban areas but could become a barrier to wider access to internet for rural areas. ISDN uses dedicated lines and specialist equipment, but the same splitting method as DSL, to provide simultaneous telephone and surfing services. This could be useful for places where DSL technology would be too costly or not available. However, ISDN relies on an outside power outlet making the network vulnerable in case of power failure. As better alternatives are developed, customers will benefit from a wider range of choices and get a better run for their money. <heading>The Looming Threat of Email Viruses</heading>Computer viruses are program files which exploits weaknesses of computer systems and harms them - filling up memory space, deleting files, disrupting the sequence of execution, popping up annoying windows etc. Emails being popular and vulnerable are a star target for virus writers. The sources used where "How the Internet works" by P. Gralla, published by Que in the USA in 2001 and "How email viruses work" from WebReference. The most popular form of email virus known is file attachments. While downloading it, a virus can actually be downloaded to your computer. The virus runs itself incognito, copies itself to your hard-disk, sends itself from contacts in your address book, appearing to be from you with randomly generated subject line and body text. But viruses can also be downloaded when HTML email is being displayed. The virus can stop you from updating your anti-virus and replicate itself. A new virus named 'Fizzer' can even randomly generate addresses. Outlook Express is popular, though it can be easily infected by virus writers who target it more compared to others on the market. Outlook Express has many inbuilt functions that make 'email browsing' easy - the mass mailing facilities, spell checker, automatic time-set mail, etc. Being in the Microsoft family, coming with most Windows Operating Systems, it has common functions which allow users to use a consistent interface. It allows emails to be viewed using HTML. Emails can also be managed locally rather than via a host such as Hotmail. Alternative software does not receive enough advertising to make people switch - even though many are more secure. Email viruses will find ways of spreading around using new techniques. Updating one's anti-virus software would be a good way of protecting your computer. Being cautious with emails received is another. You never know who is out there! <heading>Reflective Conclusion</heading>The books explaining the functioning of the internet are numerous, and so were the web sites. However, I had to find the particular paragraphs that explained the use of the telephone systems for communication and most sources went into generalist information and explained more how topologies and protocols were implemented. Finding information about email virus and Outlook Express was easier being a concern in today's Internet society. A longer report would have given more technical details, but I tried to include the most important points. Being generally curious about the way things work and an avid Internet user, it was a pleasure to complement the background knowledge I had, and I plan to read on more. I used many websites and books for references and had to filter which information would be useful for the reports. But the final references were those which had the most relevant and coherent information. 