John Dryden argued that poetry written in blank verse was in fact not poetry: 'poetry needed rhyme like the state needed a king." In this essay I will look at two poems concerned with a similar subject matter, one engaged in the 'bondage' of a regular rhyme scheme and the other in the 'ancient liberty' of free verse. <fnote>Cited by Michelle O'Callaghan, approaching poetry lecture-31.01.05 </fnote><fnote>Milton, cited by Michelle O'Callaghan, approaching poetry lecture- 31.01.05 </fnote>The first of these is B. Jonson's 'On My First Son.' In this poem, the grief of a father who's lost his son is strictly contained within the limits of a regular rhyme scheme. This 'order, regularity, skill, and art' is characteristic of the poetry of the time. Jonson's use of heroic couplets enables him to present each pair of lines as a self contained syntactic unit. This has the effect of maintaining the momentum of the poem. For the most part, the poem is written in iambic pentameter, which is the 'most popular metrical line' in English poetry. However Jonson makes a brief break from this in line three: <fnote>A. de Tocqueville, cited in handout, week 5. 'Approaching Poetry: Free Verse' </fnote><fnote>Ferguson, Salter, Stallworthy, The Norton Anthology of Poetry (U.S.A, Norton & Company, Inc. 1970) 4th Edition, introduction. </fnote><quote> 'Seven years thou 'wert lent to me, and I the pay,'</quote>The first two feet in this line are anapaestic. The addition of two extra syllables in this line slightly alters the beat of the poem, maintaining the interest of the reader. It also has the effect of suggesting Jonson's difficulty at presenting his grief within such a tight metrical scheme. Jonson makes use of caesura throughout the poem, with lines like: <quote> 'O could I loose all father now! For why Will man lament the state he should envy,</quote>By fracturing the lines in this manner within the regular iambic pentameter of the poem, Jonson is clearly showing the distress he feels at loosing his eldest son. He also uses enjambment in this extract, flowing the lines into each other in order to maintain the pace of the poem. He is extending the sentence concerned with the thought that he should be pleased for his son rather than 'lamenting' his death, showing that while he can reason with himself, his emotions are beyond rational control. There is little figurative language in this poem. However, Jonson uses the metaphor of his son being 'lent' to him, and his having to 'pay' for this loan on his son's seventh birthday. He uses another metaphor towards the end of the poem, suggesting that his son was his 'best piece of poetry.' Jonson uses sibilance with 'best piece,' and coupled with the meaning of the metaphor, this helps to make the language both ornamental and fundamental to the meaning of the poem. The second poem is J. O'Callaghan's 'Pleeeeeeeeease.' Unlike Jonson's poem, this is written in the style of free verse. The breaks in this poem are determined 'entirely by syntax and sense." O'Callaghan makes consistent use of enjambment throughout the poem, with the only punctuation coming in the form of a question mark to end the poem. Like Jonson, O'Callaghan's poem is addressed to someone who has died, and by ending the poem with a question O'Callaghan leaves the meaning of the poem hanging in the air, emphasising that it can never be answered. The poem is both aural and visual in its structure; although the line length is mixed, when it is laid out on the page you can see how the lines are shortest at the beginning and end of the poem and longest towards the middle. This has the effect of showing the speaker getting lost in reminiscence as she gets into the poem. The lines are stichic, which stresses the flow of consciousness that is suggested by the lack of punctuation and use of enjambment. However, there is a strong relation between lineation and syntax, with each line presenting a separate thought about an action. This maintains the integrity of the structure of the poem, and makes it easier to read. <fnote>Derek Attridge, cited in handout, week 5. 'Approaching Poetry: Free Verse' </fnote>O'Callaghan uses alliteration in line 6 with 'blab,' and 'boats and bikes.' As this is the only instance of alliteration in the poem, it stands out, and serves to endear the reader to the subject of this poem's irritating habits. In turn, this seems to stress the special nature of the relationship between the speaker and the subject of the poem. The most significant structural device in this poem is O'Callaghan's use of anaphora, beginning each line with 'and.' This has the same effect on the poem as Jonson's strict metrical scheme: by imposing a structure onto her thoughts, O'Callaghan is preventing the poem from becoming overcome with grief. This is also an example of the 'contrast between fixity and flux." In contrasting the openness of the rhythm and line length with a fixed opening to every line, O'Callaghan is showing that her poem is not 'free' but is in fact controlled. 'The line on the page has an integrity and function of its own.' <fnote>T.S Elliot, cited in handout, week 5. 'Approaching Poetry: Free Verse' </fnote><fnote>Derek Attridge, cited in handout, week 5. 'Approaching Poetry: Free Verse' </fnote>O'Callaghan stresses that the poem is addressed to someone she knew well with the use of colloquial language, such as 'kooky' in line 16 and by writing 'OK' in the informal style in line 19. She also refers to the 'Prairie Home Companion' without explanation. This seems to make the poem feel more intimate. The repetition of the words 'I,' 'you,' and most significantly, 'we,' has the same effect. She also uses parallelism, by repeating the line <quote> 'and we get on each other's nerves'</quote>As this line comes towards the beginning of the poem and then again towards the end, the repetition serves to bring the poem to a close. Although these two poems are written in very different styles, in both cases it is the formal features of their structure which help to control their powerful content. By presenting the painful issue of death in this measured and restrained manner, it is made all the more painful and touching to the reader, rather than if it was just presented in an uncontrolled outpouring of grief. 