<abstract><heading> Executive Summary</heading>As the UK's next European Capital of Culture, Liverpool will see its profile rise. During the field trip, it is easily to discover that Liverpool is working hard on the infrastructure in order to rebuild the city's image and the confident of the Liverpool's local resident. As a winner city, Liverpool can surely gain benefits from the title economically in the way of increasing in tourism, boosting local business and creating more jobs. As one of the stakeholders/businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel must make good use of its resources and capabilities to gain competitive advantage among the rivalries and minimise the negative impacts. Apart from focusing on the economical benefits, it is also the responsibility for all the stakeholders/businesses, not only the Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel, to pay effort into the sustainable tourism. The first and the most important thing they need to do is "No Do Harm" to the environment and to minimise pollution, waste, energy consumption, water usage, landscaping and chemical exercise. If tourism industry is managed poorly, it can ruin the place, however, if the tourism industry is handled well, it can provide an incentive to preserve the best things a destination offers for us. This is what the sustainable tourism is. </abstract><heading> Introduction</heading>European Capital of Culture, which is originated in Athens in 1985. It is designed to "contribute to bringing the peoples of Europe together". European City of Culture was held every year among different countries within the European Union. It has become ever more popular with the citizens of Europe and has seen its cultural and socio-economic influence grow through the many visitors it has attracted. It is the second time for the UK's city to be awarded as the European Capital of City. The first time was held in the Scotland's largest city of Glasgow in 1990. This accolade made a huge change to Glasgow. Before Glasgow won the title, it was perceived as grim, crime-ridden and violent. But today's Glasgow is "the coolest city in the UK". As the next European Capital of Culture, Liverpool has shared a similar history as Glasgow, and follow by a negative image. Thus, it is believed that, through the European Capital of Culture in 2008, Liverpool can take the advantage of the designation to build up a positive image and become a fantastic city for tourists. In attempting to promote the Liverpool tourism industry, the authorities of Liverpool like the Liverpool Culture Company and Liverpool City Council must cooperate to rebuild the city so as to put up a excellent place for tourists. If the tourism industry in Liverpool is become prosperity, the stakeholders in Liverpool can also get the benefits through the regeneration. In this report, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel, one of the stakeholders or businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry, will be used to evaluate the effects under the designation of European Capital of Culture by utilising some models. <heading> Definition </heading>Nowadays, tourism business is the largest industry among all of the different kinds of industries and it is one of the fastest growing industries all over the world. The faster it grows, the more the destructive power it possesses and the life is become shortened. If it is well-planned and well-managed, tourism can be a positive force, bringing benefits to destinations around the world; in the reverse, if it is poorly planned and managed, tourism can be an engine for degradation. It is clearly in the interest of the tourism sector to maintain and sustain the basis for its prosperity, thus sustainable tourism should be promoted in every corner. <heading> Sustainable Tourism</heading>According to the definition by WTO, it is defined as "Sustainable tourism development meets the needs of present tourists and host regions while protecting and enhancing opportunities for the future. It is envisaged as leading to management of all resources in such a way that economic, social and aesthetic needs can be fulfilled while maintaining cultural integrity, essential ecological processes, biological diversity and life support systems." (UNEPa, 2002) <heading> Sustainable Tourism Business</heading>Sustainable tourism business is the business operating within the tourism industry, which takes a responsibility on the environmental concern. Take hotel as an example, it is one of the sector in the tourism industry. As the issue on environmental concern is arising recently, hotel managers try to find out lots of way to reduce the energy consumption. Under this circumstance, the hotel is a sustainable tourism business because it strives for protecting the environment. <heading> Stakeholder / Business in Liverpool</heading>In this report, one stakeholder/business is included for analysing its operating environment in the Liverpool tourism industry by applying some theoretical models of strategic management and then finding out how the stakeholder/business do to maintain the sustainability. Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel is one of the stakeholders/businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry. As an up-scale 4-star hotel, its primary role is to offering food, beverage and sleeping accommodation with a superior quality to its customers and tourists. Through the name of European Capital of Culture, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel is certainly able to get benefits from the "08 project". However, in order to access the opportunities for Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel to expand their achievement to get more chances offered by the event. <heading> SWOT analysis</heading>According to the Hill & Jones (2004), SWOT analysis is to identify the strategies that will create a firm-specific business model that will best align, fit, or mach a company's resources and capabilities to the demands of the environment in which it operates. Here, SWOT analysis is used to recognize the resources and capabilities of Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel with the opportunities together to gain the advantages through the "08 project" , and also to identify its weaknesses and the threats it will face so as to find means to minimize their influences. <heading>Strengths</heading>Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel is owned by a listed company called Whitbread plc and its mother company is Marriott International Inc., which is a leading worldwide hospitality company. Thus, it has a well-known brand name. Marriott started operating since 1927, it has rich experience and knowledge in providing excellent services to its customers so that it was always given lots of awards (Marriott International Inc., 2004). As Marriott has a good reputation in the accommodation sectors, it gets loyalty from its customers and attracts many potential guests and performs well among the rivalries. Therefore, Marriott can gain profits even though during the difficult trading situation these several years. With the strong financial support, it can do many R & D in order to create and to innovate its products and services like technology of online booking and Wi-Fi wireless Internet access in (PR Newswire, 2004) and Marriott is able to select the right location in light of providing its customers with convenient, which is the critical factors influencing the decision-making of the guests. <heading>Weaknesses</heading>During the field trip in Liverpool, we had a talk which is held in the Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel. At that time, I found that this hotel is a little bit out of my expectation. There are three weaknesses including the human resources, the physical appearance and the capacity. Firstly, in terms of the human resources, it is not difficult to find that the hotel is lack of staff. In such a big brand hotel, it is unreasonable to see that only several staff in the lobby. In regarding to the physical appearance, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel is famous of focusing on their layout design, furnishment, decoration and even the uniform design. However, it gave us the impression of old-fashioned. On the aspect of capacity, Marriott Liverpool City Centre is really small in the capacity since it has only 146 rooms (The Mersey Partnership, 2004). This amount is totally unable to accommodate the extra tourists during 2008. <heading>Opportunities</heading>Basically, the major opportunity for the Marriott Liverpool City Centre is the event of European Capital of Culture. As a winning city, the authorities of Liverpool have to rebuild its image to get rid of the negative picture. The regeneration of the city can make it more attractive in order to create a centre of attention to the tourists. As a consequence, it can attract many travelers visiting Liverpool and hence the demand for the hotels will be increased obviously at that time. <heading>Threats</heading>As estimated, the "08 project" can attract an extra 1.7 million tourists to Liverpool (Liverpool 08, 2004). However, according to the Mersey partnership (2004), it recorded that the sum of rooms offered by all kinds of hotels is not able to cover extra guests if the situation remain unchanged in the near future. According to the Mersey Partnership (2004), the supply of hotels in Liverpool city centre increased significantly in 2002 and 2003 with the opening of 4 new budget hotels, adding a further 448 budget hotel bedrooms in the city centre (representing a 19% increase in total hotel supply, and an 83% increase in budget hotel supply). As at November 2003, the total city centre hotel supply now stands at 26 hotels and 2,754 bedrooms, accounting for 40.5% of the total Merseyside hotel supply [Appendix 1]. Moreover, during the period of 1997 to 2003, the Mersey Partnership investigates that the city centre hotel supply has increased by some 75% over the past 7 years. Since 1997, 11 new hotels with an additional 1156 new hotel bedrooms have opened in the city centre. In addition a further 50 new rooms have been added to existing hotels, adding 1206 rooms to the total stock [Appendix 2]. The summarised model of the SWOT analysis is displayed in the [Appendix 3]. <heading> Porter's Five Forces</heading>According to Go & Pine (1994), they mentioned that the Porter's Five Forces model is used to gain an insight into the evolving structure of the Liverpool hotel industry. It is comprised of the following five forces: <heading>The Threat of New Entrants</heading>The threat of new entrants to an industry are mainly depends on the barriers to entry and the reaction to new entrants, and the core barriers to entry in the hotel industry are economics of scale; product differentiation; capital requirement and location (Go & Pine, 2004). However, since the authorities must build up more and more amounts of hotels in order to cater the enormous demand of the extra tourists, these factors are not the critical elements for the potential investors to be considered. Thus, the threat of new entrants is high. <heading>The Bargaining Power of Buyers</heading>The bargaining power of buyers is high because of the three elements. The development of technology that enables that enables individual travelers to reserve hotels themselves anytime anywhere in the world. (Olsen, West & Tse, 1998) cited in (Kim & Oh, 2003). Customers can force hotels to lower prices with higher quality and better services (Kim & Oh, 2003). Buyers can always find alternative hotel option and have knowledge to play one hotel firm against another (Go & Pine, 1994). <heading>The Threat of Substitute Products</heading>The third major competitive force is pressure from substitute products. As in the era of technology, the travel is becoming easier and faster. Thus, the convenient of transportation make possible to schedule one-day round-trip flights to their destination instead of staying overnight. On the other hand, there is a wide range of accommodation substitutes with the potential to replace the stay in the hotel industry such as resort time shares, recreational vehicles and camping grounds etc. (Go & Pine, 2004). Thus, the threat of substitute products is high. <heading>The Bargaining Power of Suppliers</heading>As Go & Pine (2004) stated, suppliers to an industry can drive down profitability by raising prices or reducing the quality of goods sold to the industry. Suppliers can exert their bargaining power over hotel companies by threatening to raise prices, limit availability of resources, or reduce the quality of resources (Porter, 1980) cited in (Kim & Oh, 2003). Moreover, Labour is another source of bargaining power of supplier as not many people would like to work in the lodging industry. The lodging manpower report (Hiemstra 1988) concludes that it seems anomalous that the labour shortage exists while unemployment prevails (Go & Pine, (1994). Actually, the bargaining power of supplier is not high. <heading>Industry Competition</heading>Undoubtedly, since more new entrants are going into the industry, the industry competition will be stiffer. Apart from the increase in the competitors, the rivalry's strategy will be another factor influence the competition. Generally, the competition is likely to be high. <heading> PEST analysis </heading>It is inevitable that the more prosperity the tourism industry is, the more cost the destination needs to be bore. As say by the United Nations of Environment Program, sustainability has three interconnected aspects: environmental, socio-cultural, and economic. <heading>Environmental</heading>The negative impacts of tourism development can gradually destroy the environmental resources on which it depends. However, on the other hand, tourism has the potential to create beneficial effects on the environment by contributing to environmental protection and conservation. It is a way to raise awareness of environmental values and it can serve as a tool to finance protection of natural areas and increase their economic importance (UNEPb, 2004). In this perspective, Marriott Liverpool City Centre has done well since they mentioned in their annual report that they are taking the responsibility on the environmental concern. They concentrate on the way how they use the resources. They plan to manage those resources as efficiently as possible. <heading>Socio-culture</heading>Tourism can generate positive impacts as it can serve as a supportive force for peace, foster pride in cultural traditions and help avoid urban relocation by creating local jobs. As often happens when different cultures meet, socio-cultural impacts are ambiguous: the same objectively described impacts are seen as beneficial by some groups, and are perceived as negative - or as having negative aspects - by other stakeholders (UNEPc, 2004). Because of the designation of the European Capital of City, there are surely more tourists from all over the world, especially from the European Union, come to visit the place. This may lead to a clash like different languages and different cultures. Due to this reason, Marriott has to manage carefully on providing training and indicator for its staff in order to deal with the problem easily. <heading>Economic</heading>According to the UNEP (2004), it pointed out that the main positive economic impacts of tourism relate to foreign exchange earnings, contributions to government revenues, and generation of employment and business opportunities. It is the similar case as in Liverpool, economically being the European Capital of Culture means an increase in tourism, boosting local business and creating more jobs. Liverpool can enjoy benefits from attracting more tourists visiting Liverpool as they can bring lots of opportunities to the place. As one of the sector in the tourism industry, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel can also share the benefits from the European Capital of Culture during 2008. <heading> Conclusion</heading>As one of the Stakeholders/businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry, and possessing strong resources and capability, Marriott Liverpool City Centre must utilise its strengths and opportunities provided by the European Capital of City 2008 to gain the competitive advantage among its competitors and hence to minimise the negative impacts appear in the industry. Besides enjoying the benefits the designation offer, it is a must for Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel to bear the responsibility on the sustainability. They should protect the destination in order to make Liverpool become a lively and exciting city since 2008, but not only during 2008. 