<heading>Introduction</heading>The aim of this report is to compare and contrast the management of Bath and Oxford. It will compare and analyse both tourism destinations (Bath and Oxford) in terms of the range of their respective markets; the way they are managed as tourism destinations and the range of facilities that they have to offer the tourist. Therefore, basically, this report will firstly consider the destinations - Oxford and Bath in terms of the visitor's origins, length of stay and how these meet the aims of the management plans employed. Then, it will compare and analyse about how tourism is managed by the City Councils between Oxford and Bath and the range of tourist facilities, attractions and services available. Finally, it will compare and analyse the impacts of tourism on the local economy, society, politics and physical environment between both places. <heading>The scale and value of tourism, visitor origins, and length of stay and the aims of the management plans employed</heading><heading>Bath</heading>Bath was officially recognised as a "World Heritage Site" in 1987 because Bath & North East Somerset has a rich history, which has attracted people from all over the world. Consequently, tourism is an important factor in the growth and sustainability of the area. From Appendix 1, we can find that the regional shoppers were the highest number of people (almost 4 million) to go to Bath in 1996 and 1997. The most origins of tourists of Bath for UK residents in 2000 were South West, South East and West Midlands, which were 24%, 18% and 13% respectively. The most number of overseas residents came from USA and France, which was 21% and 14% respectively in 2000 (Norton Radstock College, 2004). The amount of money spent by the UK staying visitors and overseas staying visitors was £75.5 million and £63.5 million correspondingly in 1998 (Bath & North East Somerset Council, 2004a). The average length of stay in Bath is 1.7 nights (Bath Spa Project, 2004). The Bath Spa Project team aims to promote Spa to the tourists and visitors because Bath is the only place that we can enjoy Spa in the UK. The new Spa will create job opportunities and generate local revenues of at least £3.8 million per annum and £5.4 million spend locally. The Bath Spa Project team hope that the project will increase the length of stay of the visitors in the region. There will be an additional 48,000 'bed-nights' per year if the average length of stay were to increase to 1.75 nights on average (Bath Spa Project, 2004). <fnote>Run by Bath and North East Somerset Council </fnote><heading>Oxford</heading>As regards Oxford - 'the city of dreaming spires', it is famous the world over for its University and place in history. Hence, tourism is also an important sector in Oxford. 60% of visitors to Oxford were British on average between 1990 and 1991. European and North Americans visitors were the next two biggest groups: 17% and 13% respectively. Most of the tourists stayed in Oxford for 2 nights during the same period (19.2%) whereas the average length of stay was 3 nights (Oxford City Council, 1992) (Appendix 2). The average expenditure per person per day on selected items in Oxford was 18.85 GBP excluding transport between 1990 and 1991 (Oxford City Council, 1992) (Appendix 3). Moreover, the total expenditure of the UK residents was £257 in 2002 where the total expenditure of the overseas residents was £239 in 2002 (Star UK, 2004a). Most of the hotels and guest houses in the city are members of Oxford Association of Hotels & Guest Houses. It monitors the high standards of its members and can assist visitors in finding suitable accommodation (Oxford Association of Hotels & Guest Houses, 2004). Consequently, visitors or tourists will be more willing to stay in Oxford for a longer time so that the length of stay of the visitors or tourists will probably be longer and generate local revenues and job opportunities. <heading>Tourism management by City Councils in terms of access, transport and promotion</heading>Bath and Oxford have a good transport location. They are not too far away from London and Heathrow Airport. Both of them are within 2 hours drive of London. Hence, they are very convenient and easy to be accessed. They have a good transport system; we can reach both places by different kind of transport mode easily. <heading>Bath</heading>Bath Spa railway station is on the main railway line between London Paddington and Bristol Temple Meads stations. Bristol is just 10 minutes away whereas London is about an hour and 45 minutes journey (Beautiful Bath Tourist Guide, 2004). Besides, frequent coaches go through London and other UK towns. What is more, Bath is served by a large number of local bus services run by First Badgerline. Besides, in order to reduce the heavy traffic flow in town, Bath and North East Somerset Council promotes park-and-ride services. There are 4 park-and-ride car parks in Bath (Appendix 4), which are Newbridge (from the west of Bath), Lansdown (from the North or East of Bath), Odd Down (from the South or East of Bath) and University (from the East of Bath and provides service on Saturdays and some University vacation times only) (Bath & North East Somerset Council, 2004b). They ease the pressure of traffic in the town of Bath a lot. Besides, Bath City Council introduces a new traffic scheme from 30 th March 2001. The scheme intended to reduce the amount of traffic in the city centre. The city centre is divided into 3 zones - northern, central and southern - each with their own access points, which will allow all vehicles to access specific areas of the city centre, but prevent through traffic. Access to all parts of the city centre will be maintained at all times (Mushroom Maps & Guides Online, 2004). <heading>Oxford</heading>As regards Oxford, the transport is very well-developed, convenient and well served by road and rail networks that give fast and direct access locally, nationally and from Europe. Oxford has rail services to London Paddington that run twice an hour during the day (Oxford Online, 2004a). What is more, there are 24-hour express and frequent coaches linking Heathrow Airport, Gatwick Airport and central London with Oxford. There are frequent local bus routes serving destinations in and around Oxford. Besides, car park in the city centre is limited. Oxfordshire city council recommends the visitors to Oxford arriving by car to use the park-and-ride service in order to reduce traffic flow and air pollution. The park-and-ride car parks are: Peartree (to the north), Water Eaton (to the North East), Thornhill (to the east), Redbridge (to the south) and Seacourt (to the west) (Oxford Online, 2004a). In addition, the Oxfordshire county council encourage local Oxford residents to use cycle instead of using car in order to improve the environment, cut congestion, save space and avoid pollution. 19% of the population of Oxford cycle to work. Additionally, Oxford has some of the highest rates nationally for people travelling to work by bus and cycle (Oxfordshire County Council, 2004a). In addition to encouraging people to use park-and-ride services, the Oxford City Council also enforces the following rules: (1) Motorists may not use the High Street to travel from east to west as previously; (2) Cyclists will find new routes into town in operation and priority at many traffic lights (Oxford City, 2004). All of these rules can improve the traffic and environment significantly. <heading>The range of tourist facilities, attractions and services available and the role they play in any visit - restaurants, attractions, accommodation, guides and walks</heading><heading>Attractions</heading>Oxford and Bath are very similar to each other in some aspects. There are many historical buildings, museums and other attractions in both places. As for Oxford, the Ashmolean Museum, Carfax Tower, Oxford University Museum of Natural History, Pitt Rivers Museum, Bodleian Library etc are all worth visiting. According to Star UK (2004), Oxford University Museum of Natural History and Pitt Rivers Museum are two of the major free admission attractions in Southern England. There were estimated 277,366 visitors and 142,995 visitors for the Oxford University Museum of Natural History and the Pit Rivers Museum respectively in 2002 (Star UK, 2004a). Besides, the University Church of St. Mary the Virgin was one of the major admission charged attraction in Southern England; there were estimated 300,000 visitors in 2002 (Star UK, 2004a). As for Bath, the Roman Baths, Bath Abbey, the Royal Crescent, and Thermae Bath Spa etc are the most well-known attractions in Bath. In 2002, the Roman Baths was one of the major admission charged attraction in the South West England which had 845,608 visitors (Star UK, 2004b). Also, the Roman Baths was one of the most popular and major admission charged attraction in the whole UK in 2002. <heading>Accommodation</heading>In terms of accommodation sector, it is operated in a similar way in Oxford and Bath. The accommodation is divided into two parts, which are serviced and self-catering accommodation. Both destinations have an excellent range of accommodation to suit all tastes and budgets. They have an interesting mix of serviced accommodation ranging from large corporate hotels to very high quality specialist hotels, guesthouses and B&Bs, and some self-catering properties and hostel accommodation. In Bath, occupancy levels have been consistently high over a number of years. Annual average room occupancy in serviced accommodation is 65% although recently falls of approximately 5% have been experienced in the sector. Generally, the room occupancy levels in the rural areas are slightly lower than in the city centre (Bath & North East Somerset Council, 2004c). In Oxford, 75% staying visitors were staying within Oxford, it is the same proportion as in 1990 (Oxford Online, 2004c). Overall, the outcome figures of the occupancy levels of two places are probably at the similar level as the similar situation of the accommodation sector in Oxford and Bath. <heading>Restaurants</heading>In catering services, restaurants in Oxford and Bath are more or less the same. Since both destinations are the famous cities in the U.K., they attract thousands of visitors from locally and internationally. Thus, it is essential to provide a wide range of cuisines for tourists to choose, they include Chinese, Thai, Japanese, Indian, Italian, Indonesian, American, French and English etc. And there are also various types of catering services such as bar, cafe, night club, public house, take away, wine bar and tea room. All are considering the needs of tourists and so providing pertinent food services is one of the most important reasons for attracting people to visit. . <heading>Guides and Walks</heading>Guides and walks are included in the travel organisers sector. As usual, many people would travel by participating through the travel agents; however, there are parts of the travellers do not want to take part in the travel agents, but only willing to join the local tours organised by tour organisers. In Oxford, with its pedestrianised areas, tucked-away lanes and gated roads, its compact city centre is best explored on foot. There are walking tours in the city centre, conducted by the Guild of Guides daily. The tour last 2 hours and include admission to colleges of the University of Oxford like Christ Church etc. If the tourists feel tired, they can take a bus tour on an open-top bus which drives through the city centres and let the visitors to know more the place in a comfortable way. Bus tours are available in both Oxford and Bath and it is mainly operated by City Sightseeing. Appendix 5 shows the bus tour map in both city centres. <heading>The Impacts of tourism on the local economy, society, politics and physical environment</heading>Oxford and Bath are similar in many ways as they are all historical cities. There are many age-old buildings in both cities. Tourism is a major industry to them. It brings more than 2,700,000 visitors per year to Bath. Bath is also a sub-regional shopping centre; there are about 3,800,000 shopping visits annually (Audit Commission, 2002). Oxford is famous throughout the world as an historic university city. It attracts more than 1.5 million tourists each year and is the third most popular tourist destination in Britain (Oxford Green Party, 2002a). Although the tourism in these two centres has the potential to bring major economic benefits to destinations, we can't ignore the collusions carried by tourism to society, politics and physical environment. <heading>Economic Impacts</heading>Tourism is a key contributor to the local economy. Whether an economy of a city is strong or not depends on several items like the employment patterns of that city, the Gross Value Added (GVA), the capital investment on that city and the expenditures spent in there etc. Overseas visitors are a vital section to the prosperity of the destination. According to the Star UK (2004), there are nearly 400 thousands overseas visitors have been in Oxford while there are only half-size in Bath. Nevertheless, in both Cities, tourism bought them profitable revenues. Tourists spend about £60-80 million in Oxford (Oxford Green Party, 2002b), whilst approximately £200 million in each year in Bath. As Glasson mentioned, there is a considerable economic benefit associated with the average visitor spend of £44 per visit and £19 per day. Over two thirds of the money spent is on shopping and eating out. Only just over one fifth is spent on accommodation, with the remainder spent on other items (J. Glasson et al, 1995). Besides, the GVA of Oxford and Bath are also an important indicators. In Oxford, the overall GVA is increased from £9,123 in 1998 to £11,012 in 2001. In Bath, the overall GVA is improved as well; it started from £7,602 in 1998 to about £8,700 in 2001. Hotels & Restaurants is a major sector in the tourism industry, the figure of the GVA of the Hotels & Restaurants showed a steady increase of average of £1,000 in both cities (National Statistics, 2001). Appendices 6 & 7 show the economic situations of Oxford and Bath. Due to the similarity of both centres, the economies in these destinations are also in a similar way, but Bath did better than Oxford. However, in regards of the employment patterns, when compared to the figures in both towns, Oxford did better than Bath because it has a higher employment rate than Bath's. There are 3,500 people directly employed in the tourist industry in Oxford (Oxford Green Party, 2002c); in Bath, the tourism industry are estimated to support at least 70,000 jobs directly, and contribute around £2.3 billion per year to the economy (Our South West, 2001).  Appendix 8 shows the total net estimated revenue budget for 2002/03 of Culture and Leisure Time of Bath and North East Somerset Council. <heading>Social Impacts</heading>Although tourism brings a considerable benefit to the local economy, it should be remembered that the city exists primarily to meet the needs of those who live and work in, and all the local decision-making should reflect this by putting the needs of local people first. There is a survey about the attitudes of residents towards tourism canvassed in a Vocicebox Survey in Bath. As seen from the result, almost all of the local residents thought that tourism is an essential industry to Bath; however, there are some figures reflect the dissatisfaction. 60% think the local tourism department should encourage more visitors, but there are nearly one-third of them think that the department should promote Bath only out of season. Apart from this, 13% even do not wish the council to do any thing; they don't want more visitors to travel in Bath. It is obvious to see that parts of the residents considered there is an interruption from the tourism industry. More than half of the interviewees thought tourism has a little effect on their daily life. Although tourist industry is no doubt to bring the financial benefits to the destination and give more employment opportunities to the local citizens, no one would greet the promotion of tourism industry if the problems outweigh any benefits. <heading>Political Impacts</heading>Political impact has been playing a chief role in the tourism industry. It is because whenever any policy imposed by the government, it has a profound influence to both the local residents and tourists in both the positive and negative way. For instance, there is a strategy called National Tourism Strategy which is adopted by the government in 1999, it includes measures to promote the planning and transport issues associated with tourism, manage visitor flows, maximise the benefits of tourism for local economies, establish an effective policy framework and build partnerships with the public, private and voluntary sectors (Oxfordshire Country Council, 2004c). Take traffic congestion as an illustration, it does not only affect the residents and workers, but also perceived by visitors as one of their major dislikes of the places. In Oxford, One of the traffic management proposals is the removal of all traffic from Cornmarket Street and the reduction of traffic in High Street and St. Aldate's, it is used to improve tourists perception of Oxford. <heading>Environmental Impacts</heading>Tourism is a major growth industry internationally; however, uncontrolled promotion of tourism can have very undesirable environmental effects. Impacts are not just the obvious one such as traffic congestion mentioned in the political Impacts, but include the demand on water and sewerage infrastructure, energy use, the landscape and the air pollution. The number of tourism trips is estimated to be growing in the near future, but there is a serious concern about this prospect because such an increase would be unsustainable - particularly in the impacts of transport and water use. The challenge to the tourism industry is that the development of the industry is compatible with proper safeguarding of the special environment in both Oxford and Bath. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Tourism is the world's largest industry and predicted to double in size in the next 20 years. It has the potential to bring major benefits to destinations, but can also be damaging to the people living there and to their environment. Oxford and Bath are two similar places, both are the famous destinations within the UK, as they are the historic cities and they contains thousands of treasures like cultures, histories, buildings etc. Although the tourism industry in Oxford and Bath is prosperous and brings with lots of economic benefits, there are still many problems like social and environmental issues which would affect both the tourists and the local residents. The government has imposed many policies in order to reduce the pressure on these issues, but simply writing a responsible tourism policy is no longer enough. It is a must to show practical action, so that the tourism destinations can become long lasting, and get more advantages in the industry without affecting the environment and local residents. 