<heading>CONCEPT FOR THE TITLE</heading> The "Think History!" book series is a well established Heinemann textbook series. <fnote> URL  </fnote>It is a text book especially designed for the Secondary school. In particular, the Think History! Stage 3 is using by student aged 11 years old, will mix knowledge with funny exercises, in order to help the pupil to have fun while revising the contents. Promoting a websites based on a established and well-known text book, already a useful mate for thousand of students, is not a simple quest. As website developing team we decide to leave the original name, easy to browse and also to remember. This can help to revitalize the Think History! market between the teachers that are already used it; to appeal a new segment of the market, which is teachers that are looking for interactivity exercise to do as homework, and a simple way to look after the pupil progresses thanks to the assessment login page; to refresh the image of a product that show the capacity of developing with the new school expectations about text book; and to give to the Think History! Series a new collocation in a market full of very strong competitors. <heading>CONTENT AND COPYRIGHT ISSUES</heading> Content: the website is entirely based on the paper copy of the book.In this way, pupils are going to appreciate the interactivity aspect of learning history through the text book and also through the online activities.Moreover, the quizzes and the games section will be something separate and completely new from the text book, in order to proof the pupils memories and interest about history.the website will have a common login page for students and teachers, but then the two sub-site will be different.Indeed, the teacher part will be focus on the lessons: in this way there will be useful links, teacher blogs, and lesson helper.On the other side, the student sub-site will be colourful and attractive, with interactivity exercises to involve the children on quizzes and games, based on the text book guidelines. So the student will not be lost inside the website and the activity marks will be registered on the assessment page, common also to the teacher sub-site. That is the way in which the website and the interactivities will be useful for schools: thank to the assessment page, teachers will check pupils progresses and marks, also they can understand the grade of comprehension of every single student, thanks to the personal login code in every book. Copyright issues: Heinemann books, as registered trademark of Hartcourt Education Limited are cover by copyright. In particular, the illustration on the 'Think History! Changing Times 1066- 1500' Stage 3 are owned by Hartcourt Education Limited, and are all original artworks.All this issues are under the provision of the Copyright, Design and Patent Act of the 1988.The website is a new concept, and at the same time it uses a completely new design. In this case the Heinemann web designer will be the copyright owner, that is itself.The main issue about creating a brand new website is about the images that the editorial department will add to it. The web designer will use in order to explain as the best the richness and the new concept that will help the Heinemann Think History! Series in its new travel online. <fnote>Copyright, Design and Patent Act 1988, Chapter III, 56  URL  </fnote><heading>COMMERCIAL VIABILITY AND SUCCESS CRITERIA</heading> The UK Government are invested lot of funds on developing IT skill in the schools. Every class can have access to an high interactivity level during lessons, and schools are provided with electronic supports. Moreover, the Government is also supporting the Curriculum Online, with a free range of electronic materials through all the different stages of the learning process. The strength of Heinemann Think History book is to be a well-known textbook, with an established educational publishing out on the back. Tradition and innovation would be the main point of strength on which the Heinemann Education has to stress. The success criteria is quite sure: indeed in our competitors' reviews, as web design developing team we notice sort of lack in the presentation of the product. The Think History! Website will be an help for pupils, but also an outstanding help for teacher that are looking a new way of teaching history; or for teacher that are not really good in using the technology supported and prefer to let the exciting part of discover the online interactivity to their pupils directly. The Think History! Website will create in pupils the link between the class lessons and the homework, using a clear and simple language. This is the first website related to a course book that is looking for a high browsability, high level of contents, high interactivity between the paper and the virtual reality. 