<heading>Introduction</heading>Nonsense poetry comes in many shapes and forms. Sometimes the words are nonsense, the plot is absurd, or maybe the point of the poem is unfathomable. Nonsense poems may creep up on you from a seemingly standard poetic form, or they may jump out, instantly recognisable on the page as nonsense. They may seem touchingly simple, inexplicably complex, dark and mysterious or light and fluffy, perhaps all at the same time. But hopefully, one thing all nonsense verse has in common, is it elicits a smile. And as I hope to demonstrate with the following selection of poems, nonsense also challenges the way we think about language. Nonsense is only described as such because it does not fit into a recognized system in our minds, or it subverts a system we are familiar with. That is not to say it is chaos, rather, it operates under its own rules and within its own system so that something understood as nonsense in a wider field of literature may make perfect sense if we address it as nonsense. Nonsense verse originated as parody, and this tradition has continued. Carroll's The White Knight's Song is a parody of Wordsworth's Resolution and Independence and Tolstoy even created Kozma Prutkov, a character who wrote nonsense verse as a satire on imperial bureaucrats. Nonsense itself has been parodied; W.S. Gilbert is credited with writing a limerick without rhyme as a parody of Lear, and a short search on the internet throws up dozens of parodies of that most famous nonsense poem, Jabberwocky. Although the masters of nonsense are generally regarded to be Carroll and Lear, some experts believe that the first exponents of nonsense were the 17th century poets John Taylor and John Hoskyns. Theirs was a time of great exploration and travel writing became popular; their satire was a response to this. Hoskyns' Cabalistical Verses and Taylor's Mockado, Fustian and Motley both effectively poke fun at the contemporary attitude of noble voyage and discovery by twisting accepted forms of the time. Taylor's use of the sonnet leads us to expect love poetry, when in fact we find the poem jammed full of Greek mythological figures. This overuse of symbolic figures carrying out nonsensical acts ridicules the false pomposity of the age. This is echoed in the title; mockado being an imitation velvet, fustian a description of pretentious or pompous language, and motley bringing it all together in a haphazard mish-mash. Hoskyns also uses iambic pentameter and this use of rigid form helps to structure the nonsense into something readable, rather than plain gibberish. In fact, form plays an important part in nonsense verse. The limerick instantly comes to mind when discussing nonsense verse, having been popularised by Lear and later used by Ogden Nash. The one limerick included in this anthology is a great example of how form contributes to the overall effect; that is, of comedy and absurdity. Because of its strict form and metre, words often have to be twisted to fit into the rhyme scheme, for example 'tearance' in the limerick included. These forced rhymes are very playful, though we would not include these words in the category of nonsense words which are further discussed below. Nonsense, however, does not just use accepted forms. Christian Morgenstern's poem, The Funnels, is set out like a funnel and the enjambement, especially as the lines get smaller, means the rhythm trips along like the 'white moonlight' running down the funnels. The commas that interrupt the third line break up the rhythm to sound like the dripping moonlight, and all these details of form and metre lead the reader to become involved in the poem, and forget that the situation is completely nonsense. <fnote>Christian Morgenstern's poems are written in German; I have used translations By Geoffrey Grigson from The Faber Book of Nonsense Verse (London, Faber and Faber, 1979) </fnote>So the language in the above poem is not nonsense, but the situation it describes certainly is. How does this challenge our views on language? The structuralist Saussure asserted that language constitutes our world; it does not just record or label it. So if language makes our reality, can the situation in The Funnels, or in any other nonsense poem be said to be nonsense? This idea applies also to the creatures we encounter in nonsense verse. T.S. Eliot's Jellicle cats, for example, are described in much detail. Not only their physical attributes, but also how they spend their time, and even details of their toilette. Similarly, Lear's Jumblies are defined, though the constant repetition of their name throughout the poem itself and throughout all of Lear's poetry, is affirmation in itself. If we extend this structuralist idea that language creates our world and think of nonsense verse as a structure with its own rules and system, we can begin to make sense of nonsense. We can begin to see, for example, why we can read nonsense words and feel we almost know what they are talking about. Words like 'frumious', 'borascible', 'flumpetty' and 'brillig'. These nonsense words are usually associated with Lear and Carroll but the first example can be found in Cabbalistical Verses; where Hoskyns describes himself as a 'gymnosophist'. In a footnote he says that the word is made up of two Greek words, in the same way that Carroll's so-called portmanteau words are made up of different words all melded together to create a new one. I argue; how can we call this nonsense? Are not many words we use day to day formed in this way? Much of our language is stolen, poached from other cultures and so who is to say that 'slithy' is a nonsense word but 'hysterical' is not? If nonsense verse is its own structure with its own set of rules, then 'slithy' exists in that structure not as a nonsense word, but as a perfectly valid, if you like, portmanteau word. <fnote>Humpty Dumpty used the word 'portmanteau' to describe nonsense words in 'Through the Looking Glass'. Not only has Carroll invented the nonsense words, but he has also come up with the terminology we use to talk about them. </fnote>Another thing which portmanteau words achieve is a certain amount of ambiguity. Let us take, as an example, the word 'frumious' from Jabberwocky. Humpty Dumpty states that this word is a perfect balance between 'fuming' and 'furious', yet say it yourself, and without having to think about it a multitude of possibilities come into your head. It is this ability of the words to open up endless possibilities that makes them so understandable despite, of course, being considered nonsense. And because the train of thought which leads to the formation of portmanteau words is so entirely logical - well, it's not nonsense at all. Is it? This view of the nonsense poem as its own system is sometimes rather self defeating. Surely if we treat nonsense in this way, there can be only one aim - to find meaning or to explain. But as Michael Holquist points out in his essay What is a Boojum? the purpose of rhyme is to align the two rhyming words together and create an association which produces meaning. However, if we take nonsense as a system which has no meaning, there can be no meaning in rhyme. This seems to be a valid point but I would argue that the creation of meaning is not the sole purpose of rhyme, and that nonsense poetry, like any other genre, is still subject to the same examination in terms of rhyme and metre. Internal rhyme, for instance, plays a large role in much nonsense verse. In W.S. Gilbert's Sing for the Garish Eye there is assonance in 'bratticed/wracker' and 'braddled/sapster' which makes the reader say the poem loudly, and with confidence, which only serves to make it more absurd since its contents are nonsense. Spike Milligan's ever popular On the Ning Nang Nong depends on its rhyme; without it the poem would seem like gibberish. It is interesting here that the words we do not recognise are onomatopoeic; according to Saussure, this is the only instance where language is not apart from the word and its meaning is very clear, rather than arbitrary. Could we then say that, according to Saussure, these 'nonsensical' onomatopoeic words ('ning', 'nang', 'nong', 'bong') are in fact the only words in our language which actually make sense? It is beginning to seem that nonsense verse has brought us into the realm of philosophy, and indeed it appears that sometimes the lines do blur. Morgenstern's poem Philosophy is Born makes an interesting point. Morgenstern is satirising his contemporaries' complete faith in language as their medium and it is not until the last line that the poem slips into nonsense, or philosophy. However, we must always remember that nonsense is there to be enjoyed. The pulling apart of nonsense to discover its structures may serve us to understand it better, but no greater enjoyment can be taken from nonsense verse than that which comes from simply reading it. As Lear himself said, his aim was 'nonsense, pure and absolute'. <fnote>1471 words. </fnote><quote>Cabalistical Verses Even as the waves of brainless butter'd fish, With bugle horne writ in the Hebrew tongue, Fuming up flounders like a chafing-dish, That looks asquint upon a Three-mans song: Or as your equinoctiall pasticrust Projecting out a purple chariot wheele, Doth squeeze the spheares, and intimate the dust, The dust which force of argument doth feele: Even so this Author, this Gymnosophist, Whom no delight of travels toyle dismaies, Shall sympathize (thinke reader what thou list) Crownd with a quinsill tipt with marble praise. John Hoskyns</quote><quote>Mockado, Fustian, and Motley Sweet semi-circled Cynthia played at maw, The whilst Endymion ran the wild-goose chase: Great Bacchus with his cross-bow killed a daw, And sullen Saturn smiled with pleasant face: The ninefold Bugbears of the Caspian lake Sat whistling ebon hornpipes to their ducks; Madge-owlet straight for joy her girdle brake, And rugged Satyrs frisked like stags and bucks: The untamed tumbling fifteen-footed Goat With promulgation of the Lesbian shores Confronted Hydra in a sculler boat, At which the mighty mountain Taurus roars: Meantime great Sultan Soliman was born, And Atlas blew his rustic rumbling horn. John Taylor</quote><quote>There once was a miser named Clarence Who simonized both of his parents; "The initial expense," he remarked, "is immense, But it saves on the wearance and tearance." Ogden Nash</quote><quote>The Funnels A pair of funnels stroll by night. They both collect inside themselves the white moon- light, so clear, so calm, so bright, which then runs down the runnels of these funnels, making their woodland way much brighter, und so weit- er. Christian Morgenstern (translated by Geoffrey Grigson)</quote><quote>The Song of the Jellicles Jellicle Cats come out tonight, Jellicle Cats come one come all: The Jellicle Moon is shining bright-- Jellicles come to the Jellicle Ball. Jellicle Cats are black and white, Jellicle Cats are rather small; Jellicle Cats are merry and bright, And pleasant to hear when they caterwaul. Jellicle Cats have cheerful faces, Jellicle Cats have bright black eyes; They like to practise their airs and graces And wait for the Jellicle Moon to rise. Jellicle Cats develop slowly, Jellicle Cats are not too big; Jellicle Cats are roly-poly, They know how to dance a gavotte and a jig. Until the Jellicle Moon appears They make their toilette and take their repose: Jellicles wash behind their ears, Jellicles dry between their toes. Jellicle Cats are white and black, Jellicle Cats are of moderate size; Jellicles jump like a jumping-jack, Jellicle Cats have moonlit eyes. They're quiet enough in the morning hours, They're quiet enough in the afternoon, Reserving their terpsichorean powers To dance by the light of the Jellicle Moon. Jellicle Cats are black and white, Jellicle Cats (as I said) are small; If it happens to be a stormy night They will practise a caper or two in the hall. If it happens the sun is shining bright You would say they had nothing to do at all: They are resting and saving themselves to be right For the Jellicle Moon and the Jellicle Ball. T.S.Eliot</quote><quote>The Jumblies I They went to sea in a Sieve, they did, In a Sieve they went to sea: In spite of all their friends could say, On a winter's morn, on a stormy day, In a Sieve they went to sea! And when the Sieve turned round and round, And every one cried, 'You'll all be drowned!' They called aloud, 'Our Sieve ain't big, But we don't care a button! we don't care a fig! In a Sieve we'll go to sea!' Far and few, far and few, Are the lands where the Jumblies live; Their heads are green, and their hands are blue, And they went to sea in a Sieve. II They sailed away in a Sieve, they did, In a Sieve they sailed so fast, With only a beautiful pea-green veil Tied with a riband by way of a sail, To a small tobacco-pipe mast; And every one said, who saw them go, 'O won't they be soon upset, you know! For the sky is dark, and the voyage is long, And happen what may, it's extremely wrong In a Sieve to sail so fast!' Far and few, far and few, Are the lands where the Jumblies live; Their heads are green, and their hands are blue, And they went to sea in a Sieve. III The water it soon came in, it did, The water it soon came in; So to keep them dry, they wrapped their feet In a pinky paper all folded neat, And they fastened it down with a pin. And they passed the night in a crockery-jar, And each of them said, 'How wise we are! Though the sky be dark, and the voyage be long, Yet we never can think we were rash or wrong, While round in our Sieve we spin!' Far and few, far and few, Are the lands where the Jumblies live; Their heads are green, and their hands are blue, And they went to sea in a Sieve. IV And all night long they sailed away; And when the sun went down, They whistled and warbled a moony song To the echoing sound of a coppery gong, In the shade of the mountains brown. 'O Timballo! How happy we are, When we live in a Sieve and a crockery-jar, And all night long in the moonlight pale, We sail away with a pea-green sail, In the shade of the mountains brown!' Far and few, far and few, Are the lands where the Jumblies live; Their heads are green, and their hands are blue, And they went to sea in a Sieve. V They sailed to the Western Sea, they did, To a land all covered with trees, And they bought an Owl, and a useful Cart, And a pound of Rice, and a Cranberry Tart, And a hive of silvery Bees. And they bought a Pig, and some green Jack-daws, And a lovely Monkey with lollipop paws, And forty bottles of Ring-Bo-Ree, And no end of Stilton Cheese. Far and few, far and few, Are the lands where the Jumblies live; Their heads are green, and their hands are blue, And they went to sea in a Sieve. VI And in twenty years they all came back, In twenty years or more, And every one said, 'How tall they've grown! For they've been to the Lakes, and the Torrible Zone, And the hills of the Chankly Bore!' And they drank their health, and gave them a feast Of dumplings made of beautiful yeast; And every one said, 'If we only live, We too will go to sea in a Sieve,--- To the hills of the Chankly Bore!' Far and few, far and few, Are the lands where the Jumblies live; Their heads are green, and their hands are blue, And they went to sea in a Sieve. Edward Lear</quote><quote>Jabberwocky `Twas brillig, and the slithy toves Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: All mimsy were the borogoves, And the mome raths outgrabe. "Beware the Jabberwock, my son! The jaws that bite, the claws that catch! Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun The frumious Bandersnatch!" He took his vorpal sword in hand: Long time the manxome foe he sought -- So rested he by the Tumtum tree, And stood awhile in thought. And, as in uffish thought he stood, The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame, Came whiffling through the tulgey wood, And burbled as it came! One, two! One, two! And through and through The vorpal blade went snicker-snack! He left it dead, and with its head He went galumphing back. "And, has thou slain the Jabberwock? Come to my arms, my beamish boy! O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!' He chortled in his joy. `Twas brillig, and the slithy toves Did gyre and gimble in the wabe; All mimsy were the borogoves, And the mome raths outgrabe. Lewis Carroll</quote><quote>Sing for the Garish Eye Sing for the garish eye, When moonless brandlings cling! Let the froddering crooner cry, And the braddled sapster sing. For never and never again, Will the tottering beechlings play, For bratticed wrackers are singing aloud, And the throngers croon in May! W.S. Gilbert</quote><quote>On The Ning Nang Nong On the Ning Nang Nong Where the cows go Bong! And the monkeys all say Boo! There's a Nong Nang Ning Where the trees go Ping And the tea pots Jibber Jabber Joo. On the Nong Ning Nang All the mice go Clang! And you just can't catch 'em when they do! So it's Ning Nang Nong! Cows go Bong! Nong Nang Ning! Trees go Ping! Nong Ning Nang! The mice go Clang! What a noisy place to belong, Is the Ning Nang Ning Nang Nong! Spike Milligan</quote><quote>Philosophy is Born The moorland sheep is frightened and amazed At seeing me. What can this mean? It means I might be the first man this sheep has ever seen. An infectious gaze, we stand and stare as if we were asleep. I might in fact be seeing my first sheep. Christian Morgenstern (translated by Geoffrey Grigson)</quote>