<heading>Stage 1: Reflective journal entry and critical analysis of a personal characteristic/behaviour identified from the reflective journal entry. </heading>To enable me to identify and critically analyse a personal characteristic I will be reflecting on my feelings about starting my first third year placement. My work will be guided by Gibbs (1988 cited in: Palmer et al, 1994 p39) reflective cycle, with stage 1 focusing on the description, feelings, evaluation and analysis phases. I am acutely aware of the increased expectations of third year students and the impending expectations of qualifying and hope that by focusing on a personal characteristic I feel needs attention I will be able to develop both personally and professionally. I will begin with a reflective journal entry. Beginning my first third year placement I can honestly say that I felt more apprehensive and nervous than at any other time during my course; notably I felt less self-confident. My awareness of the increased expectations placed upon final year students added to my unease, I feared that my mentor and others would think I should be doing more than I felt capable of. I feel my anxiety was made more prominent because my last placement at a nursing home had been a very negative experience and left me feeling like I'd regressed, reducing my self-confidence and self-esteem. Not only did this placement remove me from the clinical setting it also prevented me from building on and consolidating previous learning. It seemed that the home I was placed at saw students as a free pair of hands and actively prevented me from fulfilling my role as a student nurse. Despite persistent efforts to rectify this and stand up for my needs I was constantly denied the opportunity to be involved in the management of nursing care, instead being forced to act solely as a care assistant. Because I tried, and failed, to assert myself this placement left me feeling wholly inadequate and unvalued, resulting in a complete lack of confidence in myself and my abilities. The prospect of starting a new placement filled me with dread. Previously I have only felt able to stand up for others, and only when I feel comfortable with the people concerned. As I rarely feel confident enough to assert myself it took a lot of courage to stand up for my learning needs. Following this placement I feel I lack confidence in myself and my abilities and I question whether I do the wrong things or do them in the wrong way. Such a negative experience served only to compound such feelings. Through reflection I realise that my confidence and self-esteem are always at their lowest starting new placements when everything is unfamiliar and therefore I would like to address this. With the aid of relevant literature I intend to discuss the personal characteristics of low confidence and self-esteem, including related issues I feel relevant in my case. Hodston and Simpson (2002) contend that understanding our thoughts, feelings and behaviours is essential to provide the best possible care and reach our maximum potential as nurses. They go on to say that without such an understanding of ourselves it is impossible to have an awareness of how we will respond to the thoughts, feelings and behaviours of others; hence they believe that nurses must be comfortable with themselves before they can understand others. This is concurrent with the view of Niven and Robinson (1994) who say that to relate to others it is necessary to identify important facets of ourselves. Critical analysis and reflection are also dependent on self-awareness (Timmins, 2006). Thompson (2002 p3) state that "Self-awareness involves understanding our characteristic responses to situations so that we can build on our positive qualities and be wary of any negative ones which may get in the way of effective practice." Self-awareness allows us to identify our strengths and weaknesses providing opportunity to improve on weaknesses. In addition Thompson (2002) believes that self-awareness can enhance self-confidence, because understanding our strengths and weaknesses allows our interactions and therefore practice to be more effective. Both Hodston and Simpson (2002) and Thompson (2002) point out that self-awareness differs from self-consciousness. Hodston and Simpson (2002) describe self-awareness as a conscious understanding of aspects of ourselves or a constructive appreciation of self, and self-consciousness as a concern for others' perceptions of us. Self-awareness is a strength whilst self-consciousness acts as a barrier to development and is therefore a weakness (Thompson, 2002). Self-awareness is important to the development of a confident person (Hodston & Simpson, 2002), while self-conscious people tend to develop mechanisms of self-protection and lack confidence (Thompson, 2002). While I believe, and have been told, that I am self-aware I feel that much of my awareness is actually self-consciousness and as such could affect my confidence. An individual's self-concept is described as "the knowledge that a person has about himself" and is "information chiefly acquired by interactions with others" (Hodston & Simpson, 2002 p373). Our schema of self-concept is built on past experiences and expectations of ourselves and alters over time in relation to life events, experiences and learning (Hodston & Simpson, 2002). I feel that the negative experience of my previous placement has altered my own self-concept and affected my self-esteem adversely. Self-esteem is a person's subjective appraisal of themselves as intrinsically positive or negative to some degree (Wikipedia, 2006), and influences the feelings or evaluations people make regarding their own self-worth and abilities (Niven & Robinson, 1994). Niven and Robinson (1994) conclude that people with low self-esteem tend to have a sense of undervaluation, are over-critical of themselves and often set unrealistically high or low goals, which leads to an overall sense of failure thus further reducing self-esteem and confidence; this is something I can relate to. A lack of self-belief and esteem inhibits learning and development (Dix & Hughes, 2004). As social beings most people have a desire to fit in and be valued (Benton, 1999) however, a low self-esteem increases the desire for approval and may lead to feelings of lower self-worth with the view that our opinions and needs are wrong or of little value (Niven & Robinson, 1994). At the start of any placement I worry about how I will fit in and if others will value me as part of the team, however I have never been as worried as at the start of my current placement and can attribute this increased insecurity to my last placement experience. Niven and Robinson (1994) point out that a reduction in self-esteem can lead to feelings of inadequacy when confronting new situations. Placements are considered the heart of nursing education, crucial to the consolidation of learning and vital to the development of competence and confidence (Levett-Jones et al, 2006). In an extensive literature review examining the potential relationship between belongingness, nursing students and their placement experiences Levett-Jones et al (2006) state that there is empirical and anecdotal evidence to suggest that nursing students placement experiences are often fraught with multi-dimensional problems, typified by feelings of alienation and lack of belongingness. They describe belongingness as an individual's experience of involvement in a system or environment and the extent to which they feel an integral part. It includes 'valued involvement' - the experience of being valued and accepted, and 'fit' or 'connectedness' - the perception that the individual's characteristics fit into the environment. They also suggest that a diminished sense of belonging, a lack of role acceptance, and the resultant low self-esteem, may cause a lack of self-confidence. I feel that this is applicable to my situation as disregard of the student nurse's role at my previous placement made me feel devalued resulting in feelings of not belonging and reduced self-worth. Even though I feel the care assistant role is integral to nursing and of great worth I felt that by neglecting my needs as a student nurse preparing for future practice my self-esteem and confidence were reduced. Farrand et al (2006) noted, in a study that sought to examine if the implementation of competency recommendations has led to improvements in the confidence of final year nursing students, that placement quality and duration was reported as contributing to a lack of confidence and experience. Placements are perceived poorly by students if they feel their learning is limited as this often results in lowered levels of confidence in their own ability (Evans, 2001). The quality of placements is of great importance in optimising the development of student nurses, plays a critical role in confidence and preparedness for future practice and influence the degree to which the learning experience is regarded as positive. Positive experiences and perceptions of self-worth are related to how the student felt that they and their role were valued (Edwards et al, 2004). Newly qualified nurses, in a study by Gerrish (1999) assessing preparedness for practice, largely attributed lack of confidence in ability to poor placements that did not allow opportunity to develop skills needed for future practice. Again I feel this relates to me as by refusing to acknowledge my role and learning needs my development was limited. I feel that this has set me back as I have not had the opportunity to consolidate and further my learning and thus I do not feel able to fulfil the expectations of third year students, which in turn has adversely affected my confidence. The transition associated with a new placement setting is a difficult time with energy being focused on fitting in, fulfilling expectations and adapting to new responsibility. The resultant fear and anxiety felt at this time can impact negatively on confidence and student learning (Evans, 2001; Levett-Jones et al, 2006; Gerrish, 1999). Learning environments that make students feel threatened reduce self-belief (Dix & Hughes, 2004). If students feel safe enough to admit their limitations, express their fears and feelings, assert themselves and not fear disapproval they are more likely to feel confident (Biley & Smith, 1998; Glen & Parker, 2003; Thompson, 2002). The need for nurses to be assertive to deliver patient care has never been as great (Benton, 1999) especially as personal effectiveness largely relies on the ability to assert ourselves (Thompson, 2002). However it is acknowledged that "Self-assertion can be a problem for nurses in both their professional and their personal lives." (Niven & Robinson, 1994 p31). Glen and Parker (2003) state that assertiveness is founded on the belief that each person is worthy of respect, has a right to ask, and be heard. Mentors need to create a relationship that encourages these beliefs for students to feel confident enough to be assertive. It is proposed that the three components to assertion are: 'being specific' - stating a point succinctly, 'sticking to it' - being persistent, and 'fielding responses' - acknowledging others views (Kagan et al, 1986 cited in: Niven & Robinson, 1994). Thompson (2002) states that assertiveness involves finding a positive balance between the interests of all so not to compromise anyone's rights and needs, it also creates an atmosphere of openness in which constructive change occurs. Furthermore it requires us to be aware of, and open about, our thoughts and feelings even though this may be challenging and makes us feel vulnerable. "Assertiveness is about having confidence in yourself, a positive attitude about yourself and towards others, and it is about behaving towards others in a way which is direct and honest." (Hartley, 1993 p210 cited in: Thompson, 2002 p42). A person's assertiveness is rooted in their personal philosophy as it comes from the value a person places in themselves and their rights and "is something that we are all capable of, to a certain extent at least." (Thompson, 2002 p45). In a study aiming to provide insight into the concerns and expectations of newly qualified nurses Evans (2001) concluded that nurses recognise the importance confidence plays in assertiveness and express concerns about assertiveness being misinterpreted or causing offence; a concern I share. Niven and Robinson (1994) and Benton (1999) suggest that to be seen as assertive rather than aggressive, others must believe their needs and rights are being respected so self-awareness is required. Assertion is not about getting your own way but about freedom to express your own needs and to stand up for yourself while respecting others (Benton, 1999). Being perceived as pushy or overbearing alienates others while being non-assertive allows others to take advantage of us; thus assertiveness involves a constructive balance between the extremes of being submissive and aggressive (Thompson, 2002). A low self-esteem can be attributed to non-assertiveness and a lack of assertion can lower self-esteem (Niven & Robinson, 1994; Thompson, 2002). Thompson (2002) contends that by failing to assert yourself you fail to express your own needs, allow others to have their way at your expense, and often say 'yes' when you mean 'no'. Nurses often have difficulty saying no as it usually feels uncaring to withhold agreement to take on more work to help someone else under pressure however saying no is an element of assertiveness and "It is not always in the best interests of the practitioner, or the person asking, to agree to a request." (Glen & Parker, 2003 p86). Thompson (2002) suggests that if we are unable to represent our own interests we cannot represent the interests of others. By Thompson's criteria I fail to be assertive in that I do not usually feel able to stand up for my own needs and often find it hard to say no when others ask for my assistance however, I feel that I am still able to stand up for others and am often confident enough to act as an advocate. "Self-assertion is essentially having the courage to accept and be the person we are, with all our strengths and weaknesses and individualities. It's the courage to believe in ourselves, and the confidence to convey this belief to others. It has nothing to do with exploiting others, or with always putting our own interests first." (Niven & Robinson, 1994 p33). Working with others involves a number of possible threats including those of rejection, humiliation and failure. As such fear is legitimate and not to be ashamed of. It is however important to keep it in proportion and not allow it to hinder effectiveness (Thompson, 2002). While we worry about the feelings of others we often neglect our own, whether we realise it or not our feelings influence our practice. Thompson (2002) asserts that our feelings can act as 'accelerators' that motivate or 'brakes' that de-motivate. Feelings of regret or failure can leave us struggling to cope with the demands made of us. When we sacrifice our needs through fear we fail to demonstrate self-respect and assertiveness (Thompson, 2002). I hope that by enhancing my self-awareness I will be better able to understand and improve on my self-confidence, self-esteem and learn to become less self-conscious. I now better understand that my self-consciousness is a weakness that needs addressing as it affects my confidence. By gaining a better understanding of the importance of assertiveness to nursing, and how a lowered self-esteem and lack of self-confidence can affect it, I hope I will be able to develop my future practice. Although I feel my past negative placement experience has increased my insecurity and adversely affected my confidence and self-esteem reflecting on it has provided me with the opportunity to better understand how it can inhibit my development. In undertaking this assignment I now recognise that I am not alone in feeling adversely affected by a negative placement experience (Biley & Smith, 1998; Edwards et al, 2004; Evans, 2001; Farrand et al, 2006; Gerrish, 1999; Glen & Parker, 2003; Levett-Jones et al, 2006) and I take some comfort in this. I hope my increased awareness will enable me to take a problem-based approach to my development as identifying my weaknesses allows me opportunity to improve my own practice, which in turn will hopefully help me build confidence in myself and my abilities (Biley & Smith, 1998). By identifying and analysing my lack of self-confidence, and associated low self-esteem, I hope to be able to develop an action plan for my future practice in stage 2. <heading>References</heading>Benton, D. (1999). Assertiveness, power and influence. Nursing Standard: 13(52) p48-52. Biley, F. and Smith, K. (1998). 'The buck stops here': accepting responsibility for learning and actions after graduation from a problem-based learning nursing education curriculum. Journal of Advanced Nursing: 27 p1021-1029. Dix, H. and Hughes, S. (2004). Strategies to help students learn effectively. Nursing Standard: 18(32) p39-42. Edwards, H., Smith, S., Courtney, M., Finlayson, K. and Chapman, H. (2004). The impact of clinical placement location on nursing students' competence and preparedness for practice. Nurse Education Today: 24 p248-255. Evans, K. (2001). Expectations of newly qualified nurses. Nursing Standard: 15 (41) p33-38. Farrand, P., McMullan, M., Jowett, R. and Humphreys, A. (2006). Implementing competency recommendations into pre-registration nursing curricula: Effects on levels of confidence in clinical skills. Nurse Education Today: 26 p97-103. Gerrish, K. (1999). Still fumbling along? A comparative study of the newly qualified nurse's perception of the transition from student to qualified nurse. Journal of Advanced Nursing: 32(2) p473-480. Gibbs, G. (1988). Learning by Doing. A guide to teaching and learning methods. Oxford: Further Education Unit, Oxford Polytechnic. Cited in: Palmer, A., Burns, S. and Bulman, C. (Eds) (1994). Reflective Practice in Nursing: The Growth of the Professional Practitioner. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications. Glen, S. and Parker, P. (2003). Supporting learning in Nursing Practice: A guide for practitioners. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillian. Hartley, P. (1993). Interpersonal Communication. London: Routledge. Cited in: Thompson, N. (2002). People Skills. 2nd Edition. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Hodston, B. and Simpson, M. (Eds). (2002). Foundations of Nursing Practice: Making the Difference. 2nd Edition. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillian. Kagan, C., Evans, J., and Kay, B. (1986). A Manual of Interpersonal Skills for Nurses: an experiential approach. Lomdon: Harper and Row. Cited in: Niven, N. and Robinson, J. (1994). The Psychology of Nursing Care. Basingstoke: Macmillian Press. Levett-Jones, T., Lathlean, J., Maguire, J. and McMillan, M. (2006). Belongingness: A critique of the concept and implications for nursing education. Nurse Education Today: Article in press, corrected proof. Available at:  URL  (accessed 01/11/2006). Niven, N. and Robinson, J. (1994). The Psychology of Nursing Care. Basingstoke: Macmillian Press. Thompson, N. (2002). People Skills. 2 nd Edition. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Timmins, F. (2006). Critical practice in nursing care: analysis, action and reflexivity. Nursing Standard: 20(39) p49-54. Wikipedia (2006). Online Encyclopedia: Self-esteem. Available at:  URL  (accessed 01/11/2006). <heading>Stage 2 - Action Plan based on the findings of Stage 1</heading>In stage 1 I identified and critically analysed the personal characteristics of lack of self-confidence and low self-esteem using the description, feelings, evaluation and analysis phases of the Gibbs reflective cycle (Gibbs, 1988 cited in: Palmer et al, 1994 p39); stage 2 will focus on the action planning phase. The following table is an annotated action plan for my future development of these key characteristics with the identified current issues being confidence, self-esteem, self-consciousness and difficulty in 'saying no'. I have chosen to focus on these 4 areas as I feel they are inextricably linked to my confidence and therefore need to be addressed together. The action plan identifies how I feel I can improve and develop these areas, integrates relevant literature and includes a schedule for review. I believe the goals I have set are SMART as they are specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and timely. I also feel my objectives are achievable within the remainder of this academic year and hope that by focusing on these areas I will be able to enhance my personal and professional development. <heading>Confidence Lack of self-confidence</heading><heading>Future Development</heading><list>Formally address improving self-confidence, especially during transition phases, with mentor/personal tutor.Reflect on experiences that increase/reduce confidence to aid self-awareness.Request constructive feedback from mentor - accept praise rather than question it.Engage in reflection with others to improve my self-awareness.Continue review of literature regarding self-confidence and ways of improving it.</list><heading>Annotation and Explanation </heading>Gerrish (1999) asserts that transition should be acknowledged as challenging and suggests it is helpful to reflect on past growth and maturation achieved in transitional phases to reinforce ability thus improving confidence; I will endeavour to do this when facing transition. Improved self-awareness can improve self-confidence as understanding our strengths and weaknesses allows our interactions and therefore practice to be more effective (Thompson, 2002). Rowe (1999) believes that extrinsic feedback helps us understand what others see in us and positive feedback improves confidence while Dix and Hughes (2004) add regular feedback sessions should be arranged focusing on positive aspects and development opportunities; this encourages a 'feel-good factor' which builds confidence and self-esteem. Bruce (2006) suggests when feeling low you should list things you did well that day, thinking about the small things as these are often most significant, and use the list to reinforce that you can, and do, do things well. <heading>Date to Evaluate </heading>Competency 23 (critical to placement 7) will provide opportunity to evaluate progress. I will keep an ongoing reflective journal relating to my personal development to allow me to record highs and lows to help me understand my feelings (Palmer et al, 1994). I will request feedback from my mentor, evaluate my confidence and review my development on a weekly basis. <heading>Self-esteem Low self-esteem</heading><heading>Future Development</heading><list>Formally address improving self-esteem as a development goal with mentor/personal tutor.Reflect on experiences that increase/reduce self-esteem to aid self-awareness.Try to develop a more positive outlook about myself and accept praise. Continue examination of literature regarding self-esteem and its development</list><heading>Annotation and Explanation </heading>A positive self-regard can improve self-esteem (Niven & Robinson, 1994). Rowe (1999) asserts that low self-esteem is attributed to comparing yourself to an idea of how you should be in a perfect world, and believes that as this ideal differs greatly from what is achievable self-esteem can be improved by understanding this. Hodston and Simpson (2002) highlight that self-esteem can be improved by not habitually under-valuing yourself and by setting more realistic and achievable goals as achievement improves self-worth. Receiving positive feedback should be used as an opportunity to improve self-esteem while negative feedback should not be allowed to reduce esteem as negatives can always be turned into positives (Ward. 2003). I relate to these points and am often told I am over-critical of myself; I will therefore try to avoid this and will try to focus on the positives. <heading>Date to Evaluate </heading>Competencies 23 and 24 (critical to placement 7 and 8) will provide opportunity to evaluate progress. Reflections and evaluations of levels of self-esteem will be included in my reflective journal. I will request feedback from my mentor, evaluate and review the effects of self-esteem on my development on a weekly basis. <heading>Self-esteem & Confidence Self-consciousness</heading><heading>Future Development</heading><list>Identify and reflect on situations that make me self-conscious to aid self-awareness.Continue use of literature regarding self-consciousness and ways of reducing it. Highlight self-consciousness and an area for development with mentor.</list><heading>Annotation and Explanation</heading>Thompson (2002) asserts that while self-awareness is an asset, self-consciousness is a hindrance as it is a barrier to development and reduces confidence. It is suggested that by changing the way you compare yourself to others (Ward, 2003), worrying less about what others think of you and making the same allowances for yourself as you do for others (Niven & Robinson, 1994) self-consciousness can be reduced and confidence and self-esteem increased. I am aware that I make allowances for others but not for myself so I will endeavour to do this and will try to make fewer comparisons. Niven and Robinson (1994) add that self-consciousness is often used as a defence and that by identifying your defences, the situations that invoke them and attempting to come to terms with them confidence can be increased. <heading>Date to Evaluate </heading>Competency 23 (critical to placement 7) will provide opportunity to evaluate progress. Self-consciousness will be included as and area of reflection in my journal. I will request feedback from my mentor on situations where he/she feels that my self-consciousness has affected my practice and request advice on how to address this on a weekly basis. <heading>Confidence & Assertiveness Difficulty 'saying no'</heading><heading>Future Development</heading><list>Reflect on situations when I find it difficult to 'say no'.Utilise recommendations from the literature suggesting ways of 'saying no'.Highlight improving on 'saying no' as an area I would like to work on with mentor.Observe others 'saying no' to requests.Request constructive feedback from my mentor following situations when I have said no to aid self-awareness and build confidence.</list><heading>Annotation and Explanation </heading>Hodston and Simpson (2002) recognise that saying no is difficult for some and often affected by the underlying fear of offending others, however they point out that everyone has the right to say no without feeling guilty as it is the request not the person that is being turned down. I often find it hard to refuse to help when asked even if it 'puts me out' as I feel I lack the confidence to say no. There are many recommendations regarding how to say no. In future practice I will try to consider why I need to say no; say it clearly giving reasons for my decision and explain that I would help if I could as this shows that I have understood the request, considered my own needs and shown empathy (Hodston & Simpson, 2002; Thompson, 2002). I will also remember that it is not always in the best interests of the person asking to agree to a request (Glen & Parker, 2003); I had always assumed it was. If I find it hard to 'say no' to a request that would 'put me out' I will try the advice of Hodston and Simpson (2002) who recommend that to avoid feeling 'railroaded' you should request time to think by asking 'can I get back to you? <heading>Date to Evaluate </heading>Assertive communication is evaluated in competency 5 (critical to placements 7 and 8). I will reflect on and evaluate my progress following every situation where I should have or did 'say no'. I will also request feedback form my mentor regarding how I handled the situation and where possible I will ask from feedback from the person making the request about how they felt I handled the situation to aid my self-awareness. I feel that by undertaking both stages I have improved my self-awareness and been able to focus on personal characteristics requiring development in a positive way. Reflection plays a central role in my development plan as reflection increases consciousness of actions, which in turn offers opportunity to develop (Palmer et al, 1994). In addition to the evaluations listed above I will review and evaluate my reflective journal at the beginning and end of placement 8 to assess my development in all areas. By including others in the reflective process I hope to incorporate perspectives other than my own which Palmer et al (1994) believe aids self-awareness and learning. By reflecting on and critically analysing key personal characteristics and proposing an action plan for their development I have taken a problem-based approach to my development to enable me to build self-confidence and improve my professional practice (Biley & Smith, 1998). I feel the issues identified contribute to each other as reducing self-consciousness will help me assert myself and build self-esteem, in turn improving confidence. I have valued the opportunity to identify areas for improvement and hope that my action plan will provide a framework to both develop and assess my future development. 