<heading>How and Why Do the Teeth of Primates Vary in Morphology? </heading>Primates, like all mammals, are heterodonts. This means they have distinctive categories of teeth in terms of function and morphology. There are four different kinds of teeth; the anterior peg-shaped incisors and dagger-shaped canines and the posterior broad, cusped, molars and pre-molars. <heading>The Anterior Teeth</heading>The anterior teeth of primates serve a large range of functions including food acquisition, grooming, fighting and sexual display. The incisors are generally small, but in the case of the aye-aye they resemble those of rodents, being relatively very large and continuously growing. These features enable the aye-aye to gnaw holes in tree bark to gain access to insect prey. Anthropoids have fully closing incisors with a biting or tearing function as opposed to the Prosimii, which have reduced upper incisors and a procumbent row of lower incisors. The reduction of the maxillary (upper) incisors in the prosimians (excluding genus Tarsius) is related to the presence of the Jacobson's organ, which is situated in the roof of the mouth and is used in the detection of chemical signals. These strepsirrhine primates also possess a toothcomb, formed by the procumbent lower incisors and the canines. The role of this dental unit is primarily related to grooming, although many species also use it for scooping up fruit pulp and exudates. The above mentioned full closure found in the anthropoids serves a mostly dietary function, and the size of the incisors varies with actual dietary requirements. The general rule is that frugivores have relatively larger incisors than those of folivores due to the need to peel fruit and break it into manageable pieces prior to mastication. Canines vary in size among primates for various reasons. Tamarins possess relatively long canines which enable them to gouge holes in tree bark in order to gain access to the gum and sap beneath. Baboon and gorilla males have huge canines and the fact that these species display marked sexual dimorphism in this respect points to sexual display being the primary function. <heading>The Posterior Teeth</heading>The pre-molars and molars in all animals have the sole function of food processing. Primates in general are distinctive in that their molars have diverged relatively little from the ancestral mammalian condition. Prosimians retain the most primitive structure on the occlusal (face which closes with the opposite tooth) surface of the molars. This is probably linked to the fact that all prosimians are relatively small, and therefore insects make up a large portion of their diets, as suggested by Kay's threshold. The ancestral mammal from which all primates evolved was also small and insectivorous and it seems that there has been less pressure for the prosimians to shift diet to fruit or leaves, and so their molars have remained relatively unspecialised. This is especially evident in genus Tarsius, the most primitive of all primates in terms of occlusal molar structure, and which is the only true insectivore (or, more accurately, faunivore, as tarsiers also eat lizards and small birds). A general rule often cited about primate molars is that folivores and insectivores possess sharp, shearing crests, whereas frugivores do not have such a need for these functional properties, fruit needing to be pulped rather than sliced. We must be careful with such generalisations because, "Most living primates do have mixed diets that change not only between populations of the same species but also during seasons of the year" (Ankel-Simons 2000). Even the above mentioned tarsier, which has the most easily categorised diet, has a taste for many different kinds of prey. It is likely that molar morphology will not have a high correlation to function as primate teeth must be able to cope with a large range of food stuffs. We must also be wary of terms such as frugivore and insectivore because these food groups incorporate a huge variety of structural consistencies. For example, one insectivore may eat mainly eat mainly hard-bodied insects, in which case small pointed cusps are required to crack the exoskeletons. Another insectivore, however, may prey upon mostly soft-bodied insects such as grubs, and this diet would require longer, razor-like cusps in order to shear the morsel into small pieces. It is worth mentioning the Old World monkeys in relation to posterior dentition, as they have a universal feature which identifies them as a "natural group" (Martin 1990). All cercopithecoids have four cusped, bilophodont molars in both the upper and lower jaws. The reason for this is probably due to their largely folivorous diets but, again, this encapsulates a wide range of different leaf types, from tough old ones, to young new ones and it is not easy to relate morphology to function. Ankel-Simons ( ) identifies this problem well, writing, "Primates are endlessly adaptable because of their very nature. Animals with large brains, four unspecialised and very dextrous limbs, and having comparatively unspecialised dentitions and digestive systems are not very likely to be adapted to such precise degrees that the correlation between morphology and function becomes incontestable." <heading>In What Ways Do the Special Senses Differ Between Nocturnal and Diurnal Primates? </heading>The function and structure of primate species' specials senses are strongly related to their respective activity patterns. Nocturnal species (of which all but one are members of the suborder Prosimii) are in general relatively small, solitary and insectivorous. By contrast, diurnal species are comparatively larger, live in social groups and are mainly folivorous or frugivorous. All of these variables, in addition to the simple fact that one group is active during daylight and the other in the dark, produce shared special sense characteristics. <heading>Vision</heading>Nocturnal primates have relatively larger eyes and orbital sockets than diurnal species. Besides this simple difference, there are structural distinctions of the eyeball which separate the two groups. Diurnal primates have a greater need for colour vision, for food location, predator avoidance and communication. The retinas of these animals therefore contain far more cones than their nocturnal counterparts, albeit with much variety between species. They also possess a specialised retinal spot known as a fovea, which contains a high concentration of light sensitive rods, allowing high visual acuity. Nocturnal primates lack a fovea, but have a specialised reflective device of their own, the tapetum lucidum, which in effect recycles light passing through the retina and provides a greater degree of light sensitivity. Notable exceptions regarding these general features include the nocturnal tarsier and night owl, which both have a fovea but no tapetum lucidum, and also the diurnal lemurs of the family Lemuridae which lack a fovea but have a reflective retina. All of these species are palinosts, meaning that at some stage in the past their ancestors have switched from one activity pattern to the other. <heading>Audition</heading>All primates share similar internal ear structure, although there are variations relating to the frequencies which different species need to pick up. For example, many nocturnal primates have an enlarged auditory bulla, probably to aid the detection of low frequency vibrations made by flying insect prey. In addition, the insectivorous diet of most nocturnal primates requires large mobile ears in order to pinpoint the location of this prey, whereas diurnal primates generally use sound for communication and predator avoidance only and have largely lost the ability to swivel their ears. The diurnal Lemurid palinosts retain external ear mobility. <heading>Olfaction</heading>Nocturnal primates are in general more reliant on smell for hunting and communication and so retain several primitive characteristics not present in most diurnal species. These include a moist rhinarium, used to detect chemical scents in conjunction with the vomero-nasal, or Jacobson's, organ. They also have more elaborate turbinal scrolls, allowing more developed olfactory abilities. These features are absent or greatly reduced in diurnal species, although there is much variability and many New World monkeys still make use of the Jacobson's organ and have a keen sense of smell. As a consequence of the reduced need for highly sensitive olfaction, the olfactory bulbs, situated beneath the frontal lobes of the brain, are greatly reduced in diurnal primate species. Nocturnal tarsiers and night monkeys again provide the exceptions to these general rules, having no moist rhinarium. Conversely, the diurnal Lemurids retain their strepsirrhine status. <heading>Touch</heading>The main point of contact with the world for nocturnal primates is the nose and face, and they possess several adaptations in relation to this. The rhinarium acts as a tactile sense organ as well as an olfactory device. Some species, such as the Senegal bush baby and the grey mouse lemur even have epidermal ridges, similar to fingerprints, on their rhinarium. In addition to the rhinarium, nocturnal primates also have well developed vibrissae, or whiskers, which have largely been lost among diurnal species. Diurnal primates have developed far more sophisticated hands and feet with which to explore the world. In general they are more sensitive than those of the nocturnal primates, and have far greater independent digit manipulation. To facilitate this, the brain regions responsible for the extremities have become much more elaborate, with specialised regions in New World monkeys correlating to their prehensile tails. The same palinostic species provide our exceptions once again, with the nocturnal tarsier and night monkey retaining the ability to independently manipulate their digits. <heading>What is a Species and How Do New Species Arise? </heading>A species is the fundamental unit of nature. In practice species are usually recognised and defined in purely phenetic terms. As Mark Ridley (2004) puts it, a species forms a "phenetic cluster". This means that a group of organisms that shares more physical or behavioural characteristics with each other than with any other group is classified as a separate species. However, there is always variation within a group of organism and the phenetic characteristics which define that group may not be present in all individuals. For example, humans, like all hominids, have distinctive molars in that there are five cusps which form a Y shape. A taxonomist may use a feature such as this to characterise a species. Some humans do not possess one of the five cusps however, and the pattern of their molars forms more of a + shape. Although these individuals lack a defining characteristic of our species, we would not classify them as a separate organism! To cope with this problem, several theoretical frameworks have been proposed by biologists in order to define the concept of a species. The biological species concept is probably the most widely accepted of these. Ernst Mayr (1963) explains it as follows, "Species are groups of interbreeding natural populations that are reproductively isolated from other such groups". The key point here is that species share a gene pool and so also share many physical characteristics. Some phenetically different species can interbreed, for example horses and donkeys, but supporters of the biological species concept point to the fact that these matings usually result in sterile or inviable offspring, which will not pass their genes on and are therefore insignificant in terms of evolution. The specific mate recognition concept proposed by Paterson (1991) is very similar to the biological model, defining species as populations which identify potential mates within themselves only. Again, this highlights the notion of a species being an interbreeding genetic cluster. This approach was used to identify several species of bush babies which, although morphologically similar, used different mating calls. Phenetic species concepts have been suggested, but as I pointed out above, this does not adequately define a species as there is much intra-group variation, and also inter-group similarity. Another non-biological species concept is based on the idea that different species will occupy different ecological niches. The application of any of these species concepts results in very similar classification of the animals in the world, as any group of interbreeding organisms is highly likely to share certain morphological characteristics and also to occupy the same ecological niche. The process of speciation generally involves the evolution of an isolating barrier between two or more subgroups of a population. This may reveal some bias towards the biological species concept, but it is safe to say that most species are reproductively isolated. Theodius Dobzhansky (1970) split potential isolating barriers into two categories: (1) prezygotic barriers such as different mating seasons, mating calls and incompatible genitalia (2) postzygotic barriers where hybrid offspring are produced but are inviable or infertile. All such isolating barriers arise due to natural selection, but there are various hypotheses as to what causes a population to diverge. The most widely accepted model of speciation is allopatric. In this scenario a population of previously interbreeding organisms becomes geographically separated. This may be due to a physical barrier such as a river or mountain range, the migration of part of a population or the extinction of the intermediate section of a population, leaving the fringes isolated. Once geographically separated, gene flow halts between the subgroups and over time environmental pressures and genetic drift cause isolating barriers to evolve in one or all of the populations. Richard Klein (1999) suggests that this type of speciation occurred in the early Homo lineage, with H.ergaster appearing in Africa and a subpopulation migrating to Asia where, geographically isolated, H.erectus evolved. There are two other less widely accepted hypotheses as to how speciation may occur. Parapatric speciation results when a geographically continuous population occupies different habitats. Boyd and Silk (2003) offer the example of baboons which live in widely different environments, from savannah to tropical rainforests. Although not reproductively isolated, the baboons living in the savannah will be slightly differently adapted to those living in the forests. Interbreeding occurs between these phenetically different populations but will usually result in less viable offspring. Thus, over time natural selection will favour populations which breed only within their own habitat and isolating barriers may evolve. The third speciation hypothesis, sympatric speciation, suggests that a population may diverge even when occupying the same habitat and geographical area. Slight differences between subpopulations, such as different food types, may be strong enough factors for selection to occur against hybridisation. Of these theories the most widely favoured by biologists is the allopatric speciation model. 