The author, Paul Bloom, begins to explain, after an introductory example of a successful World Series Poker player's extraordinary ability to pre-empt the moves of his opponents, that humans use their mental abilities in many different ways. Examples are mentioned, linking how the mind works in nature, both competatively and socially. Natural selection is a topic that is raised in a way that describes how humans use their mental capability to outwit one another for personal advancement. Ofcourse, humans are not the only ones in the world can work against them and the author mentions that humans use their minds in co-operation, thus opening a door to explain the concept of 'understanding' one another. Communication allowes us, as humans with the mental capacity to 'understand', to teach, negotiate and relate to others. The argument that these mental abilities are inborn is discussed throughout the rest of the chapter, using thorough examples of tests that were conducted on babies to find out, among other things, if they could recognise whether or someone else knew what they knew or if they assumed the same things, in certain cases, that adults did. Bloom mentions four assumptions, originally stated by developmental psychologist Elizabeth Spelke, that all humans possess about physical objects. These are, cohesion, solidity, continuity and contact and allow humans to interact and manipulate the physical world outside their own minds. We expect certain things to happen in the physical world without thinking that something else might happen otherwise. Babies, according to the chapter, were largely thought of as being "stupid". Contrarily, Bloom explains quite expansively that babies are smarter than they seem, mentioning that "what one knows is very different from how one acts."Experiments are described to see if babies make the assumptions that are mentioned by Elizabeth Spelke, and they do. Babies expect objects to be cohesive and solid, they expect continuity and they expect contact to be made in order for an object to have movement. This would imply that babies have not been given the intellectual credit they deserved, although there are limits to the assumptions they make. The older babies become, the more capabilities they develop. Bloom describes how babies react to people, explaining that they can sense expressions and emotions and even without the use of language, quickly learn to communicate, using their physical abilities and capacity to interpret the expressions of people around them as a sort of guide. When they gain the capability of speech, they begin to express their preferences and appreciate that what they think is not what everyone else thinks. Some people, however, are behave in the typical ways described earlier in the chapter. People with autism, are largely unable to view the world the same as someone without. While humans can use the intuition they possess from, as Bloom suggests, a very young age to "mindread" and interpret communications, the autistic do not. They see everything as people without see inanimate objects, and thus, are unable to react appropriately to, say, facial expressions, because the face is just seen as an object. According to Bloom, human mental capacity is adaptive and the thery of natural selection can explain this well. We can use our minds and senses multi-purposefully to remain in the world. An evolutionary step forward. 