The book under discussion is the ethnography by Liza Dalby entitled Geisha. It covers a detailed interpretation of the lives of Geisha professionals, through first-hand experience of the author's own. During the 1970s for about one year, Liza Dalby became the first foreigner to be trained and established as a Geisha in one of the six Geisha districts of the ancient capital Kyoto. Liza Dalby informs the reader of the differences between the post- and the pre-war world of the Geisha. That world is called karyoukai, literally, the flower and willow world. This world is, in anycase, rather separated from the mainstream Japanese society. The explanations of the post-war karyoukai are delivered to the reader as she recounts her experiences as the Geisha, Ichigiku; a moniker derived from a combination of her Geisha family and her Japanese name, Kikuko. Due to the karyoukai's affiliation to the traditional arts, it is respected, however, involvement is often discouraged. This ethnography really brings out all the cultural misinterpretations about the Geisha and rectifies them appropriately, which is what I will be writing about in the following paragraphs. Kyoto is probably the most historically preserved city in Japan, and for the reason why it has managed to be so historically preserved, has often been used along with karyoukai, as well as other disciplines, to be the symbol of Japan. It's historical image, being preserved as much as it can considering the modern time it must exist in, has been preserved along with as many of the traditions of the flower and willow world as modernity will allow. Changes have occurred but there are ones that have easily remained regardless of the changing times, such as the nomenclature of Geisha. Dalby's Geisha name, as mentioned in the introduction, was Ichigiku, sticking to the tradition that anyone trained as a Geisha of a certain school (in this case, the dai-ichi teahouse) adopt a name that begins with ichi. Like the school's founder, Ichiko right the way to Dalby's 'elder sister' Ichiume.I mentioned Ichiume as Dalby's, or more accurately Ichigiku's, 'elder sister'. This is not meant to be taken too literally, though. Geisha and maiko (apprentice Geisha) are bound in a ceremony as so-called sisters, as the elder is to watch over her younger sister and show her the way of life; age is of no concern, where experience is. The whole Geisha household, or okiya, uses 'the family' as a sort of guide for hierarchy. The head of the okiya being okaasan (mother), and respectively the elder and younger sister(s). Pre-war, the relationship would not have been as friendly as today. It was a harsh time for young girls. To become a Geisha would be a slim opportunity for financial independence, and on the way to that goal, if ever reached, a life of servitude and, more often than not, abuse. With a struggling pre-war economy, if a maiko was not born into the okiya, she was sold into it, either through recruitment or sacrifice. She would work as a maid for the okiya, and if she showed any promise of success as a Geisha would then begin training as a maiko. Apart from those born into okiya, the tales that were told to Dalby of these kind were often ones of tragedy and despair. Nowadays, the hardships have disappeared, for human rights are a notion that tend to show strong presence in most developed economies. Retired Geisha from the old school see karyoukai as having lost its necessary bite that allowed for Geisha to reach masterdom in the arts. The reasons why pre-war Geisha entered karyoukai, were briefly described in the above paragraph. Post-war geisha, due to a sort of pro-rights clause erected in 1946, are now treated with much respect from their 'family' members. A Geisha who enters the ranks these days, often enters for a nostalgic love of the traditional arts. Afterall, the Gei-, in Geisha is the word for art. However, due to a lack of business for Geisha, compared to the boom in pre-war Japan, where the shift of interest has gone from patrons to tourists, proprietoresses of teahouses and okiya tend to use niceness to lure young girls into karyoukai business. A lot of what allows for one to become a geisha has changed. For instance, prior to the war, one would have to be born in the Pontochou district (where Ichigiku worked) to become a Geisha there, for it was a prestigious place. But now that the number of maiko is dwindling, at 4 or 5 around 1974, young girls are allowed in purely to satisfy the tourist demand. It is also not unheard of now, that the maiko process is entirely skipped when becoming a Geisha. While the profession is highly respected by most Japanese families, many parents oppose that their daughters become Geisha. When one becomes a Geisha, she can forget about having any plans to marry. In Japan, the role of a wife is very much what Western feminists have struggled to disestablish. A Geisha is to fulfil, what a wife does not. A wife is to be serious, where a Geisha is to be humorous; homely, while a Geisha is to be sexy, etc. While this image does not appeal to the average Western female, it is something that is generally accepted by most Japanese people. Additionally, both find it perfectly acceptable that a Japanese man can have a wife and a Geisha as a mistress, for they see themselves as fulfilling specific roles in life, which is something that would definitely be frowned upon in the West. Wives and Geisha in Japan are often quite friendly and acceptant toward eachother for that reason, as examplified in Dalby's book. I chose to read this book because I was aware that karyoukai was a highly separate world from even the society of its homeland. The questions I had relating to the reasons why women become Geisha, and how this affects the wives of their patrons have been answered quite thoroughly. I have learned from this book, and been inspired to learn more about the arts of the Geisha, such as music and dance. This book has opened up my eyes to realising karyoukai as being part of the backbone to authentic Japanese identity, and has successfully vanquished any naïve negativisms that I might have had before. While they are described as courtesans, I think it is fair to say that they are courtesans of a much higher order, and that the Western image of Geisha is grossly misunderstood. 