<heading>Introduction</heading>Kirtlington Golf Club is a privately owned golf club located close to Kidlington in Oxfordshire. The golf club is member orientated, but welcomes members of the public to use its facilities. This development plan will be concentrating on the restaurant within the golf club. The restaurant is made up of a lounge/restaurant and a separate bar, called the "Spike Bar." The restaurant has a maximum capacity of 120, but it is generally set up for 50 covers. The Spike bar seats around 20 people. Although called a restaurant, the room is multi-functional, and can be used for parties, meetings, conferences and dinners. The restaurant is open from 8am daily until dusk, although it can stay open later if requested and pre-arranged. This happens more frequently for golfing societies who combine golf with a meal (Appendix 1). Members of the club and the public can also hold events in the restaurant, but it's not advertised. A point to note is that if the public do use the restaurant as a venue, then the members can't be excluded from the club house, and have to have access to the Spike Bar. Food is served throughout the day from a bar menu (Appendix 2). Food is ordered at the bar. The food is very traditional sporting English food, and quite basic. Examples include bacon rolls, burgers and sausage and mash. However, the menu available to the societies and events (Appendix 3) for pre-order is far more varied than the normal bar menu. Alcoholic beverages are available as well as soft drinks and hot drinks. The alcohol license runs until 12 midnight. The main target markets for the restaurant are the members of the golf club and the societies that visit from all over the country. The majority of the members that use the restaurant are seniors (40% of golf club members), most of whom are men. At the weekend, there tends to be a younger crowd in the restaurant, both members of the club and the public. The younger people tend to be around more at the weekend as they're working in the week. Although members are the most frequent users of the restaurant, they are by no means the biggest spenders. The group spending the largest amount of money is the societies. At the weekend, a large sum of money is made from members of the public. <heading>PESTE Analysis</heading>A PESTE analysis is a process whereby information is collected about trends and events that are relevant to the business from the outside environment (Teare and Olsen, 1992). It is used to develop courses of action to take advantage of beneficial trends or avoid detrimental trends. Understanding the macro-environment is essential when considering changes to a business (Morrison and Wearne, 1996). The factors taken into account are Political, Economic, Socio-cultural, Technological and Environmental (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). There are four steps to planning and using a PESTE analysis (Kotler, Bowen and Makens, 2003). These steps are determining the factors that are relevant to the business, then deciding how to collect the information, then implementing the data collection plan, and finally analysing the data. Below is a PESTE analysis for Kirtlington Golf Club Restaurant. <heading>Political</heading>Smoking ban 2007. (Webster and Charter, 2006) As the clubhouse is an enclosed, public place no smoking will be allowed inside once the smoking ban is put into force. This might attract some visitors and displease others. Proposed meal tax -10% on every meal served (Sunday Express, 2006) Businesses will either have to raise their prices risking customers or accept a lesser profit margin. Anti-age discrimination 2006 (DirectGov, 2006). Businesses will have to monitor their employee turnover and demographic more closely. Further, they need to use careful selection processes when employing, promoting and making people redundant. <heading>Economic</heading>The restaurant market is still growing along with higher consumer demands (Mintel, 2006). The higher demand is likely to have a positive effect on food and beverage spending. Costs of petrol and oil are driving up the cost of supplies which is tightening margins (Mintel, 2006). Businesses will have to turn to local suppliers to ensure less food miles. The actual inflation rate is now estimated to be 10% for the middle classes (Watts, 2006). The actual inflation will mean less disposable income for the middle classes which will have a negative effect on eating out. Golf clubs especially attract people from the middle classes. 23% of eating out market is held by pubs (Mintel, 2006). Pubs should be considered as competitors for restaurants. This means additional competitor research will be important. <heading>Sociocultural</heading>40% of UK's population is over 45 years old (Mintel 2000). These are considered the people with time and money. People who frequently eat out are more are likely spend larger amounts on beverages (Mintel 2006). A good bar/wine-list can add considerable revenue in a restaurant establishment. In the next ten years, healthy eating combined with innovative dishes will strongly influence restaurant food. The "grey market" will be the ones dictating new eating trends (Mintel 2006). It will be crucial for businesses to adjust their menus to this trend to keep attracting customers. It is now common to eat out at any time during the day. There are no strict meal periods (Mintel, 2006). Having a restaurant open all day might bring extra revenue. However, it's important to weigh the potential revenue against the added cost. Over 50% of Cherwell District's population is in social grades A, B and C1 (National Statistics, 2006). These are the typical social grades frequenting golf clubs. <heading>Technological</heading>Websites are increasingly important (Mintel, 2006). It's important that websites are informative and easy to use. New web based systems are in place that can handle recipe and menu management (Caterer and Hotelkeeper, 2006). This system could help restaurants to cut their costs and source the best supplier for a particular product. Accounting software is becoming more popular (Caterer and Hotelkeeper, 2006). These systems make accounting far easier. They also allow the restaurant to identify income and cost trends. <heading>Environmental</heading>Environmental issues continue to be important in the mind of the consumer (Mintel, 2006). Restaurants need to publicise their commitment to the environment to attract those consumers concerned with the environment. Cherwell District Council's Environmental Policy (Cherwell District Council 2006). The environmental policy encourages businesses to save energy, have efficient waste management and preserve the countryside. <heading>Customer Audit Trail Analysis</heading>A customer audit trail is the process of evaluating a service experience first hand in both the case study organisation and its competitors. The identified competitors of Kirtlington Golf Club are the Bicester Golf and Country Club, Chipping Norton Golf Club and the Oxford Arms public house in Kirtlington. In order to compare the Kirtlington Golf Club (KGC) with its competitors, it is necessary to carry out customer audit trails both there and at all the competitors. A customer audit trail is a form of competitive analysis. The main reason for carrying this out is to identify a businesses strengths and weaknesses relative to the competition (Teare and Olsen, 1992), and use these facts to create a competitive advantage (Chambers and Lewis, 2000). The customer audit trail involves visiting each establishment in order to assess their facilities and quality (Mawson, 2000). (The customer audit trails for KGC, Bicester Golf and Country Club, Chipping Norton Golf Club and the Oxford Arms are available in Appendix 4). <heading>Kirtlington Golf Club</heading>We found that although well presented, the restaurant was not signed, and was set up for an evening function, making it very intimidating. We were welcomed and our order arrived swiftly, but it was noted that there was confusion of other table's orders. The food was good value with large portions. All the facilities were of high quality, and staff were genuinely friendly. <heading>Bicester Golf and Country Club</heading>A very different setting to KGC. We were welcomed and directed upon entry to the restaurant. The service was slow and there seemed to be a lack of interest in quality service. The food was very good, and the menu extensive. Despite being of higher aesthetic quality, the prices were still as low as KGC; however the service left a lot to be desired. <heading>The Oxford Arms</heading>A forty minute wait was encountered for the table, despite being initially told it was 10 minutes. No compensation was offered for this. Once ordered the food was well presented and delicious, but over priced for what it was. We felt that although apologetic, it wasn't entirely sincere. We felt that the pub was drastically understaffed for half term week. <heading>Chipping Norton Golf Club</heading>Despite a professional impression with security at the gate, and the knowledge of a dress code, once inside, the building was shabby and uninviting. The bar/restaurant was clean and bright, but very smoky. Portions were small, but prices didn't reflect this, and the menu was limited. Clearly the restaurant was a function room as well as a bar, so was basic. <heading>Positioning Map and Statement</heading>Positioning maps are based on the results of competitive analysis (Morris and Shaw, 2000), and so ours is a result of the customer audit trails. A positioning map is "a visual illustration of how customers perceive competing services" (Lovelock and Wright, 2002 pp 221). A positioning map plots consumer opinions on attributes of a business, varying from price to location amongst others (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). Below is a positioning map for Kirtlington Golf Club and its competitors. <figure/><table/>This positioning map compares the price of the cheapest main course at each establishment with the overall quality of the experience. The scale of the quality axis is 1= very good quality, 2= good, 3= average, 4= poor and 5= very poor. We decided to use these attributes to compare the competitive set as our interview (Appendix 5) highlighted that price is very important to the market. We chose overall quality because the perceived quality determines customer satisfaction (Johnston and Clark, 2001), that is to say that a product or service is perceived to be of high quality if it meets or exceeds the customer's expectations. From this positioning map, it can be seen that Bicester Golf and Country Club is in an unsustainable position, as their prices are low given the perceived quality (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). However, as the restaurant/bar is a secondary product to the Golf and Country Club itself, it may be supported by the income from other activities. The Oxford Arms, Chipping Norton Golf Club and KGC are all charging reasonable prices for their perceived quality, and operating within their price/quality product class (Chambers and Lewis, 2000. A positioning statement is "a phrase reflecting the image the organisation wants to create" (Morrison, 2001 pp596). The purpose of a positioning statement is to highlight differences, advantages and benefits which make people perceive a business or product in a particular way (Morrison and Wearne, 1996). Below is a positioning statement that we have created, for the position in which Kirtlington Golf Club restaurant should be. <quote>"A relaxed, informal lounge restaurant, serving value for money, traditionally English sporting food without compromising quality."</quote><heading>SWOT Analysis</heading>A SWOT analysis is an evaluation of a business' Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (Kotler et al, 2003). The internal evaluation is of the businesses strengths and weaknesses, whilst the external evaluation is of the opportunities created by the macro-environment and the threats it poses. A SWOT is used to develop strategies to exploit opportunities and minimise threats using your strengths and build on your weaknesses (Chambers and Lewis, 2000). Below is a SWOT analysis of Kirtlington Golf Club restaurant. The information on this SWOT has been drawn together from our PESTE analysis, customer audit trail and interview. <heading>Strengths</heading>Low staff turnover. This suggests that staff are happy in their jobs and are well treated. Familiarity with customers. This conveyed a very friendly, family-like atmosphere, which attracts regular custom. Good reputation for food in golfing community. The interview revealed that the quality of the chef was important to maintain this. Responsive to member's needs. Emma Stone emphasised how important the members are to the club and that no matter what, they came first. Value for money. The audit trail showed how the club was good value in comparison to competitors. This makes it attractive to the grey market. <heading>Weaknesses</heading>Lack of signage in club house. This could put people off visiting the restaurant. Lack of marketing communication. Despite Emma mentioning that she would like to attract more members of the public to the restaurant for meals and events, there is no promotion to inform them of it. No consideration to atmosphere. The main room lacks the intimacy of a restaurant, and feels more like a meeting room. Concentration on member's needs. Due to the importance of members, it's very hard to attract the public without upsetting members. Inconsistent food standards due to staff changes. This would reduce the number of returning customers if they've had a bad meal. <heading>Opportunities</heading>Increased use of internet. The club's website is poor, and might affect a customer's perception of the restaurant. Competitor (Bicester) is opening more widely to the public. KGC's commitment to members may attract ex-Bicester members. Grey market growing and influencing eating trends. KGC can capitalise on its senior members, and target the restaurant towards them. Environmental issues are important to the consumer. Commitment to the environment can reap long term rewards in the way of additional customers, and can cut costs. <heading>Threats</heading>Smoking ban. Members currently smoking in the Spike bar will now have to go outside. This may reduce use of the bar. Proposed meal tax. This will either increase prices or reduce margins, both of which would affect trade. High "actual" inflation. This reduces people's disposable income, particularly those of the middle classes. This may reduce the amount people spend in the bar and restaurant. Eating out market dominated by pubs. This means the competitor set is growing. <heading>Recommendations and Marketing Communication</heading>The following are recommendations for Kirtlington Golf Club to consider. The recommendations consider each element of the marketing mix. These elements are tools used by marketers to develop objectives for a company (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The 7 element of the mix are product, price, place, promotion, people, physical evidence and process. The elements are used in conjunction with each other to develop the hospitality offer for the target markets. <heading>Product</heading>Afternoon tea should be offered for the summer period. The afternoons are a period of excess supply (Appendix 6) for the restaurant. An offer such as this would encourage both members of the club and members of the public to use the restaurant at this time, and generate additional revenue. Barbeque evenings. At present, the restaurant is not open in the evenings, but a newly built terrace is the perfect venue for a barbeque in the summer and the club should make full use of it. These evenings would develop more of a social side to the golf club, but also attract the public, looking for a good value, casual evening out. This would also make people more aware of the restaurant itself, and hopefully generate further revenue due to this. Christmas lunches. The period of time running up to Christmas tends to be fairly quiet for the restaurant as "fair weather" golfers no longer frequent the club. For this reason, a Christmas lunch would be a suitable option. It would attract the members of the club who may already dine there for lunch, and small local businesses looking to celebrate. <heading>Price</heading>"Balls and brunch" price bundle. This discount would offer weekend golfers the opportunity to eat brunch in the restaurant during the quieter period of the morning (9-11am), with a bucket of balls for the driving range. As the bucket of balls only costs £2, very little revenue is lost in exchange for additional revenue in the restaurant. "Societies and wine" price bundle. At present, societies have the opportunity to order a 1, 2 or 3 course meal, and all drinks are charged additionally. We propose that any society ordering a 3 course meal is offered a bottle of wine for every 4 people dining. This will stimulate the demand for a 3 course meal and will encourage the societies to buy further bottles of wine. "Meeting and golf" price bundle. Although there is a conference room at the golf club, it isn't widely used, as the club doesn't advertise it. The club should offer local businesses the chance to use the meeting facilities and include a round of golf in the price. As the conference room has low variable costs, there is more room for reducing the price (Burgess, 2001). <heading>Place</heading>Develop the website. The website needs to look more professional, and include more detail. The restaurant needs to be more widely recognised by the website, and specify that it is open to the public. The SWOT identifies that there is increased use of the internet now. <heading>Promotion</heading>Use the enclosed marketing communications plan (Appendix 7) to promote the recommendations made. Marketing communications are the processes used to communicate relevant information to a target markets (Yeshin, 1998). Direct mail. Members and the local community will be targeted with direct mailings in order to increase awareness of the restaurant, and stimulate demand. In-house marketing. Posters will be displayed within the clubhouse detailing forthcoming events and encouraging members to bring friends to the club. Merchandising. This is a form of selling parts of a business, when another is being purchased. In KGC the main example is telling people about the restaurant when they book tee times for the golf course. Personal selling. This involves making direct contact with the target market, for example calling societies that return on a regular basis. Newspaper advert. This will contact a wider audience, from both the business and the leisure markets. <heading>People</heading>Integrate new chef fully. KGC has in the past had problems integrating new chefs into the restaurant. It's important that the new chef knows exactly how the culture of the organisation works, and is willing to understand what the customer expects from the menu. Encourage customer feedback from seniors. According the PESTE analysis, the grey market is growing, so the club needs to consider their needs and wants. By approaching these customers, the club will attract more people from this market. Distinguish themselves by quality of staff. The customer audit trails demonstrated that the quality of staff at KGC is significantly better than at its competitors. The staff need to be encouraged to continue this high level of working. <heading>Physical Evidence</heading>Signage inside the building. The SWOT identifies that the restaurant is not signed and therefore not easily located within the clubhouse. A simple sign at the entrance and in the corridor would rectify this. Alter interior of restaurant. Again, the SWOT identifies that the restaurant has no real identity. This could be rectified by changing the seating plan to make it more intimate and restaurant-like. Also, when there are functions in the evening, they shouldn't be set up too far in advance, as this makes the atmosphere intimidating. This was noted in the customer audit trail. Utilise terrace as smoking area. At present, smoking is allowed in the Spike Bar. Next year, this will be banned (see PESTE). The terrace could be used as the designated smoking area, and a canopy should be installed for weather protection. This would be an aesthetically pleasing area to smoke, and the smokers wouldn't feel like they were being unfairly treated. <heading>Process</heading>Table numbers are needed. When visiting KGC for the customer audit trail, it was noticed that there was some confusion about where food was going. Table numbers are a cheap and easy way to prevent this problem. Consider environmental factors when purchasing. The PESTE recognises that the market place is becoming more environmentally aware, so purchasing decisions should be made not only on price, but also on their environmental impact. <heading>Performance Measurements</heading>There are four main purposes of measuring performance within a business. These are communication to staff, motivation of staff, control of processes and to see where improvement is needed (Johnston and Clark, 2001). The balanced scorecard comprises 4 areas where performance measurements can be made- financial, external, operational and development (Kaplan and Norton, 1992, cited in Johnson and Clark, 2001), and its suggested that managers create a balance of where performance is measured using these areas. The table below shows the performance indicators that should be implemented for the key recommendations. <table/><heading>Conclusion</heading>Having researched the factors that affect the Kirtlington Golf Club, we have been able to conduct a PESTE analysis and a SWOT analysis. These have allowed us to make tailor-made recommendations to the Golf Club in order to develop the restaurant, and make it successful. The recommendations take into account all of the elements of the marketing mix, including promotion, where a detailed marketing communications plan has been developed. The recommendations will also allow the restaurant to better manage capacity. Tools such as the positioning map, the customer audit trail and the capacity management analysis have enabled us to identify areas where change may be necessary. By implementing the changes we have suggested, the restaurant can become a source of revenue for the golf club in its own right, rather than relying on the golf club for business. 