<heading>An Environmental Management Programme for the Wychwood Forest Hotel </heading>There are many reasons that an environmental programme should be implemented in any business. The global society is becoming more aware of environmental issues, as they are more widely publicised. One of the biggest issues is that of the finite supply of fossil fuels. One day, the world's supplies of coal and gas will run out, and other means will have to be found to supply our power. Not only this, but the burning of fossil fuels to create energy is also harmful to the environment. The burning contributes towards global warming, acid rain and the depletion of the ozone layer. If we continue to burn fossil fuels at the current rate, then it's predicted the world's average temperature will increase by 2ºc over the next 100 years (Webster, 2000). This temperature rise will change the global climate, making some parts of the world into arid desert, whilst other parts will be inundated with rain. The polar ice caps will also start to melt, causing sea levels to rise, meaning costal cities could disappear totally, including parts of London. Another major issue is the amount of water we use. In the hospitality industry, only 5% of water used is consumed by people, the rest being used for cleaning and food preparation. As global warming reduces the amount of rain we have, and the water table lowers, we need to consider our use, especially here in the Thames Valley, where water is scarcer than other parts of the UK (Webster, 2000). The other issue is the amount of waste the modern world creates. Only 4% of waste from the hospitality industry is recycled, with the rest being sent to landfill sites or incinerated, which releases harmful gases into the atmosphere. For a business such as the Wychwood Forest Hotel, the main focus should be on the management of energy, water and waste. The process of environmental management is not as expensive as you may think, as small changes can make a big difference. It is far easier and cheaper to prevent the pollution, than to repair its damage. The hotel will reap the rewards of an environmental programme, with cost savings made, as demonstrated by the likes of Hilton and Inter-Continental Hotel Group. The programme will also ensure new environmental legislation is met, and improve the consumer's image of the hotel. The 'green' consumer is a growing market who demands 'green' products. On a global scale, the benefits will be reaped by future generations. In order to implement a successful environmental management plan, it's important that you consider the points in the following report and decide on the most viable recommendations, and train staff to follow the new procedures. You may also wish to appoint an environment work group or manager to assess performance and look for further innovative ideas. I do hope you will seriously consider developing an environmental management programme. Hopefully, the following report will be of use to you at the Wychwood Forest Hotel, and maybe at your sister hotels in time. Yours sincerely,  <heading>Evaluation of Current Performance</heading>Currently, the performance of the Wychwood Forest Hotel with regards to environmental awareness is mixed. There are several examples of good practice employed by the hotel. In the conference rooms, there is plentiful natural daylight, which helps to keep lighting bills lower. In hotels, the lighting bill can account for as much as 20% of the energy bill (The Carbon Trust, 2004). The use of natural light and heat sources is an important aspect to consider in the design of an energy efficient building. In the hospitality industry about 4% of waste is recycled (Webster, 2000). However, at the Wychwood Forest Hotel, the information suggests that this figure is higher, with all glass and cardboard from the restaurant, kitchen and bar areas being recycled. Green Globe (1994) suggests that a hotel bin contains 10% glass and 33% paper/card, so the recycling carried out by the Wychwood Forest Hotel will reduce this proportion. From personal experience, it has been discovered that there are many hotels that don't recycle at all. For example, Cowley Manor in Cheltenham doesn't recycle any waste, with the main reason being the cost of collection. This seems to be a concern for many hotels implementing not just a recycling scheme, but also an environmental management programme in general (Webster, 2000). The baler that was purchased to reduce the volume of cardboard was a sound investment for the hotel. As the cardboard is paid for by the collector, the hotel is making money from its waste. A sound practice for the hotel would be to reinvest this money into further environmental management practices. Some of the practices at the hotel are sufficient but still have room for improvement. Although the insulation of the hotel meets all building regulations, the amount installed was compromised by the appearance of the hotel. Just 100mm of insulation in the roof of the hotel can reduce heat loss by 50-70% (Webster, 2000). However, Siegle (2003) suggests that insulation should be at least 150mm thick, which would reduce heat loss further. The reduction in heat loss would of course reduce energy bills. Although the hotel owns a petrol-run car, which produces less nitrogen oxide and sulphur dioxide than a diesel run car, the use of it should still be kept to a minimum, and full loads should be transported wherever possible, in both directions for the journey (Webster, 2000). The Best Western Papago Inn in Scottsdale operates an electric vehicle for running their errands (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). The Wychwood Forest Hotel could consider an alternative fuel for their car. There is a frequent laundry collection at the hotel, which suggests that all linen is changed on a daily basis. This should be reduced, both to save water and detergents going into the waste stream, but to reduce the number of visits made by the collection lorry which emits carbon dioxide and other noxious gases into the atmosphere (The Green Fuel Company, 2003). At present the hotel has 4 bins for general waste, which is not a considerable amount. At Cowley Manor, there are 4 of these bins, but the hotel is 3 times smaller than the Wychwood Forest Hotel. This demonstrates that the Wychwood Forest Hotel isn't producing excessive amounts of waste, but more could be done to recycle. After implementing a strict recycling programme, the Hyatt Regency Chicago now recycles 70% of their waste, and has reduced waste collection charges by 50% (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). There are also some poor systems practiced by the Wychwood Forest Hotel. Although all glass and cardboard from public areas is recycled, the waste produced in guest rooms is all sent straight to landfill, as the separation is seen as a poor use of a chambermaid's time. However, guests could be encouraged to recycle themselves in the rooms. As long as initiatives are explained, recycling bins could be placed in room (Green Globe, 1994). The menu in the restaurant at the Wychwood Forest Hotel is extensive and varied. Although this is advantageous to the guests, it could be creating large amounts of waste in the kitchen, both from unused food that is no longer fit for consumption, and from meat trimmings and vegetable peelings. Another major concern for the hotel must be their energy and water consumptions. It is possible for them to benchmark their usage against other hotels of a similar type. The Wychwood Forest Hotel uses 120kwh of electricity per square metre annually, which is an excessive level of usage, with 70-80kwh/m 2 being a satisfactory level (The International Business Leaders Forum and WWF, 2005). The hotel also uses 232kwh per square metre of gas. This is also an excessive level of usage, with a satisfactory level being 190-200kwh/m 2. It's predicted that 20% of energy used in the hospitality industry could be saved (Webster, 2000). The water usage is also high, but not excessive. Water consumption per guest is 0.56m 3, with a satisfactory level being 0.35-0.41 m 3 (The International Business Leaders Forum and WWF, 2005). The calculations for the above figures can be found in appendix 1. Only 5% of water used in hotels is actually consumed by people, while the rest is mainly used in cleaning and the preparation and cooking of food (Webster, 2000). Also, only 10% of the water used in rooms is used by the guest, and the rest is used for cleaning by chambermaids. An important measure that can be taken is to check for, and fix, all leaks. It is estimated that 25% of the water in the mains system is lost through leakages (Webster, 2000). Although there is some effort being made by the Wychwood Forest Hotel to act in an environmentally friendly manner, there is considerable room for improvement, particularly in the areas of energy and water consumption. Another area that needs consideration is the expansion of their recycling practices. Small changes to their systems will help to reduce waster produced, and energy and water consumed. Not only will these changes benefit the environment, but they will also result in reduced costs for the hotel. <heading>Discussion of Current Performance</heading>As previously mentioned, the Wychwood Forest Hotel has some poor environmental practices that need to be improved. They are problems that have been overcome by other organisations within the industry. Guest waste is not recycled at the Wychwood Forest Hotel, as it's considered a poor use of chambermaids' time. However, the Colony Hotel in Maine has rattan bins in all the rooms which are split into sections for cans, paper, glass and other waste - and they have had no adverse comments regarding this scheme from guests (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). Another suggestion by Enz and Siguaw is to replace all individual toiletry bottles with refillable wall mounted dispensers. Small bottles are wasteful in two senses; the bottles are rarely recycled and there is often product left in the bottle that is wasted (personal experience, 2005). Another area of wastage is the kitchen. The menu is extensive and consequentially has potential for large amounts of waste generated by vegetable and meat trimmings, as well as unused and leftover food. Again, the Colony Hotel in Maine is an example of industry best practice. They compost all of their kitchen waste and use it to fertilize their 11 acres of land (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). Although the grounds at the Wychwood Forest Hotel are likely to be smaller than this, this practice could still be employed. Not only would this system reduce the amount of waste sent to landfill sites, but it would also reduce the use of fertilisers on the garden. A major concern for the Wychwood Forest Hotel should be their energy consumption, both of gas and electricity. Energy is the first cost centre to see the results of an environmental management programme, and also the easiest area in which to make savings (Webster, 2000). L'Hotel in Toronto, formerly a Canadian and Pacific Resort Hotel, installed energy saving light bulbs throughout the hotel, and saves $25,000 a year on their energy bill (IHEI, 1993). As well as reducing energy use, some hotels are changing their energy supply to reduce their impact on the environment. All Hilton hotels, leisure clubs and offices in the UK are supplied by 100% renewable energy (Hilton International, 2006). Another concern for the Wychwood Forest Hotel ought to be their water consumption per guest. With water supplies low in the South East (Webster, 2000), it's important to conserve water. "Low flow" shower heads were installed in a Jamaican hotel who went on to save 500,000 gallons of water a month as a result. Another hotel to utilise this method of water conservation is the Wallard Inter Continental in Washington DC. They have saved $17,000 in a year and received no adverse comments from guests (Webster, 2000). Although not such a concern, the waste management at Wychwood Forest Hotel could be improved, with waste being sent to landfill reduced and recycling increased. There are ways to reduce waste in all areas, but the packaging surrounding supplies creates a large amount of waste. Webster (2000) suggests that packaging can be reduced by negotiating with suppliers so that they take the packaging away to reuse or dispose of themselves. This takes the cost of the disposal away from the hotel. The Tamanaco Inter Continental Hotel in Caracas returns soap boxes to the supplier for reuse, and in return, the supplier gives the hotel a rebate of $8,500 (IHEI, 1993). Another example of good practice in the industry is Forté Hotels who in 1989 decided to switch their aerosol cans of cleaning products for trigger spray bottles (IHEI, 1993). These were refillable, and a deal was struck with the supplier to provide the cleaning fluids in a concentrate form which could be mixed with water as and when they were needed. The advantage was that the storage of the chemicals took up less space, but from an environmental point of view, the trigger sprays didn't release CFC gases into the environment as the aerosols did. This system has saved 1 million plastic bottles from going to landfill sites each year (Webster, 2000). Clearly, it is possible that poor environmental practices can be improved upon, and the case studies previously mentioned are proof of this. The Wychwood Forest Hotel could look at some of these examples for inspiration when building their environmental management programme. <heading>Implementation Programme</heading>The following is a plan for the Wychwood Forest Hotel to implement environmental management practices. The plan is structured with the most important systems listed first. Ideally, one person should be appointed to oversee the implementation of the plan at an operational level. This person could either be a manager, or a member of staff who is interested in the environment and keen to take on an added responsibility. This would mean that the job was being done by someone who is truly interested in the subject. <heading>Reduce Energy Consumption</heading>This is the area where is it easiest to save money. Energy efficient light bulbs must be fitted in all light fittings. There is now a large range of designs available to suit all fittings. It would be wasteful to change bulbs that are working, but as soon as a bulb goes, they must be replaced with energy efficient ones. A 3U design low energy bulb is around £8 for 5 (osCommerce, 2003), which is more than a regular light bulb, but they last a lot longer. It would not be difficult to implement this, as the light bulb would need to be changed anyway. The maintenance engineer will be responsible for sourcing energy efficient bulbs, and ensuring that all old light bulbs are eventually changed for energy efficient ones. A simple "switch off" campaign must be implemented with all staff responsible for turning off lights, heating, ventilation and electrical equipment when they are not needed. All staff are responsible for ensuring that only equipment that is needed is turned on. There is no cost involved in a switch off campaign, so money will be saved with immediate effect. The hotel must introduce electricity sub-meters in departments and offer incentives for departments who reduced their energy use by the highest proportion. Sub-meters cost around £250 each, with data loggers, which count the usage costing around £400 (HE Energy Information Task Force, 2005). These are needed in the offices, in the restaurant, the kitchen, the leisure centre, the conference department, the housekeeping areas and the front office. This will amount to £4,550, but once the hotel knows where the electricity is being used, they can work to reduce the consumption. The costs detailed include the installation, which must be carried out by a specialist. The Heads of Departments will be responsible for monitoring the electricity usage in their departments, and then coming up with further means of reducing consumption. One of the Assistant Managers will be responsible for compiling the metering information and awarding incentives to the departments who reduce their consumption in proportion to previous figures. <heading>Reduce Water Consumption</heading>Water consumption at the Wychwood Forest Hotel is excessive, and many measures can be put into place to reduce this consumption significantly. Only 10% of water used in rooms is used by the guest (Webster, 2000), so the chambermaids must to be trained in ways of using less water. Buckets will be used by chambermaids for cleaning, rather than running taps, and the number of flushes used to clean the toilet will be reduced down to just once. The Head Housekeeper will be responsible for training their staff to conserve water whilst cleaning. There will be no cost implications of this recommendation coming into force, so savings will be made immediately. Another area for water saving measures is in the kitchen. All kitchen preparation must take place in sinks with plugs or bowls of water, not under running water, unless essential, as only a fraction of the running water is used (Green Globe, 1994). The kitchen manager/head chef will be responsible for ensuring that staff are aware of the effort the hotel is making to save water, and that they are acting accordingly. In the rooms, water must be saved in the showers. "Low flow" shower heads significantly reduce the quantity of water used, and are not an expensive technology. Not only is water saved with this technology, but as less water is used, less energy is used to heat it. The Wychwood Forest Hotel will need 83 shower heads, with an average price of £15.50 (Eartheasy.com, 2000. Conversions from Rueters.co.uk (2006)), totalling £1286.50. The maintenance engineer will be responsible for fitting the shower heads at times of low occupancy, and also between check out time, and check in time. It has been discovered that low-flow showers can be fitted without adverse comments from guests. <heading>Reduce Waste Levels</heading>Levels of general waste need to be reduced, as well as levels of recycling increased. In order to reduce levels of waste, the Wychwood Forest Hotel must negotiate with suppliers to reduce the quantity of packaging around goods purchased. If this is not possible, then the supplier must take the packaging away and dispose of it themselves. Heads of department will be responsible for negotiating with their own suppliers to organise this. If the suppliers are willing to co-operate, it may result in a rebate against orders where the packaging is collected if the supplier can reuse it. The process of receiving less packaging will not cost the hotel anything, and savings will be two fold; less waste to pay to dispose of and possible rebate from suppliers. In the guest's rooms, small bottles of toiletries will be swapped in favour of refillable wall dispensers. AVIVA make soap dispensers that have three compartments for different products. These cost £34 (excl VAT) each (Inspirations Bathrooms, 2006), and 83 would be needed for the Wychwood Forest Hotel, amounting to £2,822 (excl VAT). The Head Housekeeper will be responsible for the purchase of the dispensers, and also for purchasing the products in bulk. The Maintenance Engineer will fit the dispensers at the same time that the low flow shower heads are fitted. The money saved from purchasing the products in bulk will be re-invested into developing an even better product, as demonstrated by the Saunders Hotel in Boston (IHEI, 1993). Chambermaids must have refillable bottles for their cleaning fluids. This will greatly reduce the cost of purchasing bottle after bottle of cleaning product. Many bottles will be saved from going to landfill sites with this practice in place. The Head Housekeeper must ensure that the chambermaids are refilling their bottles with the correct cleaning products, and using them sparingly. <heading>A Change of Fuel</heading>As well as reducing energy use, the Wychwood Forest Hotel must convert some of the energy they use to a "greener" fuel. At present, Scottish and Southern Energy and npower both supply renewable energy to both domestic and business customers, though they don't guarantee that the supply will be entirely renewable due to excess demand (npower, 2006 and Scottish and Southern Energy, 2006). Switching to a renewable source of energy does not cost anything, assuming that the correct tariff is chosen by the hotel. Most companies charge the same, if not less for their renewable energy as they do for non-renewable energy (Energylinx, 2000). This is a very worthwhile approach for the hotel, and it will show a commitment to the environment at the highest level. Although not a major pollutant by the hotel, the petrol car used to run errands is a source of carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxide and sulphur dioxide emissions. The hotel must convert the car to run on "dual fuel" of both petrol and Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG). By running the car on both fuels, the engine runs efficiently, but the emissions are also reduced. LPG is a mixture of propane and butane. It is a by-product of the extraction and refining of crude oil, and has previously been burnt as waste. It can now be used to run cars, and due to the simple structure of the gases, it burns completely and cleanly (The Green Fuel Company, 2003). Conversion of a small car (1.4 Vauxhall Corsa, 10 years old) will cost £1,880 and save the hotel £701.56 on petrol a year, based on annual mileage of 10,000 miles. This conversion would pay for itself in 2.68 years. See Appendix 2 for locations of LPG refuelling centres in Oxfordshire. Although there seem to be a large number of changes for the hotel to make, most are small, and relatively easy to apply. There are several costs involved, but the savings that are made from the smaller changes in procedures must be invested in the higher cost changes. After these costs have been covered, all savings made by the hotel would be money that the hotel could reinvest into further environment development. <heading>Methods of Communication and Monitoring</heading><heading>Communication</heading>In order to effectively apply an environmental management programme, it is essential to incorporate it throughout the hotel (Boers and Bosch, 1994). Staff need to be trained in order to inform them of what the policy is, why it's in place, and how they can help to implement it (Green Globe, 1994). Canadian and Pacific Resort Hotels in Canada found that 88% of their employees felt happier in their work knowing that they were helping the environment (IHEI, 1993). Staff should be encouraged to take part in the programme, and their feedback should be taken on board (Webster, 2000). After all, they are the ones who are going to be taking part in the programme and making it work. If it's not efficient for their work, then their suggestions for changes should be considered. Enz and Siguaw (1999) suggest that a member of staff, of any level, should be made responsible for ensuring that the environmental programme is implemented successfully, and runs smoothly. They also suggest that a work group could be formed with a member of staff from each department to discuss new ideas, and to keep abreast of new technologies that could be applied to the hotel. Guests are the other main stakeholders that need to be aware of the environmental programme. Thomson, a UK tour operator, provide information to their guests about their own environmental programme before they travel by way of a page on their website (Thomson, 2006). The Wychwood Forest Hotel should put a page on their website about their environmental policy, and also include information about it in a confirmation letter sent to guests. Once in the hotel, the guests can be told about the policy by way of a note in the rooms, with tips for energy and water saving, or a page in the guest information guide (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). In order to inform other stakeholders, such as the local public and investors of the new environmental policy, a regional publicity campaign should be considered by the Wychwood Forest Hotel. This would demonstrate total commitment to the cause. The management could also invite members of the press to the hotel so that they would write articles about them. Although not free advertising, this is a low cost way of conveying the message about the policy to the wider public. Once the programme has been in place for a while, and the hotel is happy with the way it works, they should enter national environmental hotel awards, such as the Considerate Hotel of the Year Awards (Payne, 2006) <heading>Monitoring the Performance</heading>In order to continue developing the environmental management programme, their needs to be constant monitoring of the current performance and re-setting of targets in relation to past results. One major way for the Wychwood Forest Hotel to monitor it's savings is to compare their latest electric, gas, water and waste disposal bills with past bills, from before the programme was implemented (Green Globe, 1994). They should show reductions which will increase over time as more systems are put in place to reduce usage. The management may also wish to install sub-meters at the points where electricity, gas and water enter different departments (Webster, 2000). These would show where the utilities are being used the most, and may show where there is excessive use. The savings made should be publicised to the staff, guests and public, but in the form of environmental savings, and not monetary savings, as this would seem that the benefit was only for the hotel (Green Globe, 1994). Finally, guest satisfaction could be monitored to see if there are any changes in it after the environmental programme was introduced. The Wychwood Forest Hotel should also include a question on their guest satisfaction questionnaire about how the guests feel about the new policy 