'Upon his Leaving his Mistress' and '[I am bothered when I think]' are two poems very diverse in style and structure but seem to share a major common theme of love and marriage. Each poetic text deals with the idea in a contrasting but uniquely effective fashion. Simon Armitage's '[I am bothered when I think]' is unusually presented in an irregular sonnet form consisting of seven, four and three lined stanzas contrasting with the traditional Shakespearean sonnet of regular metre and rhythm, ending in an effective rhyming couplet. This subversion of the sonnet form perhaps signifies the unconventional way love is dealt with in the poem, as can be seen with the speaker's clumsy confession of love: <quote>'that was just my butterfingered way... of asking you if you would marry me'.</quote>However, though the poem is set out in sonnet form, the structure is loose and seemingly free verse as there is no fixed underlying metre and the lines are only broken up by the space on the page. Enjambment makes the poem almost prose-like creating the effect of on running thoughts. It also has the effect of revealing the natural sequence of the story he is telling. The breaks in the line create intrigue and persuade the reader to continue on. In contrast, John Wilmot's 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress' consists of three stanzas of seven lines. It mainly contains iambic tetrameter but occasional lines add an extra syllable, in these cases ending on a trochee rather than the usual iamb. The effect of this added syllable is to break up the rhythm of the poem and slow the reader down compelling them to think more carefully about the literature, for example in the first stanza: <quote>'You, whom some kinder Pow'r did fashion'. </quote>The use of punctuation so suddenly after the sentence has just begun, forces the reader to pause, slowing down their reading and provoking them to be more aware of the metre and rhythm of the text. Perhaps the pace of the poem reflects the rate at which the speaker's talk is progressing. There is a regular rhyme scheme of aabbccc in each stanza, which makes the change in metre more outstanding and effective. There is no set rhyme scheme in the poem by Armitage. The only rhyme seen is internal and half rhyme; 'flame/name' and end rhyme seen in only two occasions; 'skin/in' and 'burner/over'. Alliteration and assonance are also used to create a more unified effect, placing a sense of order on the deep emotions conveyed in the poem: 'Bunsen burner', 'blades/played/naked/flame/name'. '[I am bothered when I think]' almost seems to parody the conventional love sonnets with the melodramatic exclamation 'O the unrivalled stench of branded skin'. The humorous, childish and mischievous story told, diminishes the epic quality conventional sonnets encompass. Armitage's work does not convey the majestic romantic images of a traditional love sonnet. This idea is emphasised by the use of common everyday language; 'bothered', 'bad things', unlike the established archaic, romantic language of the contrasting love poem 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress'; 'Universal influence', 'some kinder Pow'r did fashion'. The elaborate language used and periphrasis in Wilmot's piece causes the speaker to exude charm as he uses tremendous flattery to hide any darker truths. Instead of telling his 'mistress' he is leaving her, he uses such flowery language and phrases as: <quote>'Favours, like Nature, you dispense, With Universal Influence' </quote>and <quote>'You... Joy at least of a whole Nation'. </quote>This flattery hides him from his responsibility to her. The speaker uses contrasting images to effectively persuade the girl to not be with him. In the first stanza he uses hellish imagery: 'to damn you to be only mine?' and the idea of him having many faces. The capital letter here creates an identity for the 'Face' as if it is its own separate person, enhancing the speaker's deceitful nature. However, in the last stanza, he uses such extravagant imagery as 'live up to thy mighty Mind; And be the Mistress of Mankind'. The alliteration here stresses the emphasis the speaker wants to make on creating a great impression on the listener and it furthermore enhances the grand quality of the idea, leaving a resounding effect for the final line. Throughout '[I am bothered when I think]' can be seen a specific lexical cluster containing such words as 'flame', 'burn', 'branded' and 'marked' working to conjure up a strong image in the reader's mind. The sensual imagery creates a vivid and painful reflection of events appealing to the reader's own senses. Armitage's use of words such as 'stench' directly add to the physical reading of the poem. Figurative language is a common and effective feature in both poems. In the piece by Armitage, the 'flame' of the 'Bunsen burner' is personified: <quote>'Played the handles in the naked flame'. </quote>This creates sexual connotations of heat and passion emphasising the feelings the speaker has, revealing a deeper, more sexual interpretation of the poem. The word 'played' enhances the idea of youth and the childish nature of the boy and the foolishness of the situation, contrasting sharply with the serious, adult-like idea of marriage conveyed later on in the final stanza of the poem; 'asking if you would marry me'. Similarly, Wilmot uses the same form of figurative language as he personifies the 'Earth' in the final stanza creating a maternal image of 'her' with her 'willing Womb'. The 'Mistress' is ultimately being compared to mother 'Earth', which metaphorically reveals the girl's own physical state of being whilst simultaneously creating a powerful comparison. The metaphorical line; 'when I held a pair of scissors by the blades' in Armitage's poem, perhaps reveals to the reader the idea that love is dangerous and the boy is holding danger in his hands. This agrees with the images of fire and burning seen throughout the piece. Marriage is symbolised metaphorically by the 'two burning rings' connecting strongly with the obvious idea of the wedding ceremony and exchanging rings at marriage. The word 'Marked' stands solitary amongst the loose enjambment of the surrounding text, as it stands at the end of a line after a full stop creating a stronger image and greater impact on the reader. The word seems to suggest an eternal agreement to be together and the concept that this girl is his chosen one. In the final stanza of 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress', Wilmot uses images of birth and pregnancy. The sibilance of the first line 'See the kind See- receiving Earth' seems to represent the sound of flowing water linking to the following lines of the stanza: 'Show'rs' and 'fall'. This may have sexual or maternal connotations of flowing liquids and the breaking of waters immediately prior to the baby's birth. Rhetorical questions are another device Wilmot uses to convey how skilled and apt the speaker is at charming and persuading. The rhetorical device forces the attention onto the listener who is inclined to think a certain way: 'And shall my Celia be confin'd?' It is a clever technique as it enables the speaker to answer his own question in any way he pleases. As can be seen, both poems concerning a similar theme use many different devices such as figurative language, imagery, rhythm, metre, and rhyme and language techniques in different ways to create equally effective poems but with dramatically contrasting styles and structures. 