Montaigne wrote "To the Reader" after he had finished the Essays; it was there to introduce what was to come and set the tone for the rest of his writing. However, it was not thought to have been the original preface; "On idleness" was another proposed preface to Montaigne's work. "To the Reader" demands the reader's attention from the first line when Montaigne directly addresses 'You... Reader'. This adds an element of informality and continues in a discursive style from then on. Montaigne is able to be very undeviating with his intent telling the reader exactly what he thinks they need to know and about his intentions for writing these Essays. He declares that, 'I myself am the subject of my book' and at the same time it is 'a book whose faith can be trusted'. This gives the reader a good sense that this book will be straightforward and honest because it is a book that Montaigne is using to show something of himself and not that he is writing to construct a fictional sense of himself. Therefore the reader will feel that they have some special insight into his life and his personality, somehow that they know him without having met him. This would allow the reader to appreciate many more of the sections in the book because they are not being forced to agree with his ideas, they would not be shunned if they didn't like it, they merely get some grasp of what Montaigne, himself would have thought about many different subjects. As he says himself, 'I have not been concerned to serve you nor my reputation' which pulls the reader in even more and would make them want to carry on reading because they are having nothing imposed upon them. "On idleness" is presented in the book of Essays but is thought to have been an alternative preface, mostly because of the way it addressed the reader and declared what Montaigne proposed to do with his works in a similar way as in "To the Reader". Having read "To the Reader" allows whoever is reading this to appreciate it more than if they had not because the reader will already be familiar with Montaigne's discursive language and will be sure of his style and what he is attempting to show. However, this will also be very interesting to the reader because having read the first preface they will be able to see another of Montaigne's reasons for writing the Essays. Not only did he write these books, 'to the private benefit of my friends and kinsmen so that, having lost me (as they must do soon) they can kind [me] here again' as he states in "To the Reader"; he also seems to have written it to keep 'a record' of the workings of his mind while he is retired to his estate as "On idleness" points out. With both of these pieces, though, it would be clear to the reader this early on that Montaigne is concerned about getting older and is becoming increasingly sure of himself and coming to the end of his life. "On presumption" is a section in book two that is moreso concerned with Montaigne himself and the ability for people to become too loving of themselves. This is described as a glory or 'vainglory' and 'over-high opinion we conceive of our own worth', but the reader with be able to appreciate (from having read "To the Reader" especially) that Montaigne is not one to revel in his own self-worth; on the contrary, he often humbles himself as he did in "To the Reader", 'my powers are inadequate' and in "On idleness" he states that these Essays are not to flatter himself, but to 'make my mind ashamed of itself'. Montaigne consistently depicts himself honestly and especially so in "On presumption"; however the reader may only feel reassured that this is honest if they have read "To the Reader" and are able to appreciate Montaigne's tone and style. Book two, chapter seventeen therefore reinforces Montaigne's honestly and modesty again and the reader is able to feel that they further get a deeper insight into Montaigne, the man. As he declares, 'I find myself bogged down in the laws of etiquette', it is clear that Montaigne is not the conventional Renaissance man who would be expected to be familiar and concerned with the profile they have in the court. As seen in The Book of the Courtier it is clear that people at this time that were surrounded by the upper classes, were always concerned with the image they project and there were very clear codes of behaviour and conduct surrounding this. Yet Montaigne in "On presumption" says that it is this kind of self-assurance and esteeming of oneself is not desirable for him and he is the first to avoid any appraisal for his work because, first and foremost, he has not written it for recognition. He even considers that the language with which he writes is 'rough and disdainful', and also that he has 'no idea how to please, delight or titillate'. But ironically it is this not caring or trying to please that allows the reader to appreciate his work even more and intrigues them further. In "On three kinds of social intercourse' Montaigne goes on to write about the things that please him. He details why it is that he enjoys loving friendships, loving relationships and reading books but also the negative aspects of all of these. Montaigne's tone, again, is in-keeping with what the reader is already familiar with. He humbles himself again and makes it clear that in his work he is embarking on a 'study' of the mind and not to feed his ego by being concerned about himself. However, he is aware that 'no occupation is more powerful, or more feeble, than entertaining one's own thoughts' therefore keeping the reader comfortable knowing that Montaigne is not claiming self-importance. Montaigne also discusses briefly how he enjoys to 'probe himself' and that there is some more value in exposing his soul rather than to 'stock it up'. He presents the reader with the complexities that he faces when writing these books and that he is aware how 'no occupation is more powerful or more feeble than entertaining one's own thoughts'. Having read "To the Reader" it is important to realise how this is a point that Montaigne has made many times and that he is merely reinforcing it again to show the reader even more how he doesn't regard himself highly and how they can appreciate what he has to say but not dwell on it because, after all, it is 'feeble'. He goes on to talk of loving friendships and how difficult they are to come across, bearing in mind that he only concedes to have had only proper friendship, it would occur to the reader that the aim of this writing was not just all Montaigne has stated but also to fill some void that not having a deep, loving friendship creates. It is also clear that Montaigne feels a great sense of loss from the death of his friend and so writing in this way is a method to keep his mind occupied but also one way that he will be able to continue until his death (a matter of which he is very aware of and concerned about). To appreciate this text and the others fully, it is important to have read "To the Reader" because otherwise the reader may think that if Montaigne does not regard himself too highly then there was little point in him writing these works, which are almost memoirs. However, having read "To the Reader" and then the texts that were to follow the reader can appreciate the writings of Montaigne and his selfless attitude as well as having some idea of the man himself. The advantages to having presented "To the Reader" as the preface for his works are that Montaigne is to directly address the reader showing he is aware that they have been drawn to his book, also that he doesn't want them to think he wanted them to be drawn to his work because he didn't write it for them exclusively or to get their recognition, but furthermore that he can allow them to appreciate his work as an outsider looking in on the workings of his mind without them having to agree with or like his work, almost as if he has already criticised it himself therefore protecting it from negative criticism. 