<quote>Frank O'Hara The Day Lady Died It is 12 : 20 in New York a Friday three days after Bastille Day, yes it is 1959 and I go get a shoeshine because I will get off the 4 : 19 to Easthampton at 7 :15 and than go straight to dinner and I don't know the people who will feed me I walk up the muggy street beginning to sun and have a hamburger and a malted and buy and ugly NEW WORLD WRITING to see what the poets in Ghana are doing these days I go on to the bank and Miss Stillwagon (first name Linda I once heard) doesn't even look up my balance for once in her life and in the GOLDEN GRIFFEN I get a little Verlaine for Patsy with drawings by Bonnard although I do think of Hesoid, trans. Richmond Lattimore or Brendan Behan's new play or Le Balcon or Les Negres of Genet, but I don't, I stick with Verlaine after practically going to sleep with quandariness and for Mike I just stroll into the PARK LANE Liquor Store and ask for a bottle of Strega and then I go back where I came from to 6 th Avenue and the tobacconist in the Ziegfried Theatre and casually ask for a carton of Gauloises and a carton of Picayunes, and a NEW YORK POST with her face on it and I am sweating a lot by now and thinking of leaning on the join door in the 5 SPOT while she whispered a song along the keyboard to Mal Waldron and everyone and I stopped breathing</quote><quote>Meditations in an Emergency Am I become profligate as if I were a blonde? Or religious as if I Were French? Each time my heart is broken it makes me feel more adventurous (and how the same names keep recurring on the interminable list!), but one of these days there'll be nothing left with which to venture forth. Why should I share you? Why don't you get rid of someone else for a Change? I am the least difficult of men. All I want is boundless love. Even trees understand me! Good heavens, I lie under them, too, don't I? I'm just like a pile of leaves. However, I have never clogged myself with the praises of pastoral life, nor with nostalgia for an innocent past of perverted acts in pas- tures. No. One need never leave the confirms of New York to get all the greenery one wishes-I can't even enjoy a blade of grass unless I know there's a subway handy, or a record store or some other sign that people do not totally regret life. It is more important to affirm the least sincere; the clouds get enough attention as it is and even they continue to pass. Do they know what they're missing? Uh huh. My eyes are vague blue, like the sky, and change all the time; they are indiscriminate but fleeting, entirely specific and disloyal, so that no one trusts me. I am always looking away. Or again at something after it has given me up. It makes me restless and that makes me unhappy, but I cannot keep them still. If only I had grey, green, black, brown, yellow eyes; I would stay at home and do something. It's not that I'm curious. On the contrary, I am bored but it's my duty to be attentive, I am needed by things as the sky must be above the earth. And lately, so great has their anxiety become, I can spare myself little sleep. Now there is only one man I love to kiss when he is unshaven. Het- erosexuality! you are inexorably approaching. (How discourage her?) St. Serapion, I wrap myself in my robes of your whiteness which is like midnight in Dostoevsky. How am I to become a legend, my dear? I've tried love, but that hides you in the bosom of another and I am always springing forth from it like the lotus-the ecstasy of always bursting forth! (but one must not be distracted by it!) or like a hyacinth, "to keep the filth of life away," yes, there, even in the heart, where the filth is pumped in and slanders and pollutes and determines. I will my will, though I may become famous for a mysterious vacancy in that department, the greenhouse. Destroy yourself, if you don't know! It is easy to be beautiful; it is difficult to appear so. I admire you, beloved, for the trap you've set. It's like a final chapter no one reads because the plot is over. "Fanny Brown is run away-scampered off the Corner of Horse; I do love that little Minx, & hope She may be happy, tho' She has vexed me by this Exploit a little too.-Poor silly Cecchina! or F:B: as we used to call her.-I wish She had a good Whipping and 10,000 pounds."- Mrs. Thrale. I've got to get out of here. I choose a piece of shawl and my dirtiest suntans. I'll be back, I'll re-emerge, defeated, from the valley; you don't want me to go where you go, so I go where you don't want me to. It's only afternoon, there's a lot ahead. There won't be any mail downstairs. Turning, I spit in the lock and the knob turns. John Ashberry</quote><quote>Faust If only the phantom would stop reappearing! Business, if you wanted to know, was punk at the opera. The heroine no longer appeared in Faust. The crowds strolled sadly away. The phantom Watched them from the roof, not guessing the hungers That must be stirred before disappointment can begin. One day as morning was about to begin A man in brown with a white shirt reappearing At the bottom of his yellow vest, was talking hungers With the silver-haired director of the opera. On the green-carpeted floor no phantom Appeared, except yellow squares of sunlight, like those in Faust. That night as the musicians for Faust Were about to go on strike, lest darkness begin In the corridors, and through them the phantom Glide unobstructed, the vision reappearing Of blonde Marguerite practicing a new opera At her window awoke terrible new hungers In the already starving tenor. But hungers Are just another topic, like the new Faust Drifting through the tunnels of the opera (In search of lost old age? For they begin To notice a twinkle in his eye. It is cold daylight reappearing At the window behind him, itself a phantom Window, painted by the phantom Scene painters, sick of not getting paid, of hungers For a scene below of tiny, reappearing Dancers, with a sandbag falling like a note in Faust Through purple air. And the spectators begin To understand the bleeding tenor star of the opera.) That night the opera Was crowded to the rafter. The phantom Took twenty-nine curtain calls. "Begin! Begin!" In the wings the tenor hungers For the heroine's convulsive kiss, and Faust Moves forward, no longer young, reappearing And reappearing for the last time. The opera  Faust would no longer need its phantom. On the bare, sunlit stage the hungers could begin. </quote><quote>FROM The Skaters I These decibels Are a kind of flagellation, an entity of sound Into which being enters, and is apart. Their colours are a warm February day Make for masses of inertia, and hips Prod out of the violet-seeming into a new kind Of demand that stumps the absolute because not new In the sense of the next one in an infinite series But, as it were, pre-existing or pre-seeming in Such a way as to contrast funnily with the unexpectedness And somehow push us all into perdition. Here a scarf flies, there an excited call is heard. The answer is that it is novelty That guides these swift blades o'er the ice Projects into a finer expression (but at the expense Of energy) the profile I cannot remember. Colors slip away from and chide us. The human mind Cannot retain anything except perhaps the dismal two-note theme Of some sodden "dump" or lament. But the water surface ripples, the whole light changes We children are ashamed of our bodies But we laugh and, demanded, talk of sex again And all is well. The waves of morning harshness Float away like coal-gas into the sky. But how much survives? How much of any one of us survives? The article we'd collect-stamps from the colonies With greasy cancellation marks, mauve, magenta and chocolate, On funny-looking we'd see on the street, or bright remarks. One collects bullets. An Indianapolis, Indiana man collects slingshots of all epochs, and so on. Subtracted from our collections, though, these go on a little while, collecting aimlessly. We still support them. But so little energy they have! And up the swollen sands Staggers the darkness fiend, with the storm fiend close behind him! True, melodious tolling does on in that awful pandemonium, Certain resonances are not entirely displeasing to the terrified eardrum. Some paroxysms are dinning of tambourine, others suggest piano room of organ loft For the most dissonant night charms us, even after death. This after all, may be happiness: tuba notes awash on the great flood, ruptures of xylophone, violins, limpets, grace-notes, the musical instrument called serpent, violins da gambas, Aeolian harps, clavicles, pinball machines, electric drills, que sais-je encore! The performance has rapidly reached your ear; silent and tear- stained, in the post-mortem shock, you stand listening, awash With memories of hair in particular, part of the welling that is you, The gurgling of harp, cymbal, glockenspiel, triangle, temple block, English horn and metronome! And still no presentiment, no feeling of pain before or after. The passage sustains, does not give. And you have come far indeed. Yet to go from "not interesting" to "old and uninteresting" To be surrounded by friends, though late in life, To hear the wings of the spirit, though far.... Why do I hurridly undrown myself to cut you down? "I am yesterday," my fault is eternal. I do not except constant attendance, knowing myself insufficient for your present demands And I have a dim intutition that I am that other "I" with which we began. My cheeks as blank walls to your tears and eagerness Fondling that other, as though you had let him get away forever. The evidence of visual henceforth replaced Bt the great shadow of trees falling over life. A child's devotion To this normal, shapeless entity.... Forgotten as the words fly briskly across, each time Bringing down meaning as snow from a low sky, or rabbits flushed from a wood. How strange that the narrow perspective lines Always seem to meet, although parallel, and that an isane ghost could do this, Could make the house seem so much farther in the distance, as It seemed to the horse, dragging the sledge of a perspective line. Dim banners in the distance to die... And nothing put to rights. The pigs in their cages And so much snow, but it is to be littered with waste and ashes So that cathedrals may grow. Out of this spring builds a tolerance Affair of brushwood, the sea is felt behind oak wands, noiselessly pouring. Spring with its yellow perspective bands in place And the horse nears them and weeps. So much has passed through my mind this morning That I can give you but a dim account of it: It is already after lunch, the men are returning to their positions around the cement mixer. And I try to sort out what has happened to me. The bundle of Gerard's letters. And that awful bit of news buried on the back page of yesterday's paper. Then the news of you this morning, in the snow. Sometimes the interval Of bad news is so brisk that... And the human brain, with its tray of images Seems a sorcerer's magic lantern, projecting black and orange cellophane shadows On the distance of my hand... The very reaction's puny. And when we seek to move around, wondering what our position is now, what the arm of that chair. Kenneth Koch</quote><quote>Variations on a Theme by William Carlos Williams 1 I chopped down the house that you had been saving to live in next summer. I am sorry, but it was morning, and I had nothing to do and its wooden beams were so inviting. 2 We laughed at the hollyhocks together and then I sprayed them with lye. Forgive me. I simply do not know what I am doing. 3 I gave away the money that you had been saving to live on for the next ten years. The man who asked for it was shabby and the firm March wind in the porch was so juicy and cold. 4 Last evening we went dancing and I broke your leg. Forgive me. I was clumsy, and I wanted you here in the wards, where I am the doctor!</quote><quote>Alive for an Instant I have a bird in my head and a pig in my stomach And a flower in my genitals and a tiger in my genitals And a lion in my genitals and I am after you but I have a song in my heart And my song is a doveI have man in my hands I have a woman in my shoesI have a landmark decision in my reasonI have a death rattle in my nose I have summer in my brain waterI have dreams in my toesThis is the matter with me and the hammer of my mother and fatherWho created me with everythingBut I lack clam I lack roseThough I do not lack extreme delicacy of rose petalWho is it that I wish to astonish?In the birdcall I found a reminder of youBut it was thin and brittle and gone in an instantHas nature set out to be a great entertainer?Obviously not a great reproducer? A great Nothing?Well I will leave that up to youI have a knocking woodpecker in my heart and I think I have three soulsOne for love one for poetry and one for acting out my insane selfNot insane but boring but perpendicular but untrue but trueThe three rarely sing together take my hand it's activeThe active ingredient in it is a touchI am Lord Byron I am Percy Shelley I am AriostoI eat the bacon I went down the slide I have a thunderstorm in my inside I will never hate youBut how can this maelstrom be appealing? do you like menageries? my godMost people want a man! So here I amI have a pheasant in my reminders I have a goshawk in my cloudsWhatever is it which has led all these animals to you?A resurrection? or maybe an insurrection? an inspiration?I have a baby in my landscape and I have a wild rat in my secrets from you. Barbara Guest</quote><quote>Red Lilies Someone has remembered to dry the dishes; they have taken the accident out of the stove. Afterward lilies for supper; there the lines in front of the window are rubbed on the table of stone The paper flies up then down as the wind repeats. repeats its birdsong. Those arms under the pillow the borrowing arms they cleave at night at the tug kneads water calling themesleves branches The tree is you the blanket is what warms it snow erupts form thistle to toe; the snow pours out of you. A cold hand on the dishes placing a sacuer inside her who undressed for supper gliding that hair to the snow The pilot light went out on the stove The paper folded like a napkin other wings flew into the stove. James Schuyler</quote><quote>A Man in Blue Under the French horns of a November afternoon a man in blue is raking leaves with wide wooden rake (whose teeth are pegs or rather, dowels). Next door boys play soccer: "You got to start over!" sort of. A round attic window in a radiant gray house waits a kettledrum. "You got to start..." The Brahmsian day lapses from waltz to march. The grass, rough-cropped as Bruno Walter's hair, is stretched, strewn and humped beneath a sycamore wide and high as an idea of heaven in which Brahms turns his face like a bearded thumb and says, "There is something I must tell you!" to Bruno Walter. "In the first movement of my Second, think of it as a family planning where to go next summer in terms of other summers. A material ecstasy, subdued, recollective." Bruno Walter in a funny jacket with a turned up collar says, "Let me sing it for you." He waves his hands and through the vocalese-shaped spaces of naked elms he draws a copper beech ignited with a few late leaves. He bluely gazes a rhododendron "a sea of leaves" against gold grass. There is a snapping from the brightwork of parked and rolling cars. There almost has to be a heaven! so there could be a place for Bruno Walter who never needed the cry of a baton. Immortality- in a small, dusty, rather gritty, somewhat scratchy Magnavox from which a forte drops like a used Brillo pad? Frayed. But it's hard to think of the sky as a hard glass floor with thick-soled Viennese boots tromping about on it. It's a whole lot harder thinking of Brahms in something soft, white and flowing. "Life," he cries (here, in the last movement), "is something more than beer and skittles!"" ""And the something more is a whole lot better than beer and skittles," says Bruno Walter, darkly, under the sod. I don't suppose it seems so dark to a root. Who are these men in evening coats? What are these lumps? Where is Brahms? And Bruno Walter? Ensconed in resonant plump east chairs covered with scuffed brown leater in a pungent autumn that blends leaf smoke (sycamore, tobacco, other), their nobility wound in a finale like this calico cat asleep, curled up in a breadbasket, on a sideboard where the sun falls. </quote><heading>Introduction</heading>The term 'post-modern' is broadly used but very difficult to define, perhaps because it is the term with which society, art and culture today is most commonly linked to. In this instance, however, post-modern is used to describe the poetry produced after the modernist era and post world war two. Poetry at this time in America was particularly diverse, with poets trying to move away from or develop the conventions of the poetic past. There were many groups of poets who emerged after the Second World War, and these groups all experimented with different methods in their own ways. The three major groups were, firstly, the Beat Generation (poets who used 'urban' vocabulary and performed their poetry almost as music with a spiritual influence) with people such as Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Allen Ginsberg. Secondly, the Black Mountain School (interested in the speech of poetry the formal structures which effected it), including Charles Olsen, Robert Creeley and Denis Levertov. There was also another hugely influentail group named the New York Poets who actcively tried to go against the poetic traditions which dominated poetry before the 1950s as well as experimenting with the language of poetry. Frank O'Hara with his essay Personism: A Manifesto is considered to have been the figurehead of the New York Poets (or Language Poets as they were also known). He joined forces John Ashberry and Kenneth Koch when they met in university and began a revolt against the old conventions and attempted to construct 'new concepts pf the poem' 1. <fnote>1 D. M. Allen the New American Poetry, Groves Press INC 1960 </fnote>I have decided to concentrate on the New York School Poety and what emerged from the inspiration they gave because of the interesting and innovative ways of using language to express meaning, to give form aesthetically and emphasis the zeitgeist at a time when society was undergoing great change and the poets themselves knew the importance of language in popular culture and the avant-garde. The New York School was the one most commonly associated with the avant-garde and as they especially took influence from France, the surrealist art, and the political ideas they are particularly interesting as they did not attempt to be inclusive to developing an American poetic voice, but one of an empire of poetry from America to Europe. Ironically, though, they were also trying to make poetry more personal and make it a piece from the writer to the subject and almost excluded the wider reader. At the time and thereafter it has been argued that poetry as a literary form is dying because it "has become the most private, least accessible of the arts" 2. It could be argued that as these New York poets tried to bridge the gap between America and Europe, and experiment artistically they were also responsible for the decline of poetry. <fnote>2 M. Perloff RADICAL ARTIFICE: Writing Poetry in the Age of Media University of Chicago Press 1994 </fnote>I have chosen Frank O'Hara to open this anthology with two of his poems The Old Lady Died and Meditations in an Emergency. These poems both exemplify what O'Hara said he was trying to do and how he adapted his own style: I don't even like rhythm, assonance, all that stuff. You just go on your nerve... But how can you really care if anybody gets it, or gets what it means, or if it improves them. Improves them for what? for death? Why hurry them along? 