<heading>How are social inequalities reflected in what people eat? What positive measures can be taken by health and social care professionals to reduce inequalities in the diets of patients and service users? </heading>This essay will demonstrate how social inequalities in the UK can effect whether an individual has a healthy diet. This will be followed with ideas and suggestions, for health and social care professionals, to help improve the situation. Human survival depends on food and nutrition (Mustonal. 2001); however a healthy diet suitable for everyone is difficult to define. Therefore, the priority of nutritionists has been to focus on nutritional adequacy. This means that diets should contain adequate amounts of energy for an individual and all of the essential nutrients. (Webb, 2002) Lack of an adequate diet can have serious consequences, such as; increased chance of deficiency diseases, reduced growth and reduced mental and physical development in children. (Webb, 2002) The BDA recognised as early as 1986 that certain groups were vulnerable to malnutrition, for example; children, pregnant women, ethnic minorities, disabled people, elderly and those on a low income. (Haines and de Lowry, 1986 cited in Townsend and Davidson, 1988) It was also established at this time that differences in the quantity and quality of food eaten occurred between social groups. (The Health Divide, Whitehead (1988) in Townsend and Davidson, 1988) An unhealthy or inadequate diet can have other serious consequences to health, as diet has been implicated in cardiovascular disease, obesity, cancer and diabetes. (Muston, 2001) The Health Divide also reported that people on low incomes tended to eat less fresh fruits, vegetables and high fibre foods and more fat and sugar than those with higher incomes. (Whitehead (1988) in Townsend and Davidson, 1988) Due to this information being reported more than twenty years ago, it might be quite reasonable to consider it irrelevant. However, the Government has recently admitted not everyone has an equal chance of a healthy life and identified two of the main killers as coronary heart disease and cancers. (Saving Lives: Our Healthier Nation, 1999) It is recognised in today's society, malnutrition and deficiency diseases are more common in certain groups such as; people living in extremes of social and economic disadvantage, disabled people and the very elderly. (Webb, 2002) Therefore, it is clear that much of the information from the Health Divide is still relevant in today's society. To illustrate this further, ten years after the Health Divide was written it was shown that social class differences in mortality were widening. (Smithal. 1990) To understand how people's diets are influenced by their role in society, it is necessary to also consider the factors that affect food choice. Food choice depends on how available the food is locally, for example, transportation links and shopping facilities. (Webb, 2002) For instance, changes in food retailing which occurred from 1980- 1992, when there was in increase in large out- of - town supermarkets, disadvantaged poor families as they did not have transport. (Smith and Brunner, 1997) In particular, women, elderly and disabled people are greater disadvantaged in terms of mobility and transport. (Nelson, 1997) Knowledge of nutrition and religious and cultural beliefs about food may affect food choice. (Webb, 2002) Education can be linked to level of socioeconomic class, for example people with more education are more likely to be in the higher levels, therefore, have the knowledge and the funds to achieve a healthy diet. (Murcott, 1998) Murcott has also identified; ignorance, discrimination or hostility towards ethnic minorities as factors that may affect their dietary balance, for example, availability and cost of traditional foods. (1998) This point is further illustrated by the difficulties Muslims face when trying to translate information on food additives to determine whether food is halal or not. (Bradby (1996) cited in Murcott, 1998) The implications of the factors that affect food choice can be important, such as; afro- Caribbean women in the UK are more likely to suffer from hypertension and diabetes. (Forresteral. (1996) cited in Garrow et al, 2000) Financial resources, budgeting skills and the cost of foods are very important for influencing food choice. (Webb, 2002) Richer people spend nearly 45% more on food than those on low incomes. (Webb, 2002) Poorer households consume less fruit juice or fruit, lean meat, wholemeal products and fewer salads are more likely to eat white bread, potatoes, cheaper fatty meats, beans, eggs and chips. (Gregory et al (1995) cited in Dowler and Dobson, 1997) Experts advise eating five portions of fruit and vegetables a day, however, children from low income families are eating less than half this and some did not eat any at all in a week. (Department of Health/ Food Standards Agency, 2000) This report also identified that young people, from low income families, are eating too much salt, sometimes twice the recommended levels. As a consequence of lack of adequate finances, people with lower income have lower levels of micronutrients such as; vitamins A, B, C and iron, magnesium, potassium, calcium and phosphorus in their diets. (Smith and Brunner, 1997) Disabled people and those who have long- term illness are known to be vulnerable to poverty, therefore, will also experience difficulty in maintaining a healthy diet. (Hantrais (1995) cited in Dowler and Dobson, 1997) Also, some disabled people may require special foods and feeding equipment which will add to the costs of their food shopping. People in low- income households are very skilled at budgeting, and often food is the only flexible item in the household finances, paying the bills has a higher priority than buying fruit. (Kempson (1996), cited in Dowler and Dobson, 1997) This means there is less money spent on unnecessary items, such as; alcohol and treats, cheaper brands from the cheapest shops are purchased and lower quality items are bought that provide more calories per penny. (Webb, 2002) As a consequence people on low incomes have a less diverse diet (Dowler and Dobson, 1997), and shopping can become a demoralising experience. (Smith and Brunner, 1997) Also, overweight and obesity can be linked to people with lower incomes. (Nutrition and Physical Activity Task Force (1995) cited in Smith and Brunner, 1997) Although the unhealthy diet of many people on low incomes may explain this trend, it could also be due to being unable to afford expensive diet foods, or join a diet group, or not having leisure time to exercise due to work commitments. Murcott, 1998) It is clear that many people in society are unable to maintain a healthy diet, as a result will suffer from health consequences. As health and social care professionals, it is important to understand how and why people are unable to eat as healthily as they should be. It would be too easy as a professional to blame individuals for being lazy, or incompetent with their finances as the reason. However, this does not mean we should give our patients/ clients sympathy; this will not help them to eat a healthier diet. Instead, it is more appropriate to offer sound advice and support on practical solutions to their problems. This could be to introduce them to various community projects, such as; Food for Fun which aims to raise awareness of food through fun activities; particularly looking at nutritional and low cost foods for children's lunch boxes and it also has food tasting sessions. (Food Poverty Projects Database, 2004) Projects such as these are available for everyone, for example; elderly, ex- offenders, HIV/ AIDS sufferers, homeless people, people with learning disabilities, minority ethnic groups and single parents. These projects provide valuable access to foods and teach skills that would not be learnt otherwise, however, they suffer from; lack of funding, isolation of individual initiative, lack of support from relevant professionals and reliance on volunteers. (Nelson, 1997) Therefore, it would benefit patients/ clients if more professionals were involved in similar projects, they could help raise the profile of the project which may bring in more long- term funding. Also, people may feel better knowing they are being given advice from a professional person. Other ways of providing practical advice and support would be to help raise awareness of patients/ clients eligibility to benefits or other financial support. Some patients/ clients may not be aware they are entitled to financial support for special foods, feeding equipment etc. which could benefit them. Also Nelson (1997) identified another problem with community projects; that more research is needed. This research needs to provide government and local authorities with information about practical initiatives that are proven to work. Therefore, health and social care professionals could benefit their patients/ clients by carrying out further research that will provide this information, which will allow the success of projects to be repeated across the UK instead of only certain areas. In conclusion, health and social care professionals may achieve success in their patient/ client group, but the problem of unequal health due to diet is widespread across Britain and affects millions. Therefore, although professionals can and should help it is impossible for them to address the problem on their own. The government needs to be more involved by providing long term funding across the UK to help people to achieve a healthier diet. However, the Government has been aware of the inequalities for a long time, and yet they appear to be getting wider. Therefore, it may be appropriate for the Government to address the issue of benefit and social support levels as they are clearly not providing many with sufficient funds for a healthy diet. In reality, there are people who are lazy and not competent at managing their finances; however, it is unfair to stereotype everyone on a low income as doing the same. Everyone should be able to purchase the foods they require to maintain their health and to provide their families with the correct nutrients to grow and flourish.  URL  URL  URL <heading>Reflection</heading>I have worked with adults who have learning disability and Prader- Willi Syndrome, which is a genetic eating disorder, for the last four years. Therefore, I was already aware of many of the issues that effect health and social care professionals. It is necessary to consistently be aware of your own actions and behaviour, to ensure you are acting in a professional manner. It is also necessary to question your own attitudes and assumptions, to ensure you are not treating an individual differently because of their actions or behaviour. Many people find it difficult to understand adults with learning disabilities and make the mistake of treating them like children. It may be that some adults with learning disability do have a level of understanding similar to a child; however they are not children and so should not be treated like children. I also believe care homes may attract people who display abusive behaviour towards the residents/ clients. For instance, I have seen many care staff abuse their power by withholding help or assistance because they can. I find this kind of behaviour completely unacceptable, and as a senior support worker have been responsible for reprimanding individuals. Overall, I have found the majority of people who display this kind of behaviour are very much aware of what they are doing, and will continue to do so when given the opportunity. I have also observed sexism displayed by negative attitudes towards male care workers from females. It is often still believed that men do not have the skills necessary to care for others. However, I believe both males and females are capable of working in a care environment depending on the individual. I have always thought of myself as being open- minded, and would like to think I do not behave in a discriminatory behaviour towards anyone. However, I also believe everyone has attitudes and beliefs about some people that could be seen as discriminatory. For this reason, I believe it is how a person behaves towards others that is important not what they are thinking. I have always worked hard to ensure I am acting in a professional manner, and performing to the best of my abilities, therefore, I expect the same from my colleagues. I am fairly confident in challenging other people if I think they are behaving in a manner inappropriate for a professional. Prior to the learning on this module I thought of myself as being very open- minded and aware of many different discriminations and inequalities. However, I have since realised I was ignorant in certain areas, for example, homophobia. I was unaware an individuals sexuality could be on a continuum, I have previously thought of people as either "straight" or "gay" and did not realise people could fall anywhere along a continuum. However, when I reflected on this I realised it makes sense that an individual's sexuality is a complicated issue and cannot be categorised so easily. I was also unaware of the high level of violence directed towards gay people and men from ethnic minorities in particular. I was surprised to discover how widespread racism still is in Britain today and how this relates to poverty and food inequalities. The result of this is an unhealthy diet which has serious health consequences for individuals, particularly the elderly. I have previously been aware of how an individual can use power, as described above, but was not aware of larger scale institutional and economic power. Elderly and disabled people are consistently discriminated against by large companies who do not provide them the necessary equipment or support they need to either enter a building or take part in an activity. Overall, I was shocked that discrimination and inequality is so widespread across the UK, and thought the health inequalities between the rich and those in poverty were disgraceful. It is obvious that this needs to be improved and health and social care professionals can be part of the solution. I think as a future health and social care professional employee, it is very important that I have been made aware of all the issues discussed in this module. I believe this knowledge will allow me to be a better professional, as hopefully I will be able to treat patients as individuals and not be judgemental. I hope to make the time my patients spend with me pleasant, by being approachable and sensitive to their individual needs and not treating everyone in the same manner. I would ensure I listen to individuals needs and ask them how I can help, rather than insisting I know best. I would be prepared to offer advice and support on other aspects of an individuals life if it was appropriate, for example, it is pointless for me to give someone dietary advice when they are having difficulty buying the most basic food items. Therefore, I could help put them in contact with financial advice and support agencies. In general I will try to treat everyone as an individual and not to be judgemental, even if they are behaving in a way that I do not agree with. I accept that it will be very difficult as sometimes you can do or say the wrong thing without realising it until it is brought to your attention. For this reason, I will try and be aware of all the issues that might affect an individual and how they behave, for example, whether they are male/ female, old/ young, disabled, elderly, from an ethnic minority or gay. I think it is also important to consider how I appear to my patients; there may be issues about my own appearance or behaviour that is unacceptable to some people. To allow a consistent approach to patients I think it is necessary for a health care professional to participate in regular reflection of their own behaviour and attitudes. Finally, I would ensure if I witness any individual being treated in a discriminatory manner I would report it to the appropriate person, as not speaking up is just as damaging to the individual. I believe health and social care professionals are capable of reducing the amount of inequality and discrimination in the NHS, however, the Government is also responsible and could reduce it nationwide through changes in policy and legislation. 