<abstract><heading>EXECUTIVE SUMMARY</heading>The following report aims to inform Monarka Hotel Group of potential people management strategies for the Monarka Hotel unit in Kathmandu, Nepal. The report compares and contrasts business environments. It is shown how Nepal's business environment differs from the UK's. The major divergences lie in the fact that Nepal is a very poor and underdeveloped country in comparison to the UK. For instance, its economic and political situations are very unstable. Indeed, Nepal has an extremely low GDP per capita and literacy rate compared to the UK, as its unemployment rate is nearly ten times higher than the British. The Nepalese culture, compared to the UK's using Hofstede's dimensions scores a higher power distance, a lower masculinism and individualism. It is recommended that Monarka should adopt an ethnocentric orientation during the first years of operation in Nepal, then to move to a polycentric orientation to finally reach a geocentric approach. The organisation should adopt a human resource management approach as much as possible, as opposed to a personnel management approach. By doing so, the company will be more strategically oriented and will focus on long-term performance by investing in training, rewarding and by considering its employees as assets. Resourcing the organisation will be a challenge, considering the weak condition of the labour market, but will be possible through a well define work design, and through a horizontal specialisation. It is recommended that the company adopts a diversity management approach when dealing with the differences between the employees (sex, religion, culture, etc.) in order to make best use of these differences by using them as competitive advantage. All these recommendations are taking into account the unique features of the business environment and of the local culture, in order for the human resource strategy and for the company to be integrated as much as possible in the new environment. </abstract><heading>1. INTRODUCTION</heading>The dynamic competitive international business environment of the twenty-first century has brought companies to manage daily operation in different countries, with different cultures. The present report follows the decision of Monarka Hotel Group to open a subsidiary in Nepal. Funded in 1952, Monarka hotel group is a UK based hotel chain which operates 3 different brands in all continents, including Asia. A recent marketing study has shown the viability of the Monarka Hotel brand in Nepal (appendix 1). Nepal is one of the poorest countries of the world. Nevertheless, as the land of the lord Buddha, its culture and history is very rich. Considered by the UNESCO as a natural museum for its genuine diversity, it is also a geographical sanctuary, with eight of the ten highest peaks in the world, including the famous Everest Mountain. Nepal's capital is Kathmandu, which is located in a valley at a 1'310 m altitude and has a population of 1.5 millions (NTB, 2006). The Monarka brand in Nepal would be located in Kathmandu, Nepal's capital, offering 135 rooms. The five-star hotel aims to provide a unique customer experience through operational excellence, and targets a westernised luxury market, that is the affluent American and European market. To provide a great work environment is also part of the organisation's mission statement. The present document analyses the different challenges of managing personnel in Nepal compared to the UK, and proposes several alternatives and strategies to effectively manage people. <heading>2. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS</heading>In order to evaluate how different is the business environment in Nepal compared to the UK, a comparative analysis is conducted. The comparative analysis is particularly appropriate in this case because, even though many aspects of the personnel management will be the same, i.e. the key functions, some aspects will be different since they are influenced by country specific factors and circumstances (Harris et al. , 2003). The comparative analysis enables to point out which are those main differences. The most suitable framework to compare both businesses environments is the PESTE analysis, since it also allows identifying growth opportunities (Johnson et al. , 2006). The following analysis contrasts the Political, Economical, Social, Technological and Environmental factors in a human resource perspective for the company to adapt its strategy to Nepal's environment. <heading>2.1 Political environment </heading>The political environment greatly influences businesses decisions and also human behaviour. All the laws and regulations worldwide, varying between countries and regions create a challenging political environment and, as regulations change, organisations must adapt their strategies and practices (Hodgetts and Luthans, 1997). The political environment in Nepal as a whole is much more unstable than the UK's. Even thought both governments are constitutional monarchies with a legal system based on the common law, the level of democracy and of freedom regarding the civil and political rights in Nepal is lower than the UK (appendix 2). This indicates that the Nepalese population has less liberty in developing opinions, organisations and individual autonomy apart from the state (CIFP, 2000). In fact, Nepal's political unstable political environment has long been associated with a perpetual conflict with the Maoist rebel group, led by the Communist party (US Department of State, 2006). However, very recently, a peace accord has been signed between the Maoist rebels and the Nepalese government, assuring a greater harmony and freedom in the country (BBC, 2006). Another major difference between both countries political environment is the corruption rate. Nepal classifies itself as having one of the highest corruption rates in the world (Miles et al. , 2006), whether the UK's is fairly low and representative of its healthy economy and political situation (appendix 2). Indeed, the Nepalese government seems very unstable in the distribution of permits, licenses and other legal document and services (Miles et al. , 2006). Additionally, strikes and public protests are frequent and arise on short notice (Investment Climate, 2006). It is important that the company particularly considers this aspect since it can clearly affect the business by rising work absenteeism. These public protests might be less frequent as a result of the peace agreement, but the company should still elaborate a strategy to ensure the level of business is not affected by these events when they occur. <heading>2.2 Economic environment</heading>The economic environment is closely related to the political stability, and to the potential risk of investment in a country (Deresky, 2003). As the economic environment changes faster than the political, companies must be able to benefit from it (Hodgetts and Luthans, 1997). The economic environment of the UK compared to Nepal's differs in its magnitude. In fact, Nepal's GDP is nearly ten times smaller than the UK's (appendix 2). The economic factors that will affect he most the management of human resources is the GDP per capita and the proportion of the population below poverty line. With an incredibly low minimum wage (23 USD/month), the GDP per capita in Nepal is of 1,400 USD per year, which is nearly 22 times lower than the UK (CIA, 2005). Hence, the standards of living in Nepal are very low, as more than a third of the population live below the poverty line (appendix 2). Furthermore, the unemployment rate in Nepal is almost ten times higher than the UK's with 42% compared to 4.7%. Nepal being still an agricultural economy employs 76% of its workforce in this sector (CIA, 2004) whether it is only 1.5% of the workforce for the UK (CIA, 2005). Even though the service sector contributes to 41% of Nepal's GDP, it employs only 18% of the workforce. In UK, services accounts for 75.8% of the GDP by employing 79.5% of the workforce. In 2006, the travel and tourism sector in the economy is expected to contribute to 8.2% of the GDP, creating 6.4% of the total employment (WTTC, 2006a). In UK, this sector of the economy should account for 9.4% of GDP with 8.8% of the total employment (WTTC, 2006b). The other factors of the economic environment such as imports, exports or taxing policies have less influence on the human resource management. Regarding the trade agreements, it is nonetheless important to know that, after India and Tibet, the United Kingdom is the most favoured nation for the exportation of goods (Government of Nepal, 2006). This supposes good trading relations between the two countries and might facilitate the process for home country nationals to enter Nepal, if judged necessary. <heading>2.3 Socio-cultural environment</heading>Both countries are secular and very multiethnic. Nepal's main religion is Hindu and UK's is Christian (appendix 2). For both countries, the most populated segment of the population is the 15-64 years old strata (appendix 2). However, Nepal's population growth rate is much higher, with 2.17% than the UK's with only 0.28%, which is representative of a developed westernised country (appendix 2). The major difference between the two countries is the literacy rate. In fact, less than half the population of Nepal is literate, whether in the UK it is not a concern (appendix 2). This fact has a major impact over the human resources management, foremost for a service business where the required qualifications are higher than in the manufacture or agriculture industry. Indeed, the workforce being already limited, the fact that half the population is illiterate might complicate recruitment for qualified personnel. Cultural differences must be contrasted when analysing different environments, as cultural dimensions provide a tool to understand people's beliefs and behaviors (Romani, 2004). Culture is shown through different levels: surface manifestations, values and basic assumptions (Harris et al. , 2003). In order to identify the cultural differences and similarities between Nepal and the UK, Hofstede's cultural dimensions are used. Hofstede categorises culture in different dimensions that are said to be universal since they denote factors applicable in every society (Romani, 2004); four of them are used in the present analysis. In Hofstede's study, Nepal's dimensions of culture have not been considered, but India's dimensions are present. The socio-cultural similarities between Nepal and India are important enough to use India's cultural dimensions for the comparison (Kansakar, 2001, Adhikari and Muller, 2001). Power distance refers to the existing relationship between supervisors and subordinates (Romani, 2004) and if they accept that power is distributed unequally (Hodgetts and Luthans, 1997). Nepal scores a higher power distance than the United Kingdom, meaning that Nepalese organisations are more likely to be centralised (Hodgetts and Luthans, 1997). There are subsequently more barriers between hierarchical strata (Romani, 2004) than in the UK, where low power distance indicates that organisations tend to be more decentralised, considering employees and managers on the same level. According to Hofstede, a high power distance is representative of poorer countries (Hofstede, 1984). Uncertainty avoidance refers to the degree which employees feel comfortable in taking new actions or risk when facing a new or uncertain situation (Romani, 2004). Both countries have relatively low uncertainty avoidance, meaning that the company can function with less written rules as managers will be more risk-taking to serve the organisation (Hodgetts and Luthans, 1997). Nevertheless, uncertainty avoidance greatly varies from an organisation to another within a country. Low uncertainty avoidance is more likely to happen in smaller organisations, and where the population is denser in poorer countries (Hofstede, 1984). Individualism is the tendency of people to take actions that benefit themselves or their immediate family. Opposite from individualism is collectivism, where people tend to act in the interest of a group, as they look more after themselves (Hodgetts and Luthans, 1997). As a wealthy advanced country, UK scores high in individualism, whether Nepal is in between with collectivism. Often, the higher the GDP, the most individualist is the society (Hofstede, 1984). Collectivism being higher in Nepal, it might be important to have a collective organisation of work (Romani, 2004). Masculinity is referred as an environment where extrinsic aspects such as high earning and recognition of work are most important, whereas femininity occurs in societies where the most important aspects are intrinsic and refer to interpersonal aspect of work such as good cooperation and work-relationships (Romani, 2004). Nepal scoring lower in masculinity than the UK, it is expected that factors such as a friendly atmosphere at work, employment security and co-operation will be as important as other more material factors (Hodgetts and Luthans, 1997) <heading>2.4 Technological factor</heading>The technological and environmental factors are the ones that less influences the management of human resource. It is nonetheless important to understand differences in the way business is conducted, and they can even help in understanding cultural differences. Representative of the level of development, the Nepalese technological environment present important deficiencies. Although it has a lot of airports (appendix 2), only the Kathmandu's is major and international. The other ones mostly deserve destinations that are not accessible by roadways, which are minimal. There is also a poor telephone and Internet service outside the Kathmandu region (appendix 2). In UK, the technological environment is not an issue since all transportation and communication services are widely available and deserve all the country. The fact that the Nepalese technological environment is less developed than the UK must be taken into account when developing the human resource strategies. Indeed, communication systems must be revised as they might not be functional in Nepal. Also, the poor roadway condition might complicate transportation for employees living far from their workplace. Nevertheless, those potential complications should be minimised by the fact that the hotel is located in Kathmandu, where the infrastructure is the most developed in the country. <heading>2.5. Environmental factor</heading>Nepal's environment is characterised by its particular geography. As a landlocked country with poor infrastructure, the supply of goods as food and beverage might not be as easy as in the UK. Also, one major difference is that only half of Nepal's population has access to improved water, whether it is not even a concern in the UK (appendix 2). Even though it does not affect the management of human resource, it surely presents additional cost to the hotel which wants to provide improved water for all its clients. <heading>3. HRM OR PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT? </heading>The way employees are managed in an organisation hugely influences a business success, all the most in the service industry where a great part of the service consists in the interaction between the customer and the employee. In terms of management of the workforce, two main approaches exist: they are human resource management and personnel management. Before choosing which one is the most suitable for Monarka in Nepal, it is important to understand its differences. Tyson and Fell (1986) proposed 3 different approaches to manage the workforce through different roles: the clerk of work corresponds to a routine personnel administration, the contracts negotiator which has a short term tactical approach and is most suitable when dealing with trade unions (McCourt, 2003) and the architect role, which makes long-term strategic choices (Martinez and Martineau, 1998). According to McCourt (2003), the contracts negotiator approach is most suitable in an industrialised context or in countries where trade unions are strong, since it is an inflexible and centralised approach to staff management. This approach corresponds to a personnel management approach, which is bureaucratic, reactive and short-term oriented (appendix 4). As the personnel management approach proposed formal defined roles and has a low-trust and collective approach toward the employees (appendix 4), it is probably most suitable in countries with a high uncertainty avoidance, since the employees autonomy is minimised through well defined tasks. The architect role, helping determine organisational strategy (Torrington and Hall, 1996), closely relates to a human resource management approach. Indeed, this approach is more strategic, as it is long-term and proactive focused (appendix 4). It values commitment from the employees and high-trust by having flexible roles in the organisation. Consequently, this approach is most appropriate in countries with low uncertainty avoidance since employees act with more independence. Nepal, as in the UK, has relatively low uncertainty avoidance (appendix 3), meaning employees are able to cope with new situations by taking required actions. Also, being a luxury-hotel aiming to provide best service to its clients, the nature of the Monarka brand requires employees to be able to take initiatives in order to satisfy the customer. Indeed, the human management approach is the most suitable for the company. However, as the brand is a strong brand (appendix 1), the services need to be standardised to a certain extent, but it is most important that managers give autonomy to employees in order to give best service to the customer. As the luxury hotel product is intangible dominant (as opposed to tangible dominant), the amount of discretion required by the employees is high, as well as the need to delight the customer (Lashley, 1998). The company needs also to choose if it adopts a hard or a soft approach to its human resource management. A hard approach views labour as a resource whether a soft approach considers it as an asset (Lashley, 1998). Monarka in Nepal will adopt a soft approach, since it believes its success lies in the commitment of its employees. The main disadvantage of choosing a human resource management approach is that it requires higher qualified employees, which, according to the labour market situation, is a scarce resource in Nepal. The company will need to offer excellent working conditions to recruit and keep those qualified employees, since they must be highly in demand by other units in the competitor set. Even though the availability of qualified workforce might increase in the future since the Hotel Management Academy started a new bachelor program in 2003 (Nepalese Ministry of finance, 2006), it will be necessary to recruit home or parent country nationals to manage the hotel, at least in the beginning. It will also be important that managers have an open mindset about trade unions. In fact, evidence suggests there are trade unions in the Nepalese hospitality industry, but they are still developing. It is nevertheless important to ensure that managers know how to trade with them (General Federation of Nepalese Trade Unions, 2002). <heading>4. STRATEGIC ORIENTATION</heading>To understand how companies manage their activities, Perlmutter (1969) proposes a "network-based" model (Beardwell et al. , 2004:615) that categorises organisations depending on the extent to which they adapt their practices to the host country (in this case Nepal) versus to the parent country (UK) (Harzing, 2004a). The strategic orientation greatly depends of which category of employees the firm employs for its key managers. The three choices are host-country nationals (HCN), i.e. from Nepal, parent-country nationals (PCN), i.e. from the UK, or third-country national (TCN), i.e. managers from another country than the host or the parent (Dowling and Welch, 2004). Most of the authors focus on three strategic orientations: ethnocentrism, polycentrism and geocentrism. A forth orientation, the regiocentrism approach, is rarely covered in the literature, and will not be discussed as a potential choice since there are no Monarka hotels in the Indian subcontinent. Hence, it would be irrelevant to consider this alternative. One of the deficiencies of these approaches is that it is unclear how a company can pass to one state to another (Beardwell et al. , 2004) <heading>4.1. Ethnocentric orientation</heading>The ethnocentric orientation values PCNs as key managers for the subsidiaries of the organisation. The global policies of the organisation reflect those of the home country, where most of the decisions are taken (Harzing, 2004a, appendix 5). The ethnocentric approach implies that the knowledge, management style and managers from the home country are better than those from the host country. This approach could fit Monarka in Nepal to a certain extent. In fact, it will be important, at least in the first years, to employ PCNs as key managers in the organisation, due to the scarcity of qualified labour in Nepal, and to ensure a certain control on the brand standards. However, in the long-run, this approach may not be suitable since the organisation wants to give a chance to Nepalese managers to reach key positions in the organisation and to be committed by being part of it. Furthermore, as the company wants to adopt a human resource management approach, it is important that employees perceive carrier opportunities in the organisation. <heading>4.2 Polycentric orientation</heading>The polycentric orientation recognises cultural differences and considers HCNs as being in a better position to manage the organisation by their understanding of local culture (Harzing, 2004a, appendix 5). This approach gives a lot of autonomy to the subsidiary, as policies are planned mostly according to local interests (appendix 5). To adopt this approach for Monarka in Nepal would be very risky, at least for the first years. In fact, the poor labour market condition and the political and economical instability of the country are too important to give as much independence to the subsidiary. However, if the situation stabilises in Nepal and that the organisation is able to form HCNs as a key managers, it could strengthen the national culture into the organisation. However, this approach would limit the HCN to manage in its own country as it would not have growth opportunities once in a key position. <heading>4.3. Geocentric orientation</heading>Often seen as a utopia, the geocentric approach combines the ethnocentric and the polycentric approaches by being world oriented. In this approach, 'best-fit' managers and 'best practices' policies will be chosen, regardless of their nationality or origin (appendix 5). The approaches to decision making are collective, that is the subsidiaries and headquarters will discuss among themselves to take the best decision. This approach would certainly be applicable to Monarka in Nepal. However, the costs of applying this strategic orientation are very high (appendix 5), and this orientation is very challenging to obtain. <heading>4.4 Monarka's strategic orientation</heading>Because of its presence in all continents, Monarka is a global, multinational company. Hence, the company will adopt a mixture of the ethno- and the polycentric approaches. In fact, the mixture of those both approaches would enable the company to first bring PCNs to manage the core functions of the organisation. As the organisation would get more structured in Nepal, the ideal situation would be to have HCNs trained to become key managers of the organisation in order to ensure the local culture is part of the organisation. Eventually, to adopt a geocentric would be ideal in the long term, in order to allow, amongst other reasons, HCNs to have growth opportunities in other subsidiaries around the globe. In summary, the best strategic path for Monarka in Nepal would be to begin with an ethnocentric approach, to move to a more polycentric orientation after a few years, in order to reach a geocentric approach in the long run. <heading>5. RESOURCING</heading>The resourcing process is concerned with making an effective use of the internal labour market, as well as "attracting high-quality" external applicants (Beardwell et al., 2004:175). Price (1997:90) defines resourcing as the "process by which people are identified and allocated to perform necessary work" in the organisation. Resourcing will be seen as part of the strategic business planning (Iles, 2001). In order to formulate appropriate policies and practices, the environment, as well as the labour market must be understood (Torrington et al. , 2005). Resourcing Monarka in Nepal will then be influenced by the strength, the diversity and the skills of the labour market, as well as by the work design, the organisational structure and the flexibility required by the employees. Forecasting of demand must also be taken into account, and complicates the resourcing process since, as it will be highly seasonal (appendix 1), it will require higher flexibility. <heading>5.1. The labour market</heading>The Nepalese labour market can be qualified as very weak. In fact, as mentioned previously, less than half the population is literate and, in 1991, only 9.04% of the population had a secondary level education (SAAT, 1997). Hence, the level of education of the workforce is very low, and the structure of employment reflects the low level of development of the country (SAAT, 1997). Then, to recruit workforce with the required level of qualification for a management job will be very difficult. Nevertheless, as mentioned earlier, the new bachelor program launched by the Hotel Management Academy might increase the availability of qualified and motivated workforce. The labour market can be segmented into two distinct categories: the primary and the secondary labour market. In hospitality, these two categories are present in the internal market, i.e. both markets work together in the same organisation. The first authors that categorised these markets argued that primary labour market is characterised by high wages, stable employment, a lot of benefits and growth opportunities in the company, and that the secondary labour market is characterised by low pay, absence of benefits, high turnover and few chances for advancement (Doeringer and Piore, 1971). However, the primary labour market can also be characterised as higher skilled and motivated than the secondary labour market. In hospitality, most managers are in this category (Fichtenbaum, 2006). The secondary labour market represents a lot of jobs in hospitality (housekeepers, technicians, valet and waiters) and requires lower skilled employees that often are easily replaceable (Fichtenbaum, 2006). Monarka in Nepal will have to recruit employees from these both categories. Employees from the primary labour market will probably not be a problem to recruit, though it will be a requirement that they speak English. Employees from the second category will mostly be recruited from schools or from other organisations. For both categories, Monarka will give the required training, whether into the organisation or using an external local firm, to ensure the employees know the brand standards, can fulfil their job efficiently and are committed to the organisation as much as possible. Considering the labour market characteristics, it is more logical for the company to create a strong internal labour market, focused on specified hiring standards and encouraging internal promotion. <heading>5.2. Work design</heading>Work design is of a great significance when a company tries to reach efficiency and satisfaction (Campion et al. , 2005). The two approaches of work design are the traditional approach and the work redesign approach. The traditional approach refers to the industrial revolution, when the skills required to perform a job were minimised in order to maximise efficiency. However, this method leads to low employee morale and poor working conditions. The work redesign approach recognises the intrinsic needs of workers and searches to enhance worker satisfaction and consequently productivity (Campion et al. , 2005). As discussed previously, the Nepalese culture is medium in individualism, which means it would be beneficial for the firm to organise some of the tasks as more collective than individual. The culture is also low in uncertainty avoidance, which confirms the suitability for a motivational work design model (Campion et al. , 2005) where intrinsic factors are valued, as employees will be able to work autonomously to a certain degree. Hales (1987) approach to work design proposes a grid to categorise different forms of re-design from horizontal to vertical de-specialisation of jobs to an organisational and individual level. The horizontal specialisation would be appropriate at an organisational level since it emphasises the creation of sub-units in each function, i.e. group work (Hales, 1987). It would be an effective approach with the operative team. To adopt such an approach would also fit Lashley's (1998) professional style of human resource management, going towards the involvement style. That is the trust culture would be valued as employees are asked to perform tasks that require a high discretion, but their autonomy would though be limited, foremost for the operational staff. This model should be possible to obtain with continuous training and, even though it might be more costly in the beginning, it will be beneficial in the long term since employees will be committed to the organisation. Indeed, the scarcity of qualified labour creates a requirement to keep employees even in the primary labour market, as a high turnover might be a problem. In order to meet the high service standards, it is important that employee turnover is as low as possible since the better the employees know the organisation, the best service can be delivered. <heading>5.3 Flexibility</heading>As the demand in hospitality organisations is highly variable and often seasonal, the flexibility of the employees is important to develop, and is a way to control the large costs driven labour. The three main types of flexibility are numerical (when the firm can respond to demand in terms of the number of employees), temporal (varying the patterns of working hours in order to meet peaks of demand and employee needs), and functional (when employees are able to vary their tasks rather than specialise in only one area) (Torrington et al., 2005). Atkinson's model of the flexible firm (1984) cited in (Torrington et al. , 2005) proposes two main groups of employees to meet flexibility. The first group, the core group, is formed of the primary labour market (mainly managers) who work full-time in the organisation, provide functional flexibility and are committed to the organisation. The second group is the peripheral group, where the organisation offers them just a job rather than a career. It is divided in first and second peripheral groups. The first peripheral group is numerically flexible, i.e. composed of workers that may be self-employed as they do not usually work for the firm. The second peripheral group has temporal and numerical flexibility as it is formed mainly of part-time workers. Although the organisation will need workers from all these groups to meet high levels of demand, it will aim to offer career opportunities to its core group. It will also provide opportunities to employees of the peripheral group that demonstrate loyalty and motivation to the firm to move into the core group, enhancing a strong internal labour market through internal promotion. The firm could also employ students form the Hospitality Academy as second labour market and peripheral group in order to meet high levels of demand. <heading>6. MOTIVATION AND REWARD</heading>Offering a luxury product that requires skilled staff and aiming to have highly committed workforce, Monarka in Nepal will have to offer appropriate motivation and rewards. There are two main types of reward: extrinsic (associated with monetary returns and benefits) and intrinsic (internally driven, linked to work satisfaction, challenge) (Kessler, 2001). Extrinsic rewards are those specified in the contract, whether intrinsic rewards are more psychological as they are related to the job and often are the reasons why people stay with one particular company (Torrington et al., 2005). To offer advantageous reward is also beneficial to the organisation since it will allows it to recruit higher quality staff (Torrington et al. , 2005). Monarka will provide both types of reward to its employees, though to a different level between operational and managerial staff. The intrinsic rewards will, for the operational staff, mainly be composed of the salary, which will be time-based (rate/hour). The managerial staff pay system will be different. It will be a fix remuneration (per year) with a performance based bonus at the end of the year. The performance bonus, though it is difficult to evaluate since it is often intangible, will be given equally, according to the global performance of the hotel. This approach will enhance manager's tendency to work in synergy through a common goal. Informal rewards also have to be considered. In fact, due to the nature of the industry, employees have access to substantial amounts of informal rewards as staff meals, tips, fiddles and knock-offs (theft from customers or from the employer) (Mars and Mitchell, 1976). According to Lynn (1997) tendencies to tipping will vary in different cultures. The Nepalese culture, with its low uncertainty avoidance and its emphasis on social relationship is more likely to have tipping. The salary structure will be hierarchical and the minimum wage of the organisation will be above the Nepalese minimum wage. As the Nepalese culture is medium in masculinity (appendix 3), the employees will not be motivated only by extrinsic rewards such as pay, but also by intrinsic factors. It will then be important to ensure that employees feel they have advancement possibilities in the organisation, and that sane relationships are created between the workforce. It will not only be beneficial for the motivation of the employees, but also to provide a great work environment, leading in increased productivity and satisfaction from the employees as well as from the clients. As the strategic orientation will first be ethnocentric, Monarka will need some expatriates (PCNs) as key managers. Expatriation refers to the process of international transfer of managers, although the term expatriate is mostly used to describe PCNs (Harzing, 2004a). Even though recruiting PCNs as key managers has many advantages as the familiarity with the home office's policies and practices, it also has disadvantages (appendix 6). When recruiting PCNs, it will be important to ensure they will be able to cope with the Nepalese culture in order to minimise failure risk. As English is the business language in Nepal, it is not necessary that the PCNs speak Nepali, though it would be a great advantage and would facilitate their integration. In order to recruit qualified managers from the UK and to keep them, Monarka will offer them compensations such as housing allowance, automobile, home leave, family allowance and probably hardship and mobility premium. These offers will be negotiable in order to suit each manager's need and requirements, as much as possible. <heading>7. TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT</heading>In order to ensure that the employees will be able to deliver the promised level of service to the client, the training of the workforce will be highly important. Training can be seen as a long-term investment, as it enhances the employee's commitment toward its employer, and diminishes the tendency of the employee to voluntary leave the organisation (Torrington et al. , 2005). In fact, as Price (1997:190) points out, "human resource development (HRD) is a strategic approach to investing in human capital". As discussed previously, a human resource management approach will be taken toward the employees, as opposed to a personnel management approach. This implies that the company will consider training as an investment and will aspire to improve the quality of its recruits. Also, with the low uncertainty avoidance feature, the company will focus on empowerment of the staff, i.e. the ability to take decisions independently. Nevertheless, formal on-the-job training will be crucial for the operational staff. In fact, training in Monarka will be seen as an integral part of the organisational strategy. As the company aims to move from an ethnocentric orientation to a polycentric and, with strong internal labour market, it is logical that the company promotes continuous development of its workforce in order to encourage promotions within the organisation. It will be important that the international managers (PCNs) are trained or have worked in another Monarka hotel before having the opportunity to go in Nepal. To receive training on the Nepalese culture would also minimise the potential inability to cope with the cultural difference. Moreover, as the local workforce is very low-skilled and as the organisation wants to integrate with the local culture, it will refer to local organisations, governmental and institutional programmes for the training of its core workforce. Finally, as the organisation wants to move toward a geocentric approach, it would be appropriate to provide the chance to some local managers to benefit from a training experience in other subsidiaries in Europe or Asia. <heading>8. MANAGING DIVERSITY AND EQUALITY</heading>With globalisation, frontiers between countries are dissipating as their population gets more culturally diverse. Minority groups face disadvantages and organisations must develop policies and strategies in order to minimise discrimination and to maximise the potential opportunities created by this diversity of the workforce (Torrington  et al. , 2005). Organisations can, whether opt for an equal opportunity (EO) approach with the purpose of reducing discrimination, or a diversity management (DM) approach, in order to maximise the potential of each employee (Torrington  et al. , 2005). In fact, as the EO approach focuses on specific groups, the DM approach concentrates more on the individual (appendix 7). Even though both approaches seem contradictory, there is a consensus that both tendencies are valid (Hyman, 2004). Even though both approaches are needed to ensure progress, the organisation must focus on a particular one. As Monarka opts for a human resource management approach and a horizontal specialisation (Hales, 1987) approach for its operational workforce, it is logical that it tends to focus on the DM as well. In fact, in the DM approach, employees are expected to work in harmony, and line managers are considered as the key managers. The DM focuses on the individual by giving opportunities to all its employees. This characteristic suits the strong internal labour market orientation by giving the opportunities to operational staff to become managers. As the Nepalese population is very multicultural (U.S. Department of State, 2006), by adopting a DM approach, Monarka wants to consider the individual differences as an opportunity and use them in order to create a unique competitive advantage. No discrimination, "directly or indirectly, against older or disabled people, women, ethnic minorities or people with different sexual orientations" will be tolerated, nor in the organisation, or in the recruitment process (Torrington et al. , 2005:538). <heading>9. CONCLUSION</heading>The following research proposed viable recommendations for a people management approach of Monarka hotel, a luxury brand, in Kathmandu, Nepal. The document first performed a review of the different business environments (UK and Nepal) by comparing them, and then justified human resource management strategies in term of strategic orientation, human resource management approach, resourcing, rewarding, training and managing diversity. Although the Nepalese environment presents several lacks, the most important of them being a very weak and low-skilled labour market, the analysis showed the viability of an effective human resource strategy. The research being conducted in the UK, it is based on secondary data only. Nepal being underdeveloped, some information seems not to be available at all, which limits to some extent the strength of the analysis. Furthermore, the validity some sources can be questioned since a lot of information on the country has been found on government websites, which could tend to modify some information to their advantage. Nevertheless, substantial theoretical research has also been conducted, which provides a strong basis for the viability of the proposed Monarka human resource strategy in Nepal. 