In this essay it will firstly introduce why language acquisition by apes is interesting to psycholinguistic research and for me personally. It will then look at two specific questions from the topic area. The first question is whether apes are capable to acquire and use language. It will be examined while discussing experiments of two chimps, Washoe and Kanzi. The second question is why humans are capable to acquire and use language. It will be considered with two main views by Piaget and Chomsky. Finally this essay will be concluded by evaluating how my reading has provided an answer towards these questions. There is also a further question arising at the end. It is assumed that language acquisition and the use by non human primates is one of most interesting topic in psycholinguistic research. According to Harley (2001) the study of psycholinguistics is concerned with understanding, producing and remembering language. It seems that the topic is in particular related to understanding language since it is required to analyse the nature of language. Moreover while looking at language use by apes it leads to a further consideration on language acquisition by human beings. In addition this topic is interesting for me personally to find out if humans have any chances to communicate with other primates through human language system. As it was discussed in the class animal communication is different from humans. However communication with other primates will be possible when they have achieved acquisition of human language. In order to investigate the possibility the topic needs to be examined. In addition there are particularly two questions which are interesting and most relevant to psycholinguistic research in this topic area. The first question is whether apes are capable to acquire and use language at equivalent level to humans. It is said that apes such as chimpanzees are cognitively intelligent to have a rich communication system in the wild (Harley, 2001). Furthermore a chimp called Sarah had achieved as high cognitive abilities as humans at the similar age. She recognised that it is not necessary to change the amount of water when pouring it from a tall, thin glass into a short, fat glass (Harley, 2001). However as it was discussed in the class it has been claimed that vocal tracts of apes are not structured to produce speech (Harley, 2001; Steinberg et al, 2001). Therefore language here does not necessarily mean spoken language. However it involves with both semantic associations among words and syntactic rules in sentences as Harley (2001) regards them as essential features of human language. While a number of experiments have been attempted with various apes such as chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutuns the most famous and successful representatives are the cases of Washoe and Kanzi. Washoe, a chimpanzee had started to learn American Sign Language (ASL) when she was at approximately one year old (Harley, 2001). ASL is standard sign language widely used for people with hearing impairment in North America. It has words and syntax as all spoken languages do (Harley, 2001). While she was taught eating habits, toilet training and other social activities as a human child she had achieved some linguistic acquisition (Harley, 2001). For example she showed remarkable success on creativity of new signs. In other words she was able to invent a new word such as waterbird for an object she had not learnt before. The word which refers to swan is created by combining previously learned two words, water and bird (Carroll, 1999). On the other hand most researchers have concluded that Washoe had only achieved rudimentary syntax and word order. Although she was able to combine words up to five items there is not enough evidence if they are syntactically structured (Harley, 2001; Steinberg et al, 2001). For example she was likely to say sweet go although it is supposed to be go sweet in the correct order (Aitchison, 1998). In addition Harley (2001) argues that Washoe's creativity is not certainly proved. For example waterbird can be produced by accident on the day of training randomly making signs such as 'water shoe' or 'water banana' (Harley, 2001). Furthermore Washoe's vocabulary size is not comparable to the one by human children. While normal children reach to approximately 14,000 words by 72 months Washoe only learned 130 sign words in four years (Carroll, 1999, Steinberg et al, 2001). Furthermore how Washoe's linguistic skills are measured is controversial. Since she had been trained by certain staffs they might have understood her language better. Therefore they might misunderstand her gestures as sign language or had over-interpretation what she had produced. According to Harley (2001) deaf native signers claimed that there is a significant discrepancy between the understanding by trainers and their views. However it is said that another chimp, Kanzi had achieved much successful linguistic abilities. He is a pygmy chimpanzee while Washoe is a common chimpanzee. Bonobos are generally more intelligent and much suitable for social life and communicative behaviours than other apes (Harley, 2001). Kanzi's linguistic skills are measured with a keyboard. In other words when he touched it synthesised English speech in reference to objects, actions or locations was produced. The visual symbols shown on the keyboard were arbitrary geometrical while each matches a particular word (Steinberg et al, 2001). Firstly Kanzi was remarkable as he started to use keyboards spontaneously without explicit training (Aitchison, 1998). This shows Kanzi's high knowledge since Washoe was required explicit training associating a particular symbol and word in a context (Harley, 2001). Moreover 80 % of his output was spontaneous utterances (Harley, 2001). It is also found that Kanzi had demonstrated a great achievement on fixed word order. For example he was able to put the action before the object such as 'hide peanut' or 'bite tomato' (Aitchison, 1998). It is certainly acceptable that he shows high linguistic abilities. On the other hand some of Kanzi's abilities have been questioned among researchers. Although he is said to distinguish verb meanings between get and take (Harley, 2001) his semantic understanding is not equivalent to humans. For example Kanzi had used a word, 'strawberry' to refer to multiple purposes such as the object, going the field and requesting to eat it which humans do not (Harley, 2001). In addition it has been claimed that his syntactic knowledge is slow to grow and does not go over the equivalent level of human children at age of three (Harley, 2001). In addition it is questionable that other bonobos experiments have not been reported until recently as it has been past over 20 years since Kanzi's date had gathered in 1980s. Furthermore Steinberg et al (2001, pp155) states 'why Kanzi's younger sister, Mulika has yet to achieve results equal to those of Kanzi'. These points might suggest that high linguistic abilities are limited to Kanzi. With two chimps' research it is considered that apes are not capable to acquire and use language at the similar level to humans. In order to understand language further it is necessary to investigate why humans are capable to acquire and use language while all other apes cannot. There are mainly two views to discuss the question. According to Steinberg et al (2001) pro-intelligence theorists such as Piaget argue that humans have certain aspects of intelligence which is required for language acquisition. In this theory intelligence does not mean knowledge but rather refers to means for acquiring knowledge. They believe that humans acquire language while learning or understanding intelligence from actions and experiences (Steinberg et al, 2001). Piaget has demonstrated the argument with four stages of cognitive development. For instance the first, sensorimotor stage gives infants before age of two a chance to attain knowledge that objects have continuous existence after it disappears from their views. Piaget states this learning enables infants to associate objects and its name in his cognition hypothesis (Harley, 2001). The hypothesis says that language necessarily develops by increasing cognitive skills such as perceptual processes (Harley, 2001). Therefore it is assumed that linguistic acquisition is universally relative to cognitive development. However it has been claimed that the idea does not apply to children with disorder such as Down's syndrome. In other words some children with the syndrome have achieved full competence in their language while most do not (Harley, 2001). Moreover it is assumed that hearing-impaired children who are more likely to be disadvantaged for cognitive development should delay in linguistic acquisition than those who are not. However research shows there are not huge differences in language acquisition although one learns spoken language and others acquire sign language (Harley, 2001). Therefore it is less evident to conclude that the hypothesis is true. In addition human infants from seven up to twelve years old in third stage of cognitive development recognise amount of water is same between a short wide glass and a tall thin glass (Harley, 2001). It is also proved that a chimp called Sarah had the cognitive ability as it states above. However it is researched that she would not achieve the same linguistic ability as human children age of twelve. Therefore the idea is limited in explaining the question with these objections. Another explanation towards language capability by humans is brought by innatists like Chomsky. They approach the question as they are born with basic ideas of grammar called Universal Grammar (UG). It applies to every language in the world as it is essential basis in grammar of all languages. Humans begin to acquire a particular language with UG when they receive certain speech input from the world (Steinberg et al, 2001). A good example is Pidgin and Creole language. The former has been developed while trying to communicate with different language speakers originally between slavery. The latter has been grown as a native tongue between children of pidgin speakers. Although Pidgin language has fairly simplified syntax Creole language is syntactically rich (Harley, 2001). It is explained that it happens as all humans have basic syntactic ideas in UG. Chomsky also argues that language acquisition is nothing to do with intelligence. Therefore apes are not capable to acquire language at satisfactory level although they have achieved certain intelligence (Steinberg et al, 2001). On the other hand it is less evident to determine the view since it might result from limitation in apes' intelligence or lack of analytical skills (Steinberg et al, 2001). In addition Harley (2001) points out why language development is slow and causes full of errors when we have an innate ability to acquire it. Moreover it is controversial that socially isolated children were not able to achieve more than rudimentary syntax. According to Bickerton (1990) Genie had understood the rule of past tense but had a difficulty in the actual use. Chelsea also created unusual sentences such as 'The woman is bus the going' (Aitchison, 1998). Therefore Chomsky's UG does not apply to those who received speech input later than usual. It is also found that the approach focuses on only syntactic acquisition. However as it states at the beginning semantics between words is another important element while considering language acquisition. Therefore it is a fairly limited view to answer the question. To sum up it is found that apes are not capable to acquire and use language at the equivalent level to humans from my reading. However this does not include fairly recent research and ongoing experiments with bonobo which is said to bring positive findings on the question. Therefore it is assumed that my reading has reasonably provided the answer with past research but not in current experiments. In addition my reading suggests a number of views by different researchers towards the second question. However it seems that all ideas lack explanations in some aspects or bring contradictions. Therefore it is not possible to give an exact answer. Finally it would be interesting to look at if there are any indicators to differentiate human from other primates in language capability through evolutional processes. 