In this reflective review I will firstly give an outline of our group presentation. I will then identify the most interesting aspect and the most significant learning in the topic. Lastly I will evaluate how well I was able to identify points in this report and discussion. I will also look at task processes as a group. In addition I will mention some questions rising at each stage. Our group has worked with the topic, how do we understand speech? . In order to answer the question, we have approached the topic with three points. They are speech perception from the biological view, comprehension of speech in a context and models of speech perception. In this topic I personally questioned whether we perceive sounds in the brain or whether we hear words with contextual meaning when we actually understand speech. We concluded that both approaches are possible ways to understand speech in our study. In the topic I found it most interesting about the lack of invariance problem as I have never realised the fact before although the point is reasonably understandable. It also leads to a further question whether brain has any effects on understanding speech with lack of invariance problem. In addition my significant new learning was the fact we expect what we hear or we guess missing parts from the context when we could not accurately hear speech. It in fact proves how I found speech in English. For example in lectures I cannot catch all words lecturers speak nor understand some of the meaning. However I am able to follow the content overall. The fact was a surprise for me as it enabled me to realise how my brain is working on when I hear English speech. In addition from the reading I am interested in how our brains biologically have comprehended missing sounds with only meanings such as phoneme restoration effect. Our group was able to introduce some important terms and concepts such as comprehension of sounds and garden path effects. However since we had included too many points in the presentation we made it confusing and difficult for audiences to follow the context. Furthermore it made difficult for audiences to come up questions. Therefore in discussion I could not identify points very well. However in this report I have achieved to answer each question clearly. It was beneficial to work on the topic as a group since our topic was really complicated and I could not comprehend it fully by myself. We have achieved to understand better by helping each other. On the other hand it was challenging as each of us were given different sources approaching the topic with different ways. Therefore we were confused where to focus in the discussion from the broad sources. Overall I believe the task process in group discussion was fairly successful since students' presentations had brought friendly atmosphere which enables other students to engage the discussion better. It also encouraged to examine the topic and to produce questions by themselves rather than simply listening to lectures. However some students had made a speech rather than having discussion. Therefore these sessions lacked the benefit of the group discussion. I believe it would be improved if we can concentrate a question arisen from the topic area and discuss it in the discussion. Since the detailed context will be covered in the lecture it would be much useful and interesting to concern a particular aspect on topics. 