In this paper I will critically review the article, Three Misconceptions About Age and L2 Learning by Marinova-Todd, Marshall and Snow. Fist of all I will give a summary of the article. I will start by looking at the concept of the critical period and then examine cases of L1 and L2 acquisition after the critical period. While looking at the cases I will analyse what the authors say about the critical period hypothesis in L2. In the next part I will evaluate how useful this article is for psycholinguistics students. Finally I will finish this paper with my major findings in the article concerning critical age hypothesis. I will also mention some limitations about the ideas in the article while comparing them to views by other linguists. To begin with the authors define the critical period for language acquisition as a certain period of time when human beings are highly successful at learning languages. It generally means the early childhood before age 9. After this period it is said that learners are less likely to achieve language acquisition to native level. It has been said that the critical period coincides with puberty when language-processing abilities become localised firmly in the left hemisphere. In this article the authors discussed the critical period is generally accepted between psycholinguists and have focused on talking about whether the critical period exists in L2 acquisition. The authors point out a fundamental difference between L1 and L2 acquisition while looking at examples of language acquisition after the critical period. There are people such as wolf children who are isolated from linguistic input during the critical period or congenitally deaf children whose hearing enabled to improve with hearing aids after the critical period. They have resulted in a failure of full language acquisition. In addition we face a number of people who begin to learn L2 after the critical period. However they hardly succeed to a high level of proficiency. Although they are both examples of failed language acquisition the authors consider that these are caused by completely different factors. Whereas the cases in L1 have included hardworking processes most L2 learners had a lack of effort. In other words the authors observe that the idea of the critical period is accepted for L1 but does not fit in L2. They rather believe that it is possible to achieve L2 acquisition at the high level with better learning environment and high motivation. For example against critical period hypothesis it is revealed that not every prepubescent child is capable to achieve high proficiency in L2 but only those who had not been involved in L1 environment. On the other hand there are examples of adults who have attained L2 with a high level of proficiency with a strong desire to master the language at the expense of their L1 environment. The article presumes the critical age hypothesis in L1 is true and argues over whether it is applied to L2. It is said that we can convince some neurological hypotheses such as 'less is more' hypothesis with critical period in L1 (Field: 2004). However it is not entirely certain whether the critical period exists in L1 acquisition. Steinberg, Nagata and Aline (2001) state that it is impossible to tell if there is a critical period in L1 acquisition since there is little data with Victor, Genie and Chelsea. However the article generally contains useful information for psycholinguistics students. For example there is sufficient data for localisation of a language at different ages, localisation of two languages in the brain and other neurobiological researches. As a result it is rather relevant to psycholinguistic studies although it seems slightly biased in some points. Last but not least the article concludes that adults are able to succeed L2 acquisition with high motivation and education in L2 environment for a long time. It also suggests that children learn a new language slowly with more effort than adolescents. However Field (2004) argues that adults have already established cognitive development through L1 acquisition and it prevents them from learning L2. On the other hand children have much smaller cognitive knowledge and it enables them to input languages successfully (Field: 2004). In addition this article overall gives a suggestion that there is a chance to acquire L2 at the native level as opposed to L1 acquisition even though the critical period has past. In the article the authors have not looked at separated domains such as syntax, lexis or phonology but deals with language as a whole. It is in fact considered that critical period in L2 acquisition might apply to some linguistic areas. For example Steinberg, Nagata and Aline (2001) argue the critical period hypothesis while looking acquisition of different linguistic domains separately. They conclude that there is no critical age to acquire the syntax of L2. However they suggest a possibility that learners who start getting involved in L2 environment at the earlier age are more likely to speak L2 without their foreign accent. Therefore I conclude that the article is a useful piece of work to start with psycholinguistic study for students however it is necessary to refer to the other sources with this article. Word Count: 864 words 