It is certain that everyone in the world is able to speak at least one language but every individual would not always use the exact same vocabulary or speak in a similar way in most language. Moreover use of language is different depending on certain groups of identity in particular gender differences between male and female enable to vary styles of language or lexical expressions widely. Furthermore these distinctions seem to emphasise a sense of identity such as masculinity or femininity as behaviours or attitudes. This essay will firstly discuss how men's language and women's language are dissimilar from three points. These points are vocabulary, speech styles and ways of interaction. In addition this essay will move to analyse how these differences are made while taking consideration of social life in early childhood and social relations in genders and then conclude on how much linguistic identity is important in establishing a sense of identity between genders in social context. To begin with the language used by men and women has a distinct feature towards vocabulary or lexical expressions. Ide (1989/1990: P73-74, cited Swann, 2000: P219) pointed out that Japanese language has contrasting personal pronoun forms in men's speech and women's speech (see appendix). The first difference is use of watashi in other words men use watashi as a formal expression of first pronoun, I whereas women refer to watashi as a plain form. Furthermore men have deprecatory level of language such as ore, omae and kisama however women are not allowed to use corresponding form of words. As a result it seem that women are more likely to deal with polite language and also men are accustomed to use improper language (Swann, 2000: P218). It has been found that the difference concerning vocabulary can be found not only in Japanese but also in other languages. As Coates (1993: P126) has indicated men are inclined to swear or use taboo words compared to women for example British men used swear words three times as much as women in a single sex group (Gomn, 1981, cited Coates, 1993: P127). On the other hand it has been claimed that women speak in more polite ways than men (Swann, 2000: P235) for instance women are apt to express regret when they ask a favour such as 'I'm awfully sorry to bother you but I've run out of milk. Could you possibly lend me half a pint?' or to pay a compliment when they see someone such as  'You are looking marvellous' (Coates, 1993: P129-130). Furthermore English has admirable words specific to female for example adorable, charming or sweet (Lakoff, 1975: P156). It is also clear that speech style by men is not exactly the same as the one by women and the difference between genders seems to be associated with topics in conversations. Coates (1993: P118) found that women are inclined to discuss personal matters than men therefore they often use hedges such as I think, I mean in order to avoid making direct remarks to recipients and prevent them from showing rudeness. Furthermore women tend to be polite when they control force of their speech. Coates (1993: P130) argues that women are more likely to use modal auxiliaries such as might, could or modal adverbs such as perhaps, possibly than men because women are inclined to be concerned about face needs for others in private conversations. Women can also use hedges such as you know in order to emphasise personal opinions confidently (Coates, 1993: P116-117). On the other hand men focus on common issues in a chat as a result it is not necessary to concern way of speaking (Coates, 1993: P118). In addition women are inclined to speak tentatively and less assertively than men. It seems certainly that women regularly deal with tag questions such as isn't it or  aren't they so that they are able to imply uncertainly on statements (Crawford, 1995: P24). According to Montgomery (1995, P162) it has been claimed that there are two types of tag questions, checking tags such as 'You like living in Glasgow, do you?' and facilitating tags such as 'That was a good film, wasn't it?' While the former is added by means of double-checking for the speaker the latter is orientated towards the addressee in other words speakers are expected to have turn-takings by addressees. Montgomery (1995, P162) goes on to argue that women's speech includes a number of facilitating tags which speakers ask supports from addresses therefore it seems to emphasis less assertiveness. The third difference between men's language and women's language is ways of interaction. Swann (2000, P231) notes that minimal responses such as yeah, mmh, or right are able to encourage speakers to continue to talk. Women frequently use these conversational supports because they tend to indicate how much they are truly listening with minimal responses however men regard them as a sign of agreements for speakers (Coates, 1993: P189). Furthermore men hardly have minimal responses but often interrupt conversations (Chaika, 1994: P379) therefore women cannot help stopping conversations with a few conversational supports by men because they wonder if their speech might not be interesting or addressees might not support the opinion. On the other hand men make a chance to talk by interrupting conversations and start to talk with frequent minimal responses by women (Chaika, 1994: P379). It is clear that there are distinctive linguistic features between male and female and the differences seem to be essential to establish their own identity respectively. Furthermore these linguistic identities have been produced by various influences in social context. First of all differences in language depending on genders are associated with social life in early childhood. Romaine (2000, P122-123) reports that fundamental speech styles are formed through early social interactions since girls have a tendency to play in small groups whereas boys are more likely to have outdoor sports such as football with a number of friends. Coates (1993: P157-158) also found that these dissimilar social experiences strongly affect use of language in other words girls are able to learn how to cooperate or deal with harmonious relations with members of a group in order to avoid arguments therefore their speech should be tentative and polite furthermore they sometimes have to control their opinions. On the other hand boys often compete with fellows through games for sports consequently they are accustomed to speak themselves with confidence in order to overcome fellows in conflicts (Coates, 1993: P157-158). As a result female ask intimate connections or disclosure for social relations whereas men seek hierarchy, status and independence (Montgomery, 1995: P168). Eckert and McConnell- Ginet (2003, P316-317) argue that these dissimilar speech styles help to indicate a certain sense of identity depending on genders. It has been claimed that linguistic features are also related with social context for example politeness concerning women's speech has a concern with marriages. According to Romaine (2000, P79, 81) in the Victorian culture proper languages regarded as a standard of manners as well as behaviours or dresses as a result everyone in particular women had a special education such as elocution or voice training and were eager to acquire proper languages. In that period a marriage with independent gentlemen was an object of admiration towards luxury lifestyle so women aimed to attract men with sophisticated manners. Furthermore sophisticated linguistic skills influenced marriages in the late nineteenth century and vice versa in modern age. Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (2003: P283) argues that women are able to develop linguistic skills by marring a socialised partner so it is considered that successful marriage enables to achieve job advancement. In addition there are the other social influence to consider linguistic identities between genders. Chaika (1994: P382) found that women who speak tentatively are enabled to persuade men more strongly than women who speak assertively. However this tentativeness in women's speech is less effective to the same sex in other words women are more likely to be influential by assertive speech (Crawford, 1995: P68). Therefore women are accustomed to change speech styles depending on gender of addresses however it rarely happens in men's speech because speech styles have no concern with effects for addresses whatever the gender is (Crawford, 1995: P68). Crawford (1995: P68) concludes that this linguistic feature tends to be a choice for women because women are deliberately able to speak in a tentative way in order to persuade men easily and avoid arguments with men in a social life. In conclusion it is clear that there are quite different language styles between men and women and it is an essential part to show own identity as attitudes or ideas. Moreover the linguistic identity has been concerned with social life strongly therefore it seems to reflect images of femininity and masculinity in social context. As women tend to be gentle or delicate women's language is more tentative, polite than men's language. On the other hand men's language also shows masculinity such as confidence, competitiveness or rudeness according to social relations to men. 