<heading>1. Briefly outline what you understand by the following terms:</heading>Locution usually refers to what utterance exactly means and it involves new information or expression and its following predicting expressions. Illocution is a functional meaning created by saying utterances and they are usually performing certain actions such as directives, commissives, representatives, declaratives and expressives. Perlocution means various effects or reactions on the hearers according to utterances happened in a particular situation. <heading> Illustrate your understanding of these terms with a suitable example of your own.</heading>When a man says 'Those apples look delicious' to his housemate who has just got a box of apples from her parents and is carrying them to the kitchen. Locutionary force could be the fact those apples look delicious from the point of speaker. However in the illocutionary act, the utterance may be interpreted as informing to have some apples for him. In addition the perlocutionary act shows the effect of the hearer, his housemate for example she may say 'That's mine. I don't want give any of those to anyone' and walks off with anger. On the other hand she might boast 'My parents grow these apples so it has to be tasty' with full of pride on her face. <heading>2. Analyse the attached text (transcript of the Marr-Blair interview) in terms of the following concepts: -Dimension of context (background knowledge and exophoric reference) -Speech acts and felicity conditions -Maxims of cooperation and conversational implicature -Politeness strategies</heading>We can firstly regard the prime minister in line four as TB starting from line eight throughout the text, which is an abbreviation of Tony Blair in our general knowledge although the date of the text is October 1, 2004. The general knowledge is especially called cultural background knowledge. In addition the prime minister in line four can be itself exophoric reference because it refers to assumed shared knowledge while it is prefaced by the define article. The other example of exophoric reference can be they in line eight as it shows the world we know outside the text and it can be considered as doctors. The pronoun I in line nine and thirty-two are also the reference as it is a first mention and refers outside the text to the person who is speaking. It has also used several background knowledge throughout the text. Gordon Brown is mentioned in line forty-one which can be categorised as interpersonal knowledge, as it is specific and private knowledge between politicians in other words the fact that Gordon Brown aims to be the leader for the Labour party, is general knowledge between speakers. However it can be also considered as cultural knowledge between the British societies because we absorb some general knowledge about politics or politicians by the media. Next we could find one of the speech act theories starting from line forty-two, 'I have a huge respect for Gordon... he is very very capable of doing it...'. It seems to show expressives in particular statements of likes and it also seems to include acts of praising, In addition it can be seen commissive in TB's utterance and he repetitively promises to serve a full third term but not a fourth term, as the British people's wishes throughout the second half of the text states for instance from line twenty-two to twenty- two, line twenty-four and line twenty-nine to thirty-one. Another one of his utterances, '... see the job through. I've begun it. I want to see it through. ' in the line forty-four can be also considered as commissive as it is clearly committing his future action with the words and it seems to be a strong vowing. In addition it can be seen that felicity conditions are successfully performed on a speech act. Firstly it can be easily understood that TB is having an interview by AM and the context and interviewer, interviewee roles are certainly recognised by all parties including audiences. All actions by both the interviewer and the interviewee are taken place correctly without any interruption and completed. In addition all persons, the interviewer, the interviewee and audiences intend to perform their actions which are questioning, answering and listening properly. Maxims of cooperation will be introduced next and can be first seen in line twenty-four. The TB's utterance seems to flout the maxim of quantity, as it seems less informative than what AM requires for his question. In addition the utterances of TB starting from line forty-two possibly relies on flouting the maxim of relation because he is not making a contribution to answer the preceding question by AM. In addition he also seems to flout the maxims of quality as his utterances seem not to be true while emphasising his respect strongly with the adjective, huge in line forty-two and repeating the word, very twice in line forty-three. On the other hand these utterances may be considered as sarcasm, a type of conversational implicature although he says '... don't understand me at all... ' in line forty-four because he is emphasising his utterances too much and it is well known that Tony Blair and Gordon Brown are not going well in politics as a general cultural knowledge. Therefore TM might intend to imply completely the opposite meaning to the utterances. In addition AM's utterance in line thirty-two, 'Can I just try and nail this down?' can be seen as metaphor, the other type of conversational implicature as he aims to get the exact point from TB's utterances but he compares the behaviour with a nail. Finally it will analyse politeness strategy about the text. Directive utterances and bald expressions are mostly seen throughout the text. These utterances threaten negative face of the hearer while imposing on the hearer's need for freedom of action. For example an utterance, 'Don't misunderstand me at all. ' in line forty-three threatens negative face of hearer very baldly because it challenges to stop hearer's action. In addition an utterance, 'Can I just try and nail it down? ' in line thirty-two threatens the hearer's negative face as the speaker, AM imposes on requesting action he wants. His following utterance can be positive politeness as he is claiming it from same point of view with TB, the hearer and tries to presume hearer's opinion. The other utterances, 'I have a huge respect for Gordon...he is very very capable of doing it...' from line twenty-two to the next line have been used a positive politeness as it is making him feel good while exaggerating the interests to him. On the other hand the other TB's utterance, 'Six months?' in line thirty-five can be considered that it threatens positive face of the hearer as the speaker is stopping hearer's freedom of action with contradiction to him. <heading>3. What are the limitations of undertaking an analysis based on speech act theory? Give an example of your own. </heading>Speech act theory seems fairly ambiguous as it cannot categorise every case while syntactic form and semantic function is not always correspondent. In addition some utterances are not able to classify in one group of speech acts and can be recognised in several groups because they sometimes have deeper level of meanings above the sentence such as illocutionary act in other words meaning what the utterance syntactically formed and implication of what the speaker actually tries to indicate seems to not always agree. Therefore it makes a classification complexity in speech act theory and it will be a limitation to undertake an analysis of the theory. As an example we could see the following sentence on an advertisement from a travel company: 'Our package tour to Mediterranean sea cruise can offer best places to see and amazingly gorgeous cuisine. We promise you to have extremely fantastic time.' It can be recognised as representatives in speech act theory as it insists what the holiday company believes to be for the holiday and hypotheses holiday success. However it can be also considered directives as the sentence is inviting readers to travel with the package tour. <heading>4. Comment on politeness and the management of face in the following statements or utterances:</heading><heading>M. Derrida's work does not meet accepted standards of clarity and rigour. (From a letter to The Times about the work of the French philosopher Jacques Derrida)</heading>The FTA threatens positive face of hearer as it can be threatened by expressions of criticism. The utterance can be seen FTA off record on the other hand it can bring freedom to deny the speaker's intent easily because it seems to be very indirect and speaker's intension is not clear. The FTA threatens negative face of hearer by imposing certain actions for example the speaker might ask to inspect validity of the work on The Times or it might challenge to stop dealing with work of Jacques Derrida on the newspaper. <heading>Do you think you could give me a couple of sheets of paper? I left my notebook at home. (Student to another student in class)</heading>The FTA threatens the hearer's negative face by imposing a request on the hearer. Negative politeness is used to mitigate the threat by giving hearer the option not to do the act in other words, 'Do you think...?' <heading>You are so much better at these things than I am. Can you show me how to load this programme onto my PC? I can't work it out. (To a colleague at work)</heading>The FTA threatens the hearer's negative face by imposing a request on the hearer however positive politeness strategy enables to reduce its threat by noticing hearer's good point with the first utterance and approving the hearer. <heading>Hi Joan, hi Peter. Look, I've got an essay to finish for tomorrow morning. Is there somewhere else you could do that? (Student to other students who are tuning an electronic guitar outside her room)</heading>Positive politeness is used to call student's names and it shows in-group membership with hearer. The FTA threatens negative face of hearer as student is imposing on stopping the action. <heading>A: You are trying to get me sacked! (Worker to more senior worker) B: [silence]</heading>It is very bald and using the FTA on record without redressive action. It threatens hearer's positive face as the speaker disapproves the hearer and it can be considered as being offensive on purpose. 