<heading>Introduction</heading>In parallel with the globalisation of English, the ELT pedagogy has witnessed a changeover of methods inspired by a deeper shift in the understanding of learning processes. The emergence of methods such as the Natural Approach, Communicative Language Teaching, and Task-Based Learning, have challenged traditional theories and have prompted language teachers to explore their own attitudes toward successful ways of learning. The controversial issue still facing teachers is the dichotomy between a focus on meaning and a focus on form that essentially determines the application of such theories in the language classroom. This paper will view some of the learner differences relevant to my experiences of teaching adolescents. It will elaborate on the nature of eclectic teaching, through reflection on my personal context. It will then look at the indispensable balance of structure and content-based instruction in the implementation of approaches to language learning. It will finally consider the significance of motivational activities to effective learning. It will conclude a consistency in teachers' methodologies can be established through a reference to a multi-layered syllabus, adherence to a balanced focus on both meaning and form, and fostering intrinsic motivation in learners. <heading>The complex world of learners</heading><quote>'Students' interaction with the learning process arises out of a complex of attitudes which is specific to each one as an individual.' (Tudor, 2001, p. 12) </quote>Most learners in my teaching context are in their teenage - a sensitive age of transition, confusion, self-consciousness, low self-esteem. Brown explains adolescents' intellectual capacity increases but their attention easily swerves. Harmer further states that 'one of the key issues in adolescence ... is the search for individual identity, and this search provides the key challenge for this age group' (2001, p. 39). In comparison to adults, adolescents do not have clear patterns of learning, a wealth of experiences to draw on, a long-term motivation that helps them manage with boredom. This demands the right choice of challenging and stimulating activities. Learner variables prevalent in my classroom specially revolve around such demands of age and motivation, which are further discussed below. Another attitudinal factor is that of cultural identity which defines students' expectations: whilst Arab youth thrive on interactive communication or the use of songs, their Chinese classmates ask for a clear, teacher-centred instruction. The group dynamic of a multi-lingual class puts a high demand on my choice of methodology. Every day teachers face the daunting challenge of complex individual differences of cognitive, psychological and attitudinal nature. They enable us to appreciate the uniqueness of the individual learner, and the awareness they generate in teachers acts as a propeller to our pedagogical success. At the same time, learner beliefs and emotions are intertwined with teacher's own attitudes. There is always the potential for a wave effect, one subconsciously affecting the other. Lightbrown and Spada (2006) advise that a teacher should be open and sensitive in finding the approach to her students' needs. In my first experiences of teaching adolescents, I quickly came to the realization that I would be a good teacher if I were a good psychologist. Brown claims 'the interaction between your approach and your classroom practice is the key to dynamic teaching' (2001). It is apparent that there can be as many approaches to teaching a language as there is a variety of learning styles. In addition, methodological choices teachers make for the benefit of learners may produce opposing reactions in them (Tudor, 2001), e.g. one may be horrified to join a stimulating story-telling activity. No methodological approach can lead to the same learning outcome. A given approach will have unpredictable effects depending on the group dynamics and the teacher-students interaction. Consequently, diverse needs can be addressed through diverse methods. <heading>Eclecticism</heading>Tudor writes about 'contextual relativity of methodological choices' in that each class is measured in its own micro and macro context, such as individual characteristics and goals, size, length and frequency of lessons, educational and institutional standards, socio-cultural expectations, that 'guide the interpretation of classroom interaction' (Cortazzi, cited in Tudor, 2001, p. 20). An eclectic attitude reflects such a mix of external factors. It also incorporates the intrinsic variety of methods, approaches, and materials that should satisfy a diversity of individual styles. It is a 'theoretically well-informed global understanding of the process of learning and teaching. It is inspired by the interconnection of all your reading and observing . . . and that interconnection underlies everything that you do in the classroom', therefore the eclectic choice is 'an enlightened approach to language learning and teaching' (Brown, 2001). It is dynamic as it is context-based. In his article, Gabrielatos argues that Girard's eclectic attitude has 'an intuitive appeal', that 'the intuitive teacher is not in a position to analyse with any degree of accuracy - and therefore unable to make informed (i.e. principled) decisions'. On the other hand he states that teachers who base their awareness on principles and theories can make decisions that are 'conscious, informed, and have internal consistency.' However, there should be no need for a contradiction here as both intuitive and informed awareness are quite relevant of any approach, much like the learners who stand in the middle of the brain-dominance theory and are able to perceive both analytically and globally. The key to a successful eclecticism is the teacher's inner flexibility - flexibility to reflect, to intuitively decide, to evaluate, to use his/her awareness of methodological principles and theories, to be open and sensitive, to consider all existing extrinsic and intrinsic factors in forming the right approach to a specific environment. Whatever the diversity in an eclectic approach may be, it cannot use just anything 'that goes', without a firm skeleton (Harmer, 2001). In teaching adolescents, for instance, I often use the jungle path method as it best allows me to adjust my approaches to the shifting moods of teenagers. A pitfall here can be my reliance on intuition, if done to an extreme. A common problem with the jungle path is teachers can run out of intuitive prompts and 'get stuck'. However, in most cases I find the eclectic mix of activities I have prepared still links to a logical thread, it is goal-oriented, thus giving the students and myself a sense of direction. If the link in my jungle path is a consolidation of the use of the first conditional, that becomes the skeleton of the eclectic elements I deploy in class. In practical terms, such a skeleton can be supported by the use of a coursebook. The element of continuity is then upheld by a trusted coursebook. Harmer writes about 'pragmatic eclecticism' in reference to modern versions of multi-layered syllabuses. The diversity of material and activities provided enables teachers to adapt them according to the needs of each particular context. The overall benefit of the coursebook is that it delineates a coherent path that unifies teachers' goals, as it provides support, guidance, good organization and materials (Scrivener, 1994). Halliwell comments on using the right coursebook, 'choosing a book for the whole class is always something like a leap in the dark' (1992). Good course and resource books are likely to already include most materials teachers would use in class - the main advantages for novice and even experiences teachers is that this saves time, it takes the pressure off their busy schedules, and it gives them assurance, which in turn gives confidence to the learners. Teachers do not have to adhere closely to the exercises and materials but closely enough to balance out an authentic exposure to language with stimulating communicative activities, a focus on meaning with a focus on form. Following a syllabus gives teachers a consistent link while at the same time they can use their personal creativity in adapting materials, structuring lessons, approaching learners' individual needs. One way I would utilize the benefits of a good coursebook is to spread each unit through two or three lessons, which would give me the time I need to work with creativity and imagination. I could, for example, concentrate on collocations with a lexical approach in one of these lessons, and dedicate another session on task-based learning. A contradiction arises between the idea of adhering to a syllabus and the innatist natural order hypothesis: Chomsky's belief is a suggested graded order of language elements would not correspond to the innately-wired natural order of acquiring grammar. While research studies have concluded that universal grammar can prevent learners from, for example, naturally using the - s in the third person even at advanced levels (Lightbrown and Spada, 2006), we have nevertheless observed students' learning is influenced by a complexity of psycho-cognitive factors which would individualize one's cognitive processes, therefore not following a syllabus would make it highly demanding for teachers to always cater for a class of 20 individuals, for instance. A case where a non-syllabus scenario could be easily implemented is short-term classes with groups that attend seasonal ELT studies for a period of a few weeks. <heading>Meaning and form</heading>A persistent dichotomy of attention to fluency or accuracy determines teachers' approaches. Grammar-oriented methods have proved rigid and unable to accommodate the diversity of learning styles, which has led to controversy in the value of grammar. 'To learn a language is to learn to express yourself.' (Edge, 1993) In its main function to construct sentences and speech, grammar generates linguistic creativity. It liberates one's potential for language use, thus it enables learners to reach a proficient level of expression. <quote>Pointing out features of the grammatical system is thus a form of consciousness-raising. It may not lead directly and instantly to the acquisition of the item in question. But it may nevertheless trigger a train of mental processes that in time will result in accurate and appropriate production'. (Thornbury, 1999, p. 24)</quote>It appears grammar instruction can simply be misconstrued, perhaps taken too far, which is why half of my adolescent students ask to not study it in class. Schmidt's noticing hypothesis suggests language learning occurs with attention, noticing and restructuring of a language element until it becomes automatised. In this regard Harmer comments 'unless the student notices the new language, he or she is unlikely to process it, and therefore the chances of learning it are slim'(2001, p. 73). A teaching approach with no systematic focus on form cannot enable the noticing to occur. This accounts for the high proficiency that numerous Eastern European students reach before setting foot in an English-speaking environment. In contrast, Krashen's acquisition argument is based on children acquiring their L1 naturally and suggests the same for a L2. However, can the 'innate learning capacities' (Thornbury, 1999) be triggered at any time? The critical age factor explains the fact that the majority of my adult and teenage students cannot acquire English through living in the natural environment. Ellis (1994) claims that, according to experimental studies, a merely naturalistic setting is not sufficient with higher levels of linguistic competence. Thornbury (1999) gives an example of a research conducted with a French immersion programme where the emphasis was on experiential L2 learning: the results showed a lack of formal instruction led to a poorer communicative competence. The risk with relying solely on a natural or a communicative approach is the plateau effect that leads to fossilisation. Lightbrown and Spada's research with immersion programmes gives evidence of difficulties in acquiring basic L2 structures and producing sophisticated language (2006). They further elaborate that 'focused instruction will allow learners to notice the target features in subsequent input and interaction' (2006, p. 166). It is important to consider the 'delayed effect' between input and output. Instruction is likely to take time before it is noticed and processed. A reasonable, but not exclusive, input of grammar awareness is consequently needed to boost L2 competence in most learners, which calls for the use of methods that include a focus on form. This does not contradict the merit of communicative methods, namely that emphasis should be placed on meaning. Brown comments that fluency exercises are 'a must' and there should be enough focus on accuracy to keep students' competence growing (2001). Such crucial balance of form-focused and meaning-focused input can stand behind a consistency in approach of language teachers. The form-meaning issue also stands out in my teaching context due to personal experience. As I have received form-based instruction in learning languages, I find it natural to provide the same to others. Through reflection on language principles and how language theories relate to my own learning (especially according to the brain dominance theory), I have been able to identify an overall preference to focusing on form. The above arguments, therefore, can now readjust my rationale towards the 'Get it right at the end' principle. We can see both sides of the story - 'It is difficult to draw any conclusions as to the long-term benefits of conversational interaction' (Lightbrown and Spada, 2006, p. 155) and, on the other hand, 'the effects of instruction are not always long-lasting' (p. 175). The authors reach the conclusion that focus on form will produce effective learning when it changes meaning, i.e. when used in a relevant context. This calls for attention to context-based lessons. Contextualization is significant in motivating learners and, in my work, particularly necessary for engaging adolescents' wavering attention, which is why approaches with activities that 'dramatize the relationship between grammatical items and the discoursal contexts in which they occur' will generate effective learning (Nunan, 1998). <heading>'The key to learning is motivation.' (Edge, 1993)</heading>Tudor connects contextualization with motivation in commenting that for effective learning to occur, there should be 'willing and active involvement of students in the learning process' and learners 'need to perceive the relevance of learning content and be willing to interact meaningfully with the learning activities in place' (2001, p. 11). Brown (2001) comments that extrinsic pressures, such as parental expectations, desire for professional success, competition, fear of failure, passing of exams, etc. affect students' performance. Adopting a learner-centred approach that enables students to achieve their personal goals will then increase their autonomy. A new challenge for my teaching context is to empower students to take control of their own learning through learning strategies that create a positive awareness in the learners of tools they can utilize for their own learning process and thereby enhance their confidence and sense of achievement. I can develop their autonomy by involving them in the decision-making of the day-to-day activities, of the choice of topics and lesson planning, of setting goals and expectations (Skehan, 1998). Increasing learners' autonomy promotes their motivation. A priority for me in working with teenagers is to motivate their interest and help them use their high potential for learning, creativity and commitment (Harmer, 2001). For this purpose, some of the steps recommended by Dornyei (2001) are <list>use of contextualized activities use of personalized tasks (as they best enable students to express themselves) establishing a good rapport between teacher and studentsfamiliarising them with the target culturecreating a relaxing and pleasant atmosphere.</list>In addition, Ur stresses on the use of visual materials, games, role-play, drama, information gap activities as well as open-ended questions (1996). Offering 'compulsory and optional' elements in activities and cooperative tasks (Brown, 2001) ensures all students at different levels experience a sense of success. The advantage of such techniques is that they encourage intrinsic motivation, which can compensate for the quick shifts in the extrinsic motivation of adolescents. Motivation plays a central role in advancing learning. Thus it can act as the glue behind teachers' individual approaches in class. Whether one engages analytical students in grammar exercises, provides TPR and drama for kinaesthetic learners, or makes use of time lines and videos for the visual ones, the key to success is the degree of students' involvement. This can be fostered through the above motivational techniques, particularly in my teaching context. In reference to teaching multi-lingual classes, as mentioned above, I often find no unified approach between, for example, outgoing and distracted Arabs and focused, organized Chinese students. Encouraging motivation in both nationalities seems a viable solution. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The ongoing challenge for the ELT teacher is to be in a state of constant vigilance to the psycho-cognitive and affective learning variables, the educational goals, cultural factors and expectations that form the complex world of the individual learner. Such awareness in teachers is a drive behind a successful lesson. The merits of learning theories and principles require teachers to utilize them in the individual context of the class environment. I have acknowledged the benefits of a 'pragmatic eclecticism' of attitudes and materials that can flexibly address the needs of students. I have also recognised the value of coursebooks as a source of methods, activities, resources, whose structure provides the link of continuity between teachers' approaches. A specific point of consistency in method can also be the focus on fluency and accuracy, both of which drive forward the linguistic competence of the learner. A third link in approaches is the presence of contextualization and motivational techniques in all forms of activities, especially with adolescents. By centring the locus of control in our students, we promote their autonomy, which empowers them both as learners and as individuals. 