<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The present study sought to assess the nutritional status of 11 subjects (2 male and 9 female) with ages ranging from 22-45 years. The assessment methods used were anthropometrical measurements of height, weight, skinfold thickness, bioelectrical impedance, circumference and breath measurements. The study found 9 out of the 11 participants to be within the healthy range, while one female was undernourished and one male was over overnourished, according to some of the measurements. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Measurements of nutritional status are important as they can determine a persons' health status and help predict health outcomes. These measurements may be useful in deciding if and when to intervene, in order to improve the nutrition of people in danger of developing diseases caused or made worse by poor nutrition. A variety of measurements, such as dietary, anthropometric, biochemical status, and functional and clinical status measurements (Bates et al, 2005), can be used to assess nutritional status. They can be used alone, or in combination which will give a more complete evaluation. The method used in the present study is the anthropometric assessment in which measurements such as height, weight, body mass index (BMI), circumference measurements and skinfold measurements are determined. Anthropometric measurements reflect body composition and development and are used mainly to evaluate the progress of growth in pregnant women, infants, children and adolescents, as well as detecting malnutrition and overnutrition in all groups (Whitney et al. , 1996). Measurements for an individual are compared with population standards specific for the individuals' gender and age to see how body composition compares to norms. Uniform anthropometric standards are necessary because any inferences concerning individual or population nutritional status are dependent on the standards used for comparison; to control for the same individual being classed differently according to which standards are used for the evaluation. The basic anthropometric measurements of height and weight are fundamental in this assessment and give the basic measure of skeletal size and soft tissue mass. Height measurements may be used as indicators of general body size and of bone length, and in combination with age as an indicator of the nutritional status of groups (Fidanza, 1991). Various bone components can also be measured for detailed study of body composition. Components can for instance be a guide in indicating syndromes characterised by disproportionate limb or segment length growth. Weighing should preferably be done in the morning before breakfast, as this will be the time where the body weight is the most accurate and stable from day to day. People often vary what they eat, and excretion of food may also vary during the day. It is therefore important that the weight is measured before intake of food and/or liquid, and preferably with empty bowels. Height measurements should also be taken early in the day, as the body shrinks slightly during the day as a result of gravity, as well as tiredness making the body slouch slightly. The mid upper arm circumference is utilized to measure reduction in muscle mass and/or subcutaneous tissue, and is especially useful in developing countries where subcutaneous fat is frequently low. From this measurement the mid upper arm muscle area can be calculated. This provides a more valid index of the muscle mass and protein nutritional status as it reflects more accurately the changes in muscle tissue. However, the calculation (see methods section) overestimates muscle area by about 20-25% (Gibson, 2002), and thus may underestimate the severity of muscle tissue loss. Waist-hip circumference ratio can be used to establish the distribution of subcutaneous and intra-abdominal adipose tissue, and is thought to be more precise than skinfold measurements (Gibson, 2002). This measurement is important because an intra-abdominal lipid storage is correlated with a higher risk than that of subcutaneous fat storage (Bates, 2005). The waist-hip circumference cut-off point indicating a heightened risk for cardiovascular disease and death is 1.0 for men and 0.8 for women (Gibson, 2002). Approximately half the fat in the body is located just beneath the skin (Whitney, 1996), and the thickness of this fat is assumed to reflect the total body fat. Determining the skinfold thickness is thereby a means of estimating a persons' total body fat. However, the assumptions being made by this method are that the thickness of the subcutaneous fat storage reflects the constant proportion of body fat, and that the sites where the measurements are taken represent the average thickness of the entire subcutaneous adipose tissue (Gibson, 2002). These assumptions cannot be guaranteed, as the distribution of subcutaneous fat varies within gender, race, age, disease, body weight and nutritional status. The sum of skinfolds may be used as a measure of total body fat, though the optimal combination is not established. The present study uses triceps, biceps, subscapular and suprailiac. Men and women do not have the same distribution of body fat, nor the same percentage. Women have on average more body fat than men, and the distribution is often centred on the lower part (hips and buttocks) of the body, as well as the chest, whereas men tend to store body fat on the abdomen. As well as gender differences, there are also age differences, in that the body tends to store more fat as one gets older. For this reason there are age- and gender- specific standards of comparison. Furthermore, when weighing adults the subject should preferably have only underwear on. However, this might in some cases, such as the present study where a whole group is in the same room, prove difficult. In such a case, one should be weighed with clothes on, and subtract 1-1.5 kg from the recorded weight. Body Mass Index (BMI) is calculated using the height and weight measurements, and is the most widely used tool to assess undernutrition and overnutrition in adults. For children under the age of three there are not only different standards for comparison, but also different methods of measurement, since they cannot be expected to stand upright to be measured. The height would be measured lying in the recumbent position, using an infantometer with a moveable footboard and a fixed headboard. The height measurement would be the distance between the two boards. And for weighing, the infant is allowed to sit on a special scale while being weighed. There is also a similar scale for adults who for various reasons cannot stand up, and they can be measured sitting (Whitney, 1996). Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis (BIA) is an easy, non-evasive method of calculating body composition, and can be used to calculate fat free mass (FFM) and total body water (TBW). However, to obtain accurate results the following guidelines must be followed precisely: the subject must not exercise 12 hours prior to the measurement. Five hours must have passed since the last meal. Water must not be consumed in excess before the measurement. The subject must not drink coffee four hours prior to testing. Alcohol must not be consumed 24 hours prior. And it is important to verify the subjects' weight immediately prior to testing. Anthropometric measurement is a relatively precise, quick, easy and cheap assessment, and is for these reasons, along with the fact that the equipment is easily transported, the most commonly used form of nutritional assessment. However, the accuracy and usefulness of anthropometric assessment is limited by several factors such as the skills of the assessor, accuracy of the equipment, and the interpretation of the measurements. Fluid retention and dehydration will affect such measurements, and exercise will influence muscle size independently of nutrition. Some of these measurements (e.g. skinfold thickness and circumference) are difficult to carry out on certain people, such as obese people, or the elderly (who will most likely have some loose skin that will then be registered as fat even though it might not be). Furthermore, anthropometric studies cannot be used to determine small changes in body composition over short periods of time, as the measurements will change at a slower pace. <heading>Materials and Methods</heading><heading>Weight</heading>Subjects' weight was measured using three different scales one of which was digital. Weight was measured to the nearest 0.5 kg. <heading>Height (stature)</heading>The subjects' height was measured standing, with shoes off, with a standiometer. This consists of a metric tape fixed to a vertical pole with a moveable device which can be brought down to the crown of the head of the person, who should stand with straight back in a 'salute' position and facing straight ahead in the Frankfurt horizontal plane (Frisancho, 1990). Measurements were recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. Measurements were taken three times and averaged. <heading>Segmental lengths</heading><heading>Sitting height </heading>Sitting height was measured with an anthropometer with the subjects sitting erect on a tabletop or stool, legs hanging over the edge, hands resting on thighs, and head in the Frankfurt horizontal plane. With one end on the measuring device just underneath the buttocks, the moveable end with the tape measure was brought down to the crown of the head. Measurements were recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. Measurements were taken two times and averaged. From this measurement a sitting height index can be calculated as follows (Frisancho, 1990):  FORMULA  This result would fall within the 25% of females in the appropriate age group, where the mean sitting height index is 53.3 (sd 1.4) (Frisancho, 1990). <heading>Elbow-wrist</heading>The elbow-wrist segmental length was measured with the subject standing with with arms hanging relaxed at the sides and elbows flexed at 90 degrees. The anthropometer, configured as a sliding calliper was used to measure the distance between the wrist and the elbow. Measurements were recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. Measurements were taken two times and averaged. <heading>Breaths</heading><heading>Biacromial </heading>The biacromial breadth measurement was taken with the subject standing, slightly bent forward, with arms hanging by the sides, and the assessor standing behind the subject and measuring with sliding callipers. Measurement was recorded to the nearest mm. <heading>Biiliac </heading>The biiliac measurement was determined using an anthropometer with straight blades. The subject was standing straight, with arms folded at the chest to keep them out of the way. The measurement was taken from behind the subject with the anthropometer at a 45 degree downward angle. Measurement was recorded to the nearest mm. <heading>Body Mass Index (BMI)</heading>The body mass index is calculated by dividing the subjects' weight by height 2.  FORMULA  <heading>Skinfold measurement</heading>Triceps (TSK) skinfold thickness was measured using skinfold callipers, at the midpoint of the back of the right upper arm, with the subject standing with arms relaxed by the side. The assessor grasped a vertical pinch of skin and subcutaneous fat between thumb and forefinger, and measured this leaving the callipers on for only a few seconds. Two readings were recorded and averaged. Biceps skinfold thickness was measured in the same way as described for triceps, with the only exception being that the biceps were measured at the front of the arm, while the triceps were measured at the back. Two readings were recorded and averaged. Subscapular skinfold thickness was measured with the subject standing relaxed with arms at the sides. The assessor pinched a horizontal skinfold at 45 degrees, about 1 cm below the inferior angle of the right shoulder blade. The measurement was taken with the callipers within a few seconds. Two readings were recorded and averaged. Suprailiac skinfold thickness was measured with callipers, piching a fold of skin and subcutaneous tissue at the narrowest part of the waist. The measurement was taken with the callipers within a few seconds. Two readings were recorded and averaged. <heading>Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis (BIA)</heading>The BIA measurement was determined with the subject lying supine on a table top. Two skin electrodes were fastened at the dorsal of the wrist, and at the dorsal surface of the ankle, and two electrodes fastened at the base of the third metacarpalphalangeal joints of the same hand and foot as the other two electrodes, leaving a space of 5 cm between the electrodes. Black leads were fastened to the wrist and ankle electrodes, and red leads to the electrodes on the hand and foot. The subjects' age, height, weight and exercise level was typed into the BIA box, and the result recorded. <heading>Circumference</heading>Mid Upper Arm circumference (MUAC) was measured at the midpoint of the back of the left upper arm using a flexible tape measure. Measurements were recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. Measurements were taken two times and averaged. The arm muscle area can then be measured from this by the following calculation:  FORMULA   FORMULA  Waist (WC) and Hip (HC) circumference were measured with a flexible tape measure. Measurements were recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. Measurements were taken two times and averaged. The waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) can be calculated by the following calculation:  FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>Total body fat (BF) & Fat free mass (FFM)</heading>The calculation for BF is as follows:  FORMULA  and for FFM:  FORMULA  <heading>Results</heading><table/><table/>According to the BMI scale reported by Whitney et al. (1996) three female subjects (1, 4 and 7) are underweight (BMI <20). However, according to the re-evaluation of the BMI scale, only one of these subjects (number 7, with a BMI of 17) would be classified as underweight (BMI<18.5. Bates et al, 2005). The six other females subjects are in the normal range (BMI 20-25). By the same references one of the male subjects (2) is within the normal range with a BMI of 23.2, while the other (1) falls within the obese range (BMI > 30) with a BMI of 33, and is considered to be at a moderate risk of disease (Whitney et al., 1996). The mean values of the females mostly fall within the normal healthy range, and there is not a considerable divergence. This is reflected by the standard deviations, which for most of the body measurements are relatively low (sd range 0.04 - 7.39). There are only two male subjects, and these two vary greatly in many of the measurements. The implications of this will be discussed in the following section. According to the statistics of Frisancho (1990), one of the boys is within the average arm muscle area at 50.8 cm 2 (42 - 64 cm 2), while the other is above average with high muscle content at 93.9 cm2 (> 73 cm 2). By the same standards one of the females has low muscle (18.9 cm 2) associated with wastage of muscle tissue (> 20 cm 2). The rest of the females lie between average to above average AMA standards (ca. 23 - 44 cm 2, with some variance between age groups). Looking at the MUAC, the females range from 19 - 29.5 cm 2. For the congruous age groups (22-45 years) the normal range is 27.4 - 30.1 cm with a standard deviation of 4.5 cm. For the males the mean MUAC for their age group (26 - 28 years) is 28.3 with a sd of 4.1 cm, while the range of MUAC in this group is 29.3 - 40.5 cm. According to the fat mass and fat free mass in Table 3, there are not vary large differences between the subjects, except for one male subject who has a relatively higher score than the others. <heading>Discussion</heading>The waist-hip ratio cut-off point indicating a heightened risk for cardiovascular disease and death is 1.0 for men, and 0.8 for women (Gibson, 2002), signifying that one subject (male 1) in this study is above this cut-off point and thus risk of cardiovascular disease. The WHO has set the waist circumference cut-off point at >80cm signalling risk and >88 cm signalling high risk for women, and >94 cm indicating risk and > 102 cm indicating a high risk for men (Caterson, 2005). This cut-off point is also only exceeded by one person (male 1), whereas one (female 6) is just on the border at 80 cm. The other subjects are not considered to be at risk. One would normally expect a difference in body composition between males and females, in terms of fat distribution, fat % and muscle, as well as height and weight. However, it is not very valuable to look at the sex differences in this study, as there are only two male subjects and the variances between those two are large. This is illustrated by the standard deviations. The high sd also indicate that the mean measurements in the male group is not vary representative. The female group means, on the other hand, are more representative of their gender. The mean values of the females are not very diverging. This is reflected by the standard deviations, which for most of the body measurements are not very high (with sd of 0.04 - 7.39). All of the mean measurements fall within the normal and healthy range, except the BMI of subject 7 who falls within the underweight group. However it should be noted here that there are differences between the body composition of different ethnic groups, and that Asian groups often have a lower healthy weight than that of other ethnic groups. The two methods of measuring body fat (skinfold thickness and BIA) yield rather dissimilar results in this study. The reason for this may be that the BIA method requires strict guidelines to be followed. The present study was done after subjects had eaten breakfast, and they were not asked to follow the guidelines in advance, therefore this might have had an affect on the results. Another factor may be that performing skinfold measurements require experience and skill. For the majority of the assessors in this study it was their first time using this method, and the execution might not have been very accurate. Lastly it is important to point out that the anthropometric measurements have positive and negative areas, and that they should be used within the appropriate contexts. This citation from the WHO is a good indicator of this "... all physical characteristics result from the interaction of heredity and environment ... Body measurements may not always be used safely for comparing the nutritional status of genetically different populations nor for an assessment of nutritional status by reference to a world standard. They are, however, useful for follow-up of physical state over periods too short for genetic selection to affect the population in a significant way, provided gene flow is negligible." (WHO, 1970, cited in Fidanza, 1991). <heading>Conclusion</heading>The study assessed a group of subjects, and found 9 out of 11 of these to be of good nutritional health. The measurement methods were found to be reasonably quick and easy to carry out. However, the validity of results measured by first-time assessors may be questioned. And further, some of the techniques, and especially the skinfold measurements, require a lot of practice and expertise, as well as being prone to between-assessor variances. The use of the assessment as well as the situation and subjects measured must be evaluated when making a decision as to which nutritional assessment should be carried out. 