<abstract><heading>ABSTRACT</heading>The primary route of transmission of hospital-acquired infection is the hands of health professionals; however compliance with hand decontamination is low. This study proposes to examine midwives' experience of hand hygiene and their attitudes towards and compliance with clinical guidelines. The design is a qualitative study using semi-structured interviews and the methodology is phenomenology. The research will take place in the postnatal ward of the local Women's Centre. The target population are midwives working on the postnatal ward. The sampling method proposed is purposive sampling and the intended sample size is 15. The data will be collected via semi-structured interviews, which will be transcribed. The data analysis method to be used is Colaizzi's (1978) phenomenological interpretation. Informed consent will be obtained from respondents and anonymity and confidentiality will be maintained at all times. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION / BACKGROUND</heading>Hospital acquired infection is one of the primary causes of morbidity and mortality in patients (Kerr 1998). Hence, controlling the spread of infection is critically important in healthcare settings. This fact has been highlighted in recent years by epidemics of drug resistant organism such as methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (Xavier 1999). England now has the highest proportion of MRSA bloodstream infections in Europe (Gould 2004), with roughly one in ten patients developing a hospital-acquired infection during their stay (Xavier 1999). 'In terms of promoting positive health, handwashing is the single most important clinical procedure: hands are the principle route by which cross-infection occurs' (Elliott 1996 cited in Johnson & Taylor 2000 p.69). Kerr (1998) argues that there is no room for complacency regarding health professionals' compliance with infection control measures. However compliance with hand decontamination is as low as 50% among health professionals (Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust 2003). This study proposes to explore midwives' experience of hand hygiene practice in their clinical settings and their attitudes towards and compliance with hand hygiene policies and guidelines. The people who will benefit from this research are firstly the midwives who take part because it will hopefully give them a greater understanding of their hand hygiene practice. Secondly the whole postnatal ward should benefit from this research because it should help managers to understand how to better approach the issue of hand hygiene in practice. Thirdly, if this research is published then the findings could be used to improve the understanding of hand hygiene behaviour in similar settings. Limitations to this study are that the generalisability is limited because it will only take place at one location and has a relatively small sample size. However, 'What the reader may ask is, can the research findings be transferred to another group with similar characteristics and in a similar setting?' (Bluff 1997 p.234). <heading>AIMS AND OBJECTIVES</heading>The aim of the proposed research is to determine midwives' experience of hand hygiene and midwives' feelings about following hand hygiene guidelines in the clinical setting of the postnatal ward, Women's Centre. Specifically it will seek to answer the following questions: Do the midwives comply with hand hygiene policies and guidelines? Why do some midwives not follow guidelines? What barriers do midwives have to compliance with the guidelines? What are the midwives' attitudes towards hand hygiene guidance? What factors influence their hand hygiene practice? Are there side effects to the long-term use of hand rubs or soaps? <heading>RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY</heading><heading>RESEARCH PERSPECTIVE</heading>The research perspective for this study will be the qualitative paradigm. This research intends to understand how midwives feel about hand hygiene policies and what their experience is; this data cannot be quantified. Qualitative research seeks to elicit the meanings people have for their experiences and is a process of discovery (Bluff 1997). <heading>METHODOLOGY</heading>The methodology proposed is phenomenology, this approach is chosen because the purpose of phenomenology is to explore how humans experience phenomena through the description of those experiences (DePoy & Gitlin 1998). Phenomenology '...is concerned with 'the lived experience' as perceived by the informants...' (Bluff 1997 p.232). In this case the phenomenon being explored is midwives' compliance with hand hygiene policies in their clinical setting. <heading>SAMPLE</heading>The target population for this study are midwives working on the postnatal ward at the local Women's Centre. The sampling method proposed is purposive sampling. Morse and Field (1996) state that randomised sampling is inappropriate for qualitative research (cited in Robinson 2000). It is necessary to choose participants who have knowledge of the phenomenon under investigation. 'This type of sampling permits the selection of interviewees whose qualities or experience permit an understanding of the phenomenon in question and are therefore invaluable' (Robinson 2000 p.155). The criterion for participants is that they are midwives working on the postnatal ward. Posters will be displayed on the postnatal ward outlining the study and asking for volunteers. If this approach fails to attract enough participants then letters of invitation would be given to a proportion of the midwives working on the postnatal ward. The intended sample size is 15. In qualitative research it is often not necessary or practical to have a large sample, in fact qualitative research is associated with small numbers of participants (Bluff 1997). 'It is the number of ideas that emerge and the rigor with which they were identified rather than the number in the sample which is important in qualitative research' (Bluff 1997 p.233). <heading>SITE</heading>The site at which the interviews will take is the postnatal ward of the local Women's Centre. This setting is convenient for the midwives taking part because it is where they work. It is a familiar environment and a natural setting for postnatal ward midwives; it would be anticipated that they would feel relaxed and comfortable. Qualitative research is often referred to as naturalistic enquiry because of the focus on research taking place in an environment that is neither manipulated nor controlled (Bluff 1997). Access to the setting will be sought by discussing the nature of the study and seeking permission from the head of midwifery services. Interviews will be conducted in a private room, which will hopefully help the midwives feel more secure and comfortable discussing issues that relate to their clinical practice area. <heading>DATA COLLECTION </heading>The data collection method proposed is semi-structured interviews that will be audio taped and later transcribed. An interview is an information-gathering process conducted through verbal communication between the researcher and usually one interviewee (DePoy & Gitlin 1998); in this case the interview will take place face-to-face. Semi-structured interviews follow an interview schedule but are not rigid in structure. They allow the conversation to evolve through the use of open-ended questions and prompts thus allowing the conversation to be led by the interviewer but at other times steered by the respondent's replies (Robinson 2000). This study requires the gathering of subject specific data about hand hygiene but also aims to understand individual midwives' experience and attitudes. There will be one interview with each respondent that will last approximately 45 minutes. The participant will have been informed that the interviews are being audio taped before hand and consent obtained. It has been considered that the recording of interviews may be intrusive and could prevent full expression from the informant (DePoy & Gitlin 1998), however due to the lengthy or complex nature of the answers in semi-structured interviews, in this case it is necessary to record them. The cassette recordings of the interviews will be labelled anonymously and stored securely until transcription. Notes may be taken by the researcher to supplement the recording. <heading>DATA ANALYSIS</heading>The data analysis will start after the interviews have been completed. Mills (1994) argues that data should be analysed while the collection process is still taking place (cited in Robinson 2000), however, Streubert and Carpenter (1999) state that data can be collected first and then analysed later (cited in Robinson 2000). Once the recorded data has been gathered the researcher will personally transcribe the interviews. Although this is slow it allows the researcher to become further immersed in the data (Robinson 2000). After transcription the written record will be compared with the tape to ensure accuracy (DePoy & Gitlin 1998). The analysis method to be used is Colaizzi's (1978) phenomenological interpretation that has the following steps: first of all the interview transcripts are examined and read through several times. Secondly, phrases that directly relate to the phenomenon are identified and extracted. The meaning of these phrases is then considered and themes are extracted from the interpretation of the phrases. These themes then become a description of the phenomenon. Finally the results are taken back to the participants if they choose, and checked for accuracy (Cited in Robinson 2000). As mentioned, the participants will be given the opportunity to review the researcher's interpretation of the data. Any new data that is obtained through this member checking process will be incorporated into the final description (Robinson 2000). <heading>VALIDITY / TRUSTWORTHINES</heading>The validity and trustworthiness of the data and the credibility of the interpretation will be enhanced through member checking (as mentioned above) and peer reviewing. Peer reviewing is a strategy that can be used to affirm emerging interpretations. In this approach the investigator purposely involves peers in the analytical process to review the findings (Depoy & Gitlin 1998). <heading>ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS</heading><heading>INFORMED CONSENT</heading>At the start of the research each participant will be provided with a participant information sheet giving accurate, clear and detailed information on the study process and the demands of their involvement. The letter will include a consent form that they will be invited to sign. Informed consent will be obtained from participants at least 24 hours prior to the interview to give them time to consider the study and decide to withdraw if they choose to. The letter will emphasize that participants have the right to choose not to take part, that they may terminate their involvement at any stage without giving reason and that they are encouraged to ask questions about the process at any point (Robinson 2000). <heading>ANONYMITY AND CONFIDENTIALITY</heading>To protect anonymity each interviewee will be allocated a number at the start of the research process and all notes, tape recordings and transcripts would be labelled with the relevant number. All data obtained from the study will be stored in a secure place accessible only by the researcher. Privacy and confidentiality will be maintained throughout the process and in the writing up of results and any publication that follows so that no identifying details are exposed (Carlisle 1994). Details of the site of research will also be kept confidential. 