Yes, Aristotle's two accounts of eudaimonia can be reconciled as they both promote contemplation/theoretical activity as paramount despite appearing to adopt conflicting positions regarding the importance of other virtues. I shall argue my position by initially providing a definition of Aristotle's understanding of eudaimonia as presented within the "Nicomachean Ethics". I shall then provide a brief overview of how Aristotle arrived at this understanding and continue to illustrate his two accounts of eudaimonia - the 'life plan' approach and the 'life of contemplation'. Furthermore I will identify apparent inconsistencies that have been proposed concerning Aristotle's two approaches for a eudaimon life. I will outline several different interpretations that have been proposed to overcome this apparent confliction examining the strengths and weaknesses of each interpretation. Finally, I shall present the interpretation I regard to be successful in reconciling the two accounts of eudaimonia as the eudaimon life is one that is concerned with both moral and theoretical excellences, however one regards the contemplative aspect to be significantly more appealing/enjoyable. Aristotle maintains that the highest good is happiness/eudaimonia. This is defined as the: <quote>"activity of the soul in accordance with virtue, or if there are more kinds of virtue than one, in accordance with the best and most perfect kind... in a complete lifetime"</quote><fnote>Aristotle (1976) "The Nicomachean Ethics" Translation by Thomason. Harmondsworth: Penguin p.16 </fnote>This is the supreme good for man. Aristotle consequently rejected Plato's concept of the Forms and of a 'universal good'. The rational part of the soul is comprised of two relevant kinds of virtues; virtues of character and virtues of intellect. Virtues of character are a disposition to feel and act in accordance with the mean relative to us, (to feel at the right times, towards the right objects, towards the right people, with the right motive and in the right way) this involves choice and is determined by practical reason. There are two relevant intellectual virtues - the task of practical reason is to determine which actions will lead to eudaimonia and the task of theoretical reason is to discover necessary and eternal truths. Eudaimonia is the contemplation of the truths revealed by theoretical reason. An action is right if and only if it is what the person of practical wisdom would do in the circumstances. The person of practical wisdom possesses all of the virtues/character traits human beings need in order to 'flourish' (lead a good human life and to achieve eudaimonia). This good human life must be attainable, final, and self-sufficient. Since reason operates in both the practical and theoretical sphere, one form of human activity displaying reason including excellence of character is good action. Aristotle arrives at his definition of eudaimonia by considering mans function/ergon. Aristotle argues that reason is central to a good human life because it is our function/ergon. Every object has an ergon and this is the final cause of the object. An objects ergon is what defines it and allows us to determine whether a particular individual is a good specimen of its kind. The ergon of something is what distinguishes it from anything else and what is unique of human beings is our type of soul. Man's ergon cannot be nutrition and generation as this is shared with plants nor movement and the senses as this is shared with animals. The rational part of the soul is distinctive of humans and is therefore mans ergon. Living a life in accordance with reason is mans ergon and a good human life is one where our rational capacities are employed with excellence. <fnote>Hardie, W (1980) "Aristotle's Ethical Theory" 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote>Aristotle gives two accounts of a eudaimon life. The inclusive 'life plan approach' recommends a life governed by practical reason and planned as a pure, well functioning whole. There are many elements that contribute to the formation of a good life, the first role of practical reasoning is to identify these elements and to integrate them into a coherent and inclusive whole. One's possible 'best life' would be a life of action, displaying practical wisdom and moral virtue. Aristotle's second account of a eudaimon life is the exclusive 'life of contemplation'. Eudaimonia is thought to consist of a life devoted as much as possible to philosophical contemplation: <quote>"If happiness is an activity in accordance with virtue, it is reasonable to assume that it is in accordance with the highest virtue, and this will be the virtue of the best part of us".</quote><fnote>Aristotle (1976) "The Nicomachean Ethics" Translation by Thomason. Harmondsworth: Penguin p.270 </fnote>This activity in accordance with its proper virtue will be perfect happiness, this activity is contemplation - reason employed in its non-practical role on unchanging subject matter. Philosophical contemplation is the highest and best activity that a man is capable of. Its objects are eternal and unchanging and is an activity that can be attributed to God himself as God is the supremely eudaimon being. A life of contemplation is above the human level but it is argued that we should still try to achieve it. Man has a limited capacity for intuitive reason. Since intuitive reason is in man and God is intuitive reason, there is a divine element in man, this divine element is superior to our composite human nature, so its activity (contemplation) is superior to activity displaying the other aspect of excellence (good action). Everything finds best and pleasantest what is truly its own therefore the life of reason is best for man (since reason is mans ergon) and consequently the happiest. In Book I of the "Nicomachean Ethics" Aristotle characterises human flourishing as excellent spiritual or mental activity and if there are several forms of excellence, spiritual activity expressing the best, most final excellence. In Book X Aristotle identifies the best excellence to be the best thing is us - theoretical wisdom. In considering the good man Aristotle appears uncertain regarding either an inclusive or exclusive formulation. What is unsatisfactory about the "Nicomachean Ethics" is Aristotle's failure to make explicit the distinction between the comprehensive life plan and the paramount end. Therefore it is often argued the two concepts Aristotle presents regarding eudaimonia are extremely difficult to reconcile. <fnote>Ackrill, J (1981) "Aristotle the Philosopher" Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote>It is questioned whether the function argument supports the claim that eudaimonia is the life of contemplation. Aristotle defines reason to include not only theoretical and practical reason but also our emotions and desires as long as they can 'listen to reason'. This is distinctive of human beings. The ergon argument prompts us to discover a man's excellence and his good is practical reason. However the contemplation theory tells us instead that to identify ourselves with the divine element, we have to pursue an activity that is not exclusive to man but is shared with God. Here a conflict arises between the two types of ideal - the ideal for a harmonious yet human form of life against a 'higher' ideal of a more demanding kind. Criticisms have been raised in response to the contemplative life theory. It has been implied that Aristotle is advising us to spend as little time as possible on activities other than contemplation and to attach no importance to practical or moral concerns. Ideally it seems one should neglect friends and family to concentrate on ones private intellectual life. A typical response is for one to meet the needs of ones moral life and then to concentrate on contemplation. However, I do not find this to be a satisfactory response as one cannot fully meet their moral requirements and still have time to successfully pursue contemplation. The man who is truly kind, brave, generous etc will be fully occupied exercising these virtues. Also, if contemplation is the highest activity, it is not evident why the needs of the moral life should take precedence. It is evident the moral life is not just practical activity that is practiced insofar as it is sufficient to keep one alive and in a position to pursue contemplation. Such activities are time consuming as they are concerned with the welfare of others, yet if theoretical activity is the dominant end it is not evident why displays of practical virtue should be prioritised above philosophical contemplation. Aristotle does not respond to this himself but one suggestion designed to connect morality and contemplation is that the very aim of morality is the promotion of contemplation, what makes a type of action good is its tendency to promote contemplation. Here the ultimate justification for the necessity of characteristics of the good man is that general adherence to the rules he abides by would maximise the amount of contemplation possible in the community. <fnote>Ackrill, J (1981) "Aristotle the Philosopher" Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote>One interpretation regarding Aristotle's account of eudaimonia implies that to live a truly flourishing life, morally virtuous activities should only be engaged in insofar as it contributes to nurturing ones intellect. I do not find this to be an accurate interpretation of Aristotle's account of eudaimonia as one who actually followed this life could be viewed as less than morally respectable, being dominantly concerned with ones intellectual accomplishments would give the implication that it could occasionally seem rational to neglect performing virtuous acts to further one's theoretical contemplation. One would therefore follow a retiring, contemplative life with no concern for values of social, political and family life. Some have responded to this criticism by maintaining the successful contemplative will always be morally virtuous as the committed intellectualist will never consider it rational to neglect conducting virtuous action as it is a necessary means to furthering the life of contemplation. However this response appears contradictory as if it is accepted that virtuous activity should only be engaged in as long as it contributes to nurturing ones intellect then virtuous action that does not contribute to furthering intellect should logically be neglected. <fnote>Cooper, J (1986) "Reason and Human Good in Aristotle" Indiana: Hackett Publishing Co. </fnote><fnote>Kenny, A (1978) "The Aristotelian Ethics: A Study of the Relationship Between the Eudemian and Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle" Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote>Cooper (1986) interprets Aristotle's concept of eudaimonia to be arguing the intellectualist may perform various virtuous actions as to remain involved with other people. One who organises his life from the intellectualist perspective cannot care about such actions in the way a truly just/temperate man does. He will not possess virtues as he will lack the commitment needed for the type of activity that is an essential characteristic of the virtuous person, therefore the intellectual life does not involve possession of moral virtues. However I do not believe this to be an adequate interpretation of Aristotle's understanding of eudaimonia as Aristotle devotes the majority of the "Nicomachean Ethics" to discussing the importance of the practice of moral virtues. Therefore it would correspond that the intellectualist would necessarily possess these virtues whereas Cooper's interpretation seems to render them obsolete for the achievement of eudaimonia. <fnote>Cooper, J (1986) "Reason and Human Good in Aristotle" Indiana: Hackett Publishing Co. </fnote>Another interpretation proposed by Gauthier (1963) maintained that the intellectual life and the moral life are not two separate modes of life; they are two integral parts of a single mode of life. One person that has both an excellent intellectual life and an excellent moral life. I hold a similar view to Gauthier however I maintain that Aristotle regarded the contemplative aspect to be significantly more important and desirable. Excellent theorising is considered the ultimate end as it is the pinnacle of human life, the best life is one dedicated to both moral and theoretical excellences. However, the reasonable man is more concerned with the theoretical aspect of his life despite the 'mixed life' proving to be preferable as a practical theory due to human limitations. I find this to be the most plausible interpretation of Aristotle's account of eudaimonia as the eudaimon life will include various enjoyments whilst still holding contemplation as paramount. Aristotle appears to reject a life devoted entirely to contemplation: <fnote>Hardie, W (1980) "Aristotle's Ethical Theory" 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote><fnote>Hardie, W (1980) "Aristotle's Ethical Theory" 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press </fnote><quote>"assuming then we have given a sufficient account of happiness and the several virtues, and also of friendship and pleasure, may we regard our undertaking as now completed? Or is the correct view that in the case of conduct the end consists not in gaining theoretical knowledge of the several points at issue, but rather in putting our knowledge into practice?"</quote><fnote>Aristotle (1976) "The Nicomachean Ethics" Translation by Thomason. Harmondsworth: Penguin p.277 </fnote>Here he appears to be arguing that in addition to contemplating matters we should put into practice what it is that we have contemplated. Aristotle also asserts that theoretical activity, although more highly desirable than any other human activity, is not the only activity desired for its own sake and does not by itself constitute the complete end for man. Aristotle maintained that activities which manifest practical wisdom (phronesis) and moral virtue, although a lower form of happiness than theoretical activity, are desired for their own sake and thus constitutes part of the human good/end. Therefore the life and activity that manifests ethical virtue is desirable because it prepares the way for contemplation and is consequently a means to a further end. It is also desirable in its own right and is an essential aspect of the eudaimon life presented by Aristotle. <fnote>Urmson, J (1988) Aristotle's Ethics" Oxford: Blackwell Publishers </fnote>In conclusion, despite apparent inconsistencies between the inclusive 'life plan approach' and the exclusive 'life of contemplation' proposed in the "Nicomachean Ethics", Aristotle's two accounts of eudaimonia can be reconciled. Aristotle defines eudaimonia to be the activity of the rational part of the soul performed with excellence/virtue. The function argument is crucial in explaining Aristotle's understanding of eudaimonia as it is what identifies reason/rational capacity to be man's ergon. Numerous interpretations have been proposed regarding Aristotle's two account of eudaimonia. It is evident Aristotle regarded rational activity to be the pinnacle of human life as it is mans ergon and is consequently the ultimate aim/supreme good for man, however, the importance of the moral virtues is also made apparent. Therefore, I maintain the inclusive/mixed life to be the life man should ideally lead, yet one will significantly enjoy engaging in contemplative activity above the practice of moral virtues as it is the divine element in man. 