In order to start your scheme, we should explain several procedures before any construction can begin. To fulfil your requirements for the project we need to develop your ideas into actual plans. These then should submitted to the local authority to obtain planning permission and inspected to ensure that the project meets all current Building Regulations and legislation. I will now outline the planning stage and the relevant building regulations <heading>Planning Stage</heading>The full project brief and the functional requirements of the house should be established. A substantial site analysis should be carried out to determine the dimensions of the site, the topography and drainage. All existing vegetation, buildings and access into the site should be recorded. The orientation and local climate should also be surveyed and considered during the planning stage to make use of natural resources such as sunlight. The national and local government planning policy for the development of the site should be viewed. We should consider whether there are any planning restrictions or historical land use constraints associated with the site. Witney is a conservation area which will need to be considered. Other aspects to be looked into are, whether the property will be in an Area of outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), on the Oxford Green belt and within 50m meters of a river bank, 500m of Ancient Woodland, 25m of a Public Footpath and 50m of a Tree Preservation Order (TPO). Listed Structures within 20m of this property are also to be clarified. These should be discussed with the relevant authorities. Sustainability of new developments is important and should be established. As your project is a new development, we should make use of all new technologies, new recycled materials, or low energy materials that reduce the affect the building's energy requirements and sustainability needs. The site should be considered and analyzed in relation to its immediate surroundings and its wider urban and/or landscape setting. Investigations and discussion should be carried out with the relevant authorities, or communities who will require knowledge of the existing and proposed uses and activities that will occur. They should made aware whether there will be any hazardous substances stored on the site and about changes in vehicular movements and parking requirements. Ownership certificates are required for the application; these vary according to who owns the site. Certificate A - should be completed if you are the freehold owner of the property, or have 7 years or more unexpired on your lease. Certificate B - should be completed if you are not the sole owner and requires you to confirm that you have served notice of the application on any other owners (or tenants with 7 years or more unexpired) of the property. Certificates C & D - should only be used in circumstances where not all, or none, of the property owners are known and require notices to be published publicly to ensure the best chance of notifying the owner. The certificate will also require you to confirm whether any part of the application area involves land within an agricultural tenancy. If so, you must supply details of the tenant and serve notice of the application on him/her. The certificate must be signed and dated by the applicant, or someone appointed by the applicant. vii) Statutory notices should be served on owners or tenants where certificates B, C or D are signed, or the property forms part of an agricultural tenancy. These statutory rights provide details of the applicant, the application and the planning authority to which it was submitted. You must also specify a date not less than 21 days from the date of service of the notice, within which the recipient of the notice may make any representations to the Council concerned. viii) The full planning application will require all necessary plans and drawings detailing the proposal. These should be accurate and contain sufficient detail. Landscaping proposals should also be submitted at this point. ix) Councils are required by law to charge a fee for most planning applications. The scale of this charge varies and depends upon the size of the project. The fee must accompany the application or the application will not be processed. It is important that we consider any concerns that the local authority's might have with the building of the new house, as we need to gain permission from them before we can start any of the work. To ensure that the initial design is approved, it is desirable that we produce a scheme which will fulfil all of their guidelines and regulations. The planning process starts when the application is submitted to the local authority. In the case of this scheme, we will be applying to west Oxfordshire district council. A notice of our application will then be published in the local newspapers and notices erected at the site. At this point local residents may view the plans and comment on them. The authority will consider these comments when finalising a decision on the application. This process usually lasts a period of about eight weeks. In general, permission is granted unless there are justifiable reasons for them to refuse. If our application is refused, we have the right to appeal to the council and then to the Secretary of State. We would then be allowed to make slight adjustments to satisfy the authority so that the plans could be approved at a later date. Both the planning permission and approval with respect to the Building Regulations involve a fee which is related to the size of the project. For a full application, the fee for a dwelling, up to 50 houses is £265 for each house. For above 50 houses, the fee is £13,250 and an additional £80 for each dwelling house in excess of 50, subject to a maximum total of £50,000. For all other buildings, the fees are dependent on the floor space that will be gained. i) Where no floor space will be created by the development the fee is £135. ii) Where the area of gross floor space that will be created by the development does not exceed 40 m 2 square metres the fees are £135. iii) Where the area of gross floor space that will be created by the development exceeds 40 m 2 square metres, but does not exceed 75m 2 the fee is £265. iv) Where the area of floor space to be created by the development exceeds 75 m 2 but does not exceed 3,750 m 2 square metres the fee is £265 per 75m 2. Where the area of gross floor space that will created by the development exceeds 3,750 m 2 the fee is £13,250 and an additional £80 for each 75 m 2 in excess of 3,750 m 2, subject to a maximum in total of £50,000. For your project the building application fee should be £265. <heading>Building Regulations</heading>The purpose se are in place to ensure that the building to be built is structurally safe, meets fire, health and safety standards, is energy efficient and has adequate accessibility. We should submit detailed drawings and plans for the proposed work showing all the construction details and calculations. Our proposals will be checked by the statutory authorities such as the fire service. The Council will usually give a decision within 5 weeks, although this may be extended. If our plans comply with Building Regulations, we will receive a notice stating that they have been approved. If, however the local authority is not, satisfied we will be informed and should provide amendments. There are fourteen criteria for regulations that should meet in order to gain approval. Document A - Structure. This covers the structural loads, ground movement and disproportionate collapse. Document B - Fire Safety. The building should have adequate escape routes and warning signs in case of fire and should incorporate safety features that prevent the spread of fire in the internal structures and lining. There should be satisfactory access and facilities for the fire service. Document C - Site Preparation and Resistance to Moisture. This covers the preparation of the site, and records whether any dangerous or toxic substances are present. Adequate subsoil drainage should be present and the foundations of the site should be resistant to weather and ground moisture. Document D - Toxic Substances. This regulation prevents the use of toxic materials inside buildings. Document E - Sound Insulation. this regulation enforces sound protection for other parts of the building, protection of common internal parts of buildings and estimate of acoustic conditions in public spaces. Document F - Ventilation. The building must meet ventilation requirements and meet condensation regulations in roof areas. Document G - Hygiene. The project must comply with policies for providing sanitary conveniences and washing facilities, bathrooms and hot water storage. Document H - Drainage and Waste Disposal. There should be adequate foul water and rainwater drainage, both of which should be separate. Water treatment, cess pools and solid water storage must comply with regulations. Building over sewers must also fulfill regulations. Water fitting should comply with British standards. Document J - Combustion Appliances and Fuel Storage. The scheme should have a sufficient air supply and outlets for discharge produced by combustion. The building must have protection against fuels and pollution. There should be satisfactory information regarding substances stored and adequate protection around fuel storage areas. Document K - Protection From Falling, Collision and Impact. Document L - Conservation of Fuel and Power. The building should encourage excellent conservation for fuel and power. Document M - Disabled Access to and Use of Buildings. The buildings should provide facilities for the disabled, with appropriate access and use, sanitary conveniences and suitable seating. Document N - Glazing. There should be sufficient protection against impact, manifestations of glazing, safe opening and closing windows, skylights and ventilators and safe access to clean the glass. Document P - Electrical Safety. This ensures the safe design and installation and the inspection and testing of electrical equipment. The document has been updated this month. Regulation 7 - Materials and Workmanship Approval of the plans with respect to the Building Regulations will be approved by the Building Control officer from the local authority. During construction of the building, a Local Building Inspector will attend the site to ensure the work is being carried out correctly to meet the legal requirements. The Building Regulations fee will vary according to the number of buildings there is. There are two separate fees - one for the plans submitted and an additional fee for the inspection. An approved inspector will view the plans and once satisfied will issue a Plans Certificate which will confirm that the proposed plans comply with the Building Regulations. When the work has been completed the Inspector will visit the site and issue a final certificate to the local authority stating that the building work from the Plan Notice is complete and that the Inspector has ensured that the regulations have been complied with. I hope this information explains the complex processes that we must undertake before work can begin. If you have any queries, please let me know in writing and I will address them for you. Yours sincerely . 