To me as a learner at school, the most important of the four language skills was listening. I did not like to speak very often, but I thought it necessary to understand as much as possible in my foreign languages. Consequently, when I was asked by a native speaker (e.g. at the airport) I was able to understand most of the question, but I always had great difficulties to answer it. Now, as an adult language learner, speaking is the most important skill to me. Maybe, the reason for this is the notion that later as a foreign language teacher I really have to have good speaking skills and, as it was my weakest language skill of all, I had to work quite hard on it. Therefore, in order to improve it, I decided to study in the UK for a year. I think that over the next 20 years, speaking will probably be the most important language skill for students. In a time where globalization has an impact on almost every corner of the world, it is essentially that students are able to communicate in a foreign language, particularly if their L1 is not English. However, as McDonough and Shaw (1993) state, it is a skill which is difficult to dissociate from listening in many ways, because these two skills often enjoy a dependency in that speaking is only very rarely carried out in isolation; it is generally an interactive skill unless an uninterrupted oral presentation is being given. Thus, although the importance of reading and writing should under no circumstances be neglected, listening and speaking are the main language skills to actually communicate in a language. Some teachers may choose to spend more time in class on speaking, reading and listening while writing (and sometimes reading as well) is often part of the homework. Especially writing is very time-consuming, because it takes students a lot of time to think about what to write, how to organize the text and finally to formulate it into proper sentences. Moreover, if a text is too long for the lesson, the teacher may decide that the students should read it at home so that it can be used the next time as background material. However, the teacher must bear in mind that each text needs to be well prepared and the students need a reason to read, which can be achieved by setting appropriate and meaningful reading tasks (Watkins 2005). The most interesting skill to teach could be reading, because there are so many different possibilities to integrate it in a lesson. The teacher can use authentic reading materials (e.g. newspaper articles, advertisments, chapters of books, magazines) in his lesson, which can prepare learners to cope with the range, speed and variety of the authentic language they will meet outside the classroom (White 1982). With authentic materials the teacher can prepare a lesson about the most recent news in the classroom, which is not possible with classbooks that are often more than 5 years old and their topics therefore out of date. Listening might be the most difficult language skill to teach, because in my opinion it is not easy to find appropriate listening material for students, exept the materials which are in the coursebook. Of course, the teacher can use the lyrics of songs or radio interviews and advertisments in the class. However, as Ur (1984) mentiones, they have to be carefully selected and edited, because it is hard even for a native listener to disentangle the thread of the discourse, identify the different voices and cope with frequent overlaps. All in all, using listening materials in the classroom which are not taken from coursebooks is combined with lots of pre-work for the teacher when he/she wants to get the most out of it. As I mentioned at the beginning, for me the most important language skill was listening and it was this skill which I enjoyed most of all. I really liked to listen to texts, dialogues and songs and to try to fill in any gaps my teacher made in the handout - I always thought it very challenging and exciting, especially when the material was out of the "real" life and not just constructed stories out of coursebooks. This was very motivating, because it gave me confidence that I might be actually able to communicate with native speakers of this particular foreign language. As I wrote this Portfolio after I had already done the Microteaching and its evaluation, I cannot answer the last part of this entry. However, the timing needed more discussion and attention then the other parts of the lesson and we had some problems with the third exercise (the reading exercise), because it was a little bit too long and difficult at the beginning. It did not take us long to decide on our topic and everyone of us was happy with his/her part of the lesson. 