During the last few months, Germany had again an unsuccessful discussion about the introduction of a smoking ban. The main question in this conflict between smokers and non-smokers is whether the ban should only include restaurants and bars where food is being served or whether it should also be expanded to pubs and nightclubs (Loreck 2006). Another disputed point of the smoking ban are its positive and negative effects on the economy. However, many countries around the globe have already a city- or countrywide ban, others like England and France will become smoke-free in 2007 (Kielinger 2006). Therefore, this essay will first consider reasons that reject the ban and it will then explain some of the problems with this view. Afterwards, it will provide arguments in order to demonstrate that a smoking ban for all enclosed public places should be introduced in Germany. It is the contention of smoking-supporters that the ban in Germany should not include pubs and nightclubs, because there, no food is being served and teenager under the age of 16 are not allowed to go there. They have the opinion that smokers should avoid exposing children and teenagers to cigarrette fumes, but as they are not allowed to be in these special public places, the ban is not relevant for them. However, a study of the Business Solutions Medicine Online on the health risks of smoking (2003) revealed that cigarrette fumes have a very detrimental effect on the health of people under the age of 25. It is an undeniable fact that most young adults love to go to bars and nightsclubs. Consequently, the smoking ban should definitely include these places to protect the young people from the health-damaging cigarrette fumes. Some people, who argue against a smoking ban in Germany, may refer to an article by Enstrom and Kabat (2004). There, they maintain that previous studies on the health risks of smoking for non-smokers have overestimated the effect of tabacco smoke on both lung cancer and heart diseases. Although there is a controversy surrounding the health risks of long term exposure to second hand smoke, a study issued in 2002 by the International Agency for Research on Cancer of the World Health Organization concluded that passive smokers are endangered by the same or even higher proportions of carcinogens as active smokers, because they do not have the benefit of the filter. Moreover, Sasco, Secretan and Straif (2004) discovered that, according to meta-analyses, lifelong non-smokers with partners who smoke at home have a 20-30% greater risk of lung cancer, and those exposed to cigarette fumes in the workplace have an increased risk of 16-19%. Therefore, a smoking ban for all enclosed public places is absolutely necessary to reduce the danger of second hand smoke for non-smokers as much as possible. One of the most common sources of resistance to a smoking ban comes from businesses of the catering trade which are concerned that they will suffer financial losses due to lost customers. In their opinion, the actual non-eating time will decrease, because smokers will leave immediately after they have finished their meal. Therefore, the rate of "dine and dashes" - where patrons declare they are stepping outside to smoke, whereas their intent is to leave - will increase. Indeed, according to the Zagat Survey (2004), which polled nearly 30,000 New York City restaurant customers, respondents, especially non-smokers, stated that they eat out more often now because of the city's smoke-free policy. In addition, a US surgeon general review of studies (2006) points out that business may actually prosper. Thus, research generally indicates that business incomes are stable after smoking bans are enacted, because many patrons appreciate the improved indoor air quality. It has been argued by businesses that a smoke-free Germany will have bad effects on the economy. In particular the reduced incomes on tabacco products and the following lower taxation revenue, so this argument goes, will weaken the economy of the country (Fromm 2005). While of course it cannot be denied that a smoking ban could have some negative effects on the incomes of the tabacco industry, the health care costs can be reduced to a great extent. Researchers at Dundee University, Scotland (2006), found significant improvements in the health of bar staff in the two months following the ban. They tested bar workers' lung function and inflammatory markers a month before the ban came in, and again two months after it had been introduced. The number showing symptoms related to passive smoking fell from more than 80% to less than half, with reduced levels of nicotine in the blood and improvements in lung function of as much as 10%. Furthermore, a study showed (Brown 2006) that in the first 18 months after the town of Pueblo, Colorado introduced a smoking ban in 2003, hospital admissions for heart attacks dropped 27%. Admissions in neighboring towns without smoking bans showed no change. Therefore, the reduced incomes of tabacco products are out of all proportion to the dramatic savings in the health care costs. To conclude, a smoking ban for all enclosed public areas should be enacted in Germany as soon as possible. Firstly, it has been established that cigarette fumes are bad for all people, especially for those under the age of 25. Then, it has been proven that passive smokers are exposed to an even higher proportion of carcinogens, because they do not have the benefit of a cigarette filter. Moreover, surveys have discovered that catering businesses and the economy of the country will not suffer under the introduction of a smoking ban, but they might even prosper, because of more non-smoker customers and great savings in health care costs. 