<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Tourism can be thought of as a rather complicated activity that overlaps various different sectors of the society and economy. Without planning, it may generate several unwanted and unexpected impacts (World Tourism Organization, 1994). Therefore tourism should be developed and managed in a controlled and sustainable way, based on sound planning. Moreover, it should be integrated within the wide planning process in order to promote certain goals of economic, social and environmental enhancement which may be accomplished through appropriate tourism development (Hall, 2000). This coursework will provide a critical analysis of what a tourism plan/ planning is and what are the benefits of its implementation. It will evaluate the planning process, the elements that should be included within a tourism plan and the methods of implementation. Furthermore, it will set out the implications of adopting a tourism plan for a specific destination. The selected area for the purpose of this coursework is Kranjska Gora in Slovenia, which at the time of writing does not have an existing tourism plan. Kranjska Gora is situated in the area of the Zgornjesavska valley, located at the north west of Slovenia between the Karavanke Mountains and the Julian Alps. Kranjska Gora is a year-round mountain tourist resort as well as an important winter sports resort with a variety of skiing slopes available. The size of the municipality of Kranjska Gora is 256,3 km² (Municipality of Kranjska Gora, undated; Kranjska Gora, undated). <heading>DEFINITION OF A TOURISM PLAN/PLANNING</heading>Tourism planning relates to the same basic concepts and approaches as general planning; however, it is adapted to the specific characteristics of the tourism system.A plan can be defined as a set of various decisions for action in the future (Hall, 2000). Several authors agree that the most significant feature of any type of planning, including tourism planning, is its orientation towards the future (Hall, 2000; Gunn, 2002). According to Inskeep (1991), planning for tourism is a step-by-step process which should be continuous, comprehensive, integrated, and environmental, focusing on achieving sustainable development and community involvement. Gunn (2002) similarly suggests that tourism planning should be directed towards four main goals: sustainable use of resources, enhanced visitor satisfaction, integration of local community and area and improved economy and business success. <heading>BENEFITS OF TOURISM PLANNING </heading>Numerous authors emphasize the importance of tourism planning (Godfrey and Clarke, 2000; Hall, 2000; Gunn, 2002; Inskeep, 1991). According to Gunn (2002) the purpose of planning is to create plans of action for a foreseeable future and implement them. Furthermore, the tourism sector goals and objectives can be achieved more effectively and efficiently if carefully planned and integrated into the country's overall development plan and programme. In addition, careful planning at all levels and good management are necessary to optimize the benefits of tourism and preventing or at least mitigating any problems that may occur (Inskeep, 1991). Hall (2000) similarly suggests that planning can help to minimise potential negative impacts, maximise economic returns to the area, and thus encourage a more positive response from the local community towards tourism in the longer run. Moreover, in the countries, where not much tourism has developed yet, planning can provide the necessary guidelines for its development. On the other hand, for the areas where tourism is already well established, planning is often needed to revitalize the sector and maintain its future viability (World Tourism Organization, 1994). In Kranjska Gora tourism planning could help to achieve long-term sustainable development of the area, ensuring that the natural, cultural, and other resources of tourism are conserved for the future use. Moreover, it could bring benefits to the society and provide level of tourist satisfaction essential for tourism success in the area and country as a whole. Tourism development plan for Kranjska Gora should provide a framework through which the area's tourism policy will be acted upon, ensuring the development reflects local values, and is an overall benefit to the tourism industry. As such the tourism plan should analyse the present situation in Kranjska Gora as well as provide recommendations for improvement in the area, based on sustainable development (e.g. modernisation of the ski lifts, improved road access etc.) (Strategy of Slovenian Tourism, undated). <heading>ELEMENTS OF A TOURISM PLAN, TOURISM PLANNING PROCESS and IMPLICATIONS FOR THE DESTINATION</heading>Tourism planning at the destination level is a step-by-step process of resource and market analysis, action and review. Elements of a tourism plan together with the tourism planning process will now be evaluated and implications for the destination suggested. PASOLP planning approach, adapted from Baud-Bovy and Lawson (1998), in combination with Godfrey and Clarke's (2000) and World Tourism Organization's (1994) approach to tourism planning, will be used. <heading>Tourism policy and committee structure</heading>At the first stage a tourism policy should be set as a framework through which tourism issues are/will be analysed and decisions taken. Municipality of Kranjska Gora should firstly establish a dedicated team or committee, who should create a tourism plan for Kranjska Gora jointly with local resident groups; local and national government; regional tourism groups; special interest community groups; business associations; private sector groups; and external consultant advisers if necessary. Organization and coordination among them is the key to success. <heading>Tourism resource audit</heading>A destination's tourism resource base is the core of that location's tourism appeal. One main function of the tourism resource audit is to identify the area's key assets and to examine destination's strengths and weaknesses from a supply point of view (Godfrey and Clarke, 2000; Inskeep, 1991). <heading>Tourist attractions and activities</heading>Kranjska Gora should carry out tourism resource audit, including survey and inventory of existing and potential attractions such as natural, cultural, event and activity resources; Primary and secondary attractions should be evaluated; for example, primary resources of Kranjska Gora are its natural resources (mountains) which provide all-year tourist services from winter sports to mountainous tourism. Sports tournaments are another primary attraction of the area (World Cup competitions in alpine skiing and ski flights on the giant ski-jump in Planica, the neighbour village of Kranjska Gora); Seasonality should also be considered (e.g. differences in population and activities in Kranjska Gora - winter sports in the winter and hiking during the spring and summer). <heading>Infrastructure analysis</heading>Survey of existing and already planned accommodation by number, type and quality level should be carried out as well as survey of other tourist facilities in Kranjska Gora. Any specific infrastructure constraints, such as poor quality of hotels due to the old buildings, should be identified and improvements recommended; Analysis of transport access to Kranjska Gora, as well as of the internal transportation system of facilities and services, should be carried out (e.g. poor quality of transport infrastructure and recommendations for improvement); Infrastructure of water supply, electric power, sewage disposal and telecommunications should be evaluated; Analysis of hospitality and general community services such as medical services, emergency repair etc. should be carried out. <heading>Tourism market analysis</heading>This stage consists of evaluation of demand for tourism, which is a key component of tourism planning, helping to scale any development and the infrastructure required (Lavery, 2002). Municipality of Kranjska Gora should carry out analysis of tourist arrival patterns and trends, including both international and domestic tourists; The effects of existing and potential competing tourist destinations should be analysed. For Kranjska Gora competing tourist destinations could be domestic areas such as Bled and Bohinj as well as neighbour countries with their skiing resorts (e.g. Austria with Gerlitzen and Italy with Tarvisio); Market segments should be determined according to different relevant characteristics (e.g. young people who enjoy skiing or snowboarding in the winter and seniors who prefer peaceful hiking in the mountains during the spring time); The number and type of accommodation, other tourist facilities, services and infrastructure required, should be projected according to the defined market segments (World Tourism Organization, 1994). <heading>Country's policies and priorities and relationship with other plans</heading>Planning of tourism at the destination level should be integrated into other related policies and plans that may exist, such as national and regional plans, park, recreation, and conservation plans, transportation and any other relevant infrastructure plans, and agricultural programmes. This integration will help to assure that relevant aspects of the tourism plan will be implemented by the concerned sector in an integrated manner (Inskeep, 1991). In the case of Kranjska Gora existing national and regional development policies, plans and programmes such as Slovene Tourism strategy, marketing plan for Slovene tourism, Alpine Convention, The Mountain Paths Act together with other transport and land-use plans should be considered. <heading>Economic, environmental and socio-cultural considerations</heading>Economic, social and environmental impacts are inevitable element of tourism development. Tourism planning should find a balance between the costs and benefits of these impacts in the best interest of tourism and the local community. <heading>Economic analysis and recommendations </heading>Present and projected tourist expenditures in Kranjska Gora should be defined; Calculation of the present and projected tourism economic impact should be carried out (contribution to GNP or GDP, foreign exchange earnings, generated income and employment, the multiplier effect etc.); Recommendations on how to enhance the economic benefits of tourism in Kranjska Gora should be provided (e.g. increase of employment opportunities for local community of Kranjska Gora). <heading>Environmental considerations and recommendations</heading>Any present environmental problems generated by tourism in Kranjska Gora should be identified; Recommendations on measures to prevent future negative environmental impacts as well as reinforcing positive ones should be provided; Recognition of established conservation policies affecting Kranjska Gora, such as Alpine Convention, and recommendations for further environmental protection and conservation policies and programmes should be provided; Environmental impact assessment (EIA) for each specific tourism development project in Kranjska Gora should be carried out. <heading>Socio-cultural considerations and recommendations</heading>Existing and potential positive and negative socio-cultural impacts of tourism in Kranjska Gora should be evaluated; Recommendations on how to achieve community involvement in all aspects of tourism should be provided together with public awareness programme on tourism. Tourist information brochures should also be available to visitors informing them about cultural traditions of Kranjska Gora (World Tourism Organization, 1994). <heading>Identifying opportunities and constraints</heading>At this stage, opportunities and constraints should be analysed to provide direction and a focus for future development. This should give some indication to the area of where development efforts will likely be awarded and where potential problems might emerge (Godfrey and Clarke, 2000). For Kranjska Gora opportunities could mean improvements of existing and development of new products (e.g. modernisation of ski lifts and improved hotel offer in Kranjska Gora; construction of a multipurpose hall for sports, congressional tourism and events etc.) as well as potential expansion into new markets. Constraints also need to be considered and these might include competing land-use claims which take priority over tourism use as well as development costs. Furthermore, difficult landscape of Zgornjesavska valley might be thought of as a constraint as well, affecting expansion of ski slopes and modernization of transport infrastructure. <heading>Setting development goals and objectives</heading>Tourism plan should be prepared in such a manner that it is realistic to implement. Setting goals and objectives within appropriate time frame creates a bridge between development policy and the action steps designed to pursue that policy. Without a clearly defined set of goals and objectives, a destination will have nothing to guide its activities, measure whether it has been successful, or be able to show the progress already made (Godfrey and Clarke, 2000). Kranjska Gora should set its goals and objectives for development in the short, medium and longer term. Its goals and objectives could for example be to improve standards of service offered to tourists, to increase off-season visitor trips by 15% over 3 years etc. <heading>Development of action steps</heading>Tourism action steps are developed to provide the means and methods of reaching a particular tourism objective. The action steps are very specific, describing exactly what needs to be done and in what order of activity (Godfrey and Clarke, 2000). <heading>Tourism marketing plan</heading>If the actions are intended to attract more tourists, encourage them to stay longer and to come back, as well as create more of an economic benefit, then a tourism marketing plan is essential. For Kranjska Gora specific promotion programme should be recommended with cost estimates and possible sources of funding; roles of the public and private sector in promotion should be established and overseas promotion considered. The next stage in the tourism planning process includes implementation and monitoring and review procedures. These will be analysed in the next part of the coursework. <heading>METHODS OF IMPLEMENTATION and IMPLICATIONS FOR THE DESTINATION</heading>Plan implementation is in large part a political process due to government involvement in achieving implementation (Inskeep, 1991). Nonetheless, to achieve systematic and efficient implementation, the following techniques should be applied (adapted from Inskeep, 1991, and World Tourism Organization, 1994): Project development or action programme together with adoption of specific legislation and regulations as well as estimation of costs. In Kranjska Gora each project, such as modernization of the ski lifts, should be evaluated in terms of costs, necessity as well as location and time frame; Identification of the agencies and parties responsible for specific tourism projects in Kranjska Gora. Coordination among municipality of Kranjska Gora, various levels of Slovene government and the private sector is a vital element for a successful implementation; Specification of tourist facility development and design standards, such as architectural styles and landscaping. These are generally administered by a separate design review committee or directly by the planning department. Kranjska Gora as a part of Alps, for example, has specific alpine style of architecture, which should be considered when building new accommodation as well as other tourist facilities in the area; Specification of zoning and other land use regulations that define specific areas for different types of land uses and the development standards to be applied within each land use zone in Kranjska Gora. The physical planning department should be directly involved in the development of zoning regulations for the area; Preparation of detailed area plans together with project feasibility studies; Identification of potential funding sources for project development. Financial sources in Kranjska Gora may come from Slovene government as well as private sector wishing to invest in this area, including international investors; Parks, conservation and cultural activities programmes also need to be considered. Kranjska Gora needs to take into account Alpine Convention of which the key objectives amongst other are long-term protection of the natural ecosystems and cultural interests of the indigenous population (The Alpine Convention, undated); Other programmes such as those for employee training and education, public awareness, and economic enhancement should be further specified and implemented with funding provided and organisational structures established; Procedures to monitor plan implementation and the general progress of tourism should be specified. It is essential that Kranjska Gora establishes a system to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of actions before tourism development takes place. <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>Communities, regions and countries benefit substantially from the proper tourism planning. Due to the tourism growth and its numerous and diverse impacts, Kranjska Gora should adopt a plan to manage these effects efficiently. It is necessary that planners consider both the costs and benefits that tourism brings to the area and that the principles of sustainable development are followed (Wall and Mathieson, 2006). Furthermore, in today's highly competitive tourism world, places with well planned tourism development are likely to be the most successful tourism destinations. A proper tourism plan, which would analyse Kranjska Gora's current position with regard to tourism, identify development opportunities as well as constraints, is therefore of a great importance for the destination. As such it could help to achieve higher tourist satisfaction levels and bring significant benefits, with minimal disturbance, to the society, local economy and the environment (Inskeep, 1991). It is crucial that the plan and its sub-components have respective time frames, towards which all involved parties, responsible for tourism development in Kranjska Gora, work in a coordinated manner to achieve the common long-term goals and objectives. 