<heading> INTRODUCTION</heading>Understanding of consumer behaviour is the foundation of successful marketing. By understanding how customers proceed through the decision making process and what influences their buying behaviour, marketers can obtain many clues about how to meet customer needs and wants. Within marketing discipline consumer behaviour models were developed from 1960s onwards. The aim of consumer behaviour models is to attempt to give a simplified and organized version of the relationship that exist between various factors influencing consumer behaviour (Swarbrooke and Horner, 1999). The "grand models" of consumer behaviour have been transformed by tourism researchers to produce specific models which would explain tourist consumer behaviour. Some of the models developed are quite basic (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981; Middleton, 1988 etc.), while some of the others are more complex (Schmoll, 1977; Mathieson and Wall, 1982 etc.) (Woodside et al. , 2000). For managers in the tourism industry it is crucial to understand how individuals make decisions to choose a particular holiday destination, or a specific type of tourism product, and what influences these decisions. Indeed, the evolving marketplace of the travel and tourism industry has realized that understanding travel behaviour is essential in today's highly competitive business environment (Pizam and Mansfeld, 1999). This essay will attempt to apply specific tourism models of consumer behaviour to the situation defined by particular tourist segments, tourism sector and tourism manager, working within that sector, and a specific destination. Furthermore, the essay will provide suggestions for a marketing manager in the tourism industry on how ideas from the selected models and the analyzed secondary data might improve understanding of tourist behaviour within specific tourist segments. The selected tourist consumer models for the purpose of this paper are the models from Schmoll (1977) and Mayo and Jarvis (1981). The analyzed tourist segments are seniors and newly marrieds (young couples without children). The chosen sector is destination organization sector. This sector consists of national tourist offices, destination marketing organizations, regional/state tourist offices, local tourist offices and tourist associations. These sub-sectors are commonly government organizations or public sector agencies that receive funding from government. They are responsible for the promotion and coordination of tourism in a specific region; however, they generally do not sell products directly to visitors (Middleton and Clarke, 2001). The chosen tourism manager for this particular essay is the marketing manager, employed within the destination organization sector (e.g. Oxford Tourist Information Centre). The selected destination is the city of Oxford in United Kingdom. Currently, figures specify that Oxford receives 7.7 million visitors per year who spend £364.4 million. These figures include staying and day visitors. Tourism accounts for 10% of local employment in Oxford (Oxford City Council: Visit Oxford Annual Report, 2005/2006). <heading>TOURIST CONSUMER MODELS</heading>One of the key propositions of Schmoll's model is that tourist is a rational decision maker within his/her capabilities and limited amount of information. Moreover, the model indicates that travel decision process consists of several successive stages: travel desires, information search, assessment of travel alternatives and decision. Model hypothesizes that consumer travel decisions are the result of the interaction of four different fields of influence which are internal as well as external to the consumer (Schmoll, 1977) cited in (Swarbrooke and Horner, 1999). The first of the influencing elements are travel stimuli, which encompass advertising and promotion, travel literature, reports and suggestions from other travellers and travel trade recommendations. The second elements are personal and social determinants of travel behaviour including motivations, desires/needs and expectations influenced by personality, socio-economic factors, attitudes and values and social aspirations and influences. Other important elements influencing consumer travel decisions are external variables such as confidence in the travel agent, destination image, previous travel experience, and cost and time constraints. Characteristics and features of service distribution such as attractions offered, range of travel opportunities, quality/quantity of travel information etc. are another significant element that has an impact on the consumer's decision process and its outcome (Schmoll, 1977) cited in (Pizam and Mansfeld, 1999). According to Sirakaya and Woodside (2004) one of the major strengths of Schmoll's model is that it clearly identifies the relationships between various components and shows which factors have an impact on consumer travel decisions. In addition, the model pays attention to constraints and their influence on the decision making process. <figure/>The second model analysed in this essay is the model from Mayo and Jarvis (1981). The authors emphasise that in order to understand individual travel behaviour one should view individual travellers as decision makers. Travellers develop either routine, impulsive or extensive decision making styles when making their choices. Understanding how individual consumers make travel decisions requires an insight into the psychological and social influences that have an impact on customers' choices (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981) cited in (Pizam and Mansfeld, 1999). The internal psychological influences that affect travel behaviour are personality, learning, motives, attitudes and perception. However, those psychological forces do not function in a vacuum. Travel decision maker is also influenced by outside forces as well as by other people. Mayo and Jarvis's model classifies these social influences into four major categories: role and family influences, social classes, culture and subcultures, and reference groups (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981) cited in (Pizam and Mansfeld, 1999). Sirakaya and Woodside (2004) suggest that one of the main benefits of Mayo and Jarvis's model is that it emphasizes the role of group and family in individual's travel decisions. Moreover, it successfully combines different variables which are generally believed to be the determinants of tourist consumer behaviour. <figure/><heading>TOURIST SEGMENTS, MODELS and APPLICATION TO PRACTICE</heading>Middleton and Clarke (2001) define segmentation as the process of dividing a total market into different subgroups or segments for marketing management purposes. Furthermore, the authors indicate that marketing segmentation can be referred to as the most significant of all the practical marketing techniques available to marketing managers in the tourism industry. However, according to Kotler et al. (1996), there is no single way to segment a market. A marketer should consider different segmentation variables, alone and in combination in order to find the best way to view the market structure. This essay will focus on two different tourist segments: seniors and young couples without children. Seniors are defined according to demographic variable age and relate to individuals 55 years of age or older; young couples are classified according to different stages in the family life cycle. Worldwide, interest in seniors as a major force in world tourism has increased and the consumer behaviour of the elderly market has become an important area of interest to researchers and travel and tourism marketers. The elderly consumer group in North America and Europe generates more than 60 percent of the world's international tourism expenditure (Fleischer and Seiler, 2002) cited in (Shim et al., 2005). Vacation and leisure travel and tourism industries are particularly attracted to the elderly market due to the arising trends toward early retirement and increased number of leisure years (Mathur et al., 1998). Indeed, Javalgi et al. (1992) believe that consumers aged 55 and older are a demographic 'discovery' and an opportune market for travel and tourism sector since this age segment is growing in size and has a great market potential. Moreover, as seniors take more holidays than any other age group and also outspend them on travel and leisure, the need for greater attention by the travel and tourism industry to the elderly market arises (Cleaver Sellick, 2004). With regard to travel behaviour of elderly consumers various authors agree that seniors are more likely to buy package holidays which cover both transportation and accommodation and use travel agents for making travel arrangements (Ing, 1993; Javalgi et al. , 1992). According to Javalgi et al. (1992) senior market is price-sensitive in their shopping behaviour, including shopping for products and services, related to travel. If encouraged by discount pricing, seniors tend to choose longer periods and greater distances for their holidays. When travelling, older travellers require variety, responsible and reliable information, an efficient, friendly and accurate reservation system, and overall value for money (Ing, 1993). One should notice that the senior market is a large and complex one and there is a great amount of diversity within it. Various authors agree that although a person's chronological age has long been a variable of interest within consumer behaviour, it does not completely summarize the real meaning of an older customer (Cleaver Sellick, 2004; Lieux et al., 1994; Mathur et al., 1998). One needs to consider that seniors are attracted to pleasure travel for many different reasons. Indeed, findings indicate that the senior market is not a homogenous group but consists of many different submarkets, each with its own needs and wants (Shoemaker, 1989). These ideas clearly support Kotler's et al. (1996) argument of many different possible ways to segment a market, as discussed above. In order to better satisfy the needs and wants of senior travellers a lot of research of travel motivation has been done (Shoemaker, 1989; Guinn, 1980; Lieux et al., 1994; Cleaver Sellick, 2004). The authors imply that elderly travellers are likely to be motivated to travel in order to seek, rather than to escape. Cleaver Sellick (2004) suggests that senior travel market could be divided into different segments according to their motivation to travel. Each segment is motivated to choose specific holiday destinations, transport alternatives, holiday activities and accommodation packages based on different motives. Moreover, similar motivation to travel may be held by demographically related seniors and may also include similar perceptions of travel risk. In her study, Cleaver Sellick (2004) recognized four different travel-motive segments of senior travellers: Discovery and Self-Enhancement; Enthusiastic Connectors; Reluctant Travellers; and Nostalgic Travellers, acknowledging the heterogeneity within the elderly travel market. Various other authors explored travel-motive segments within the senior travel market. An early study by Guinn (1980), which discussed travel behaviour of newly retired consumers, described this group as getting away from work and achievement goals, to leisure goals. Guinn studied motivations for recreation participation of seniors and pointed out five most important motives related to leisure activities: rest and relaxation; association with family and friends; physical exercise; learning experience, and self-fulfilment. The results showed significant relationship between the five motivations and the chosen leisure activities. A more recent study by Lieux et al. (1994) divided senior tourists into three distinct groups. The first and the largest group, "novelty seekers," seemed to travel mainly to experience new things and visit new places. They were generally young seniors with relatively good incomes. The second group, "active enthusiasts," were primarily interested in physical activities and wanted to escape from cold weather. They mainly took trips of longer duration. "Reluctant travellers" as the third group mostly had lower incomes and took shorter trips (Lieux et al., 1994). The essay will now attempt to apply the ideas discussed above to the selected tourist consumer models. Moreover, it will explore how specific elements of the models might be useful for improving the understanding that tourism marketing manager, employed within the destination organization sector, has of tourist behaviour within the senior market. The essay will focus on motivations as one of the key element from both Schmoll's and Mayo and Jarvis's models. Furthermore, it will discuss social influences on individual travel behaviour as well as advertising and promotion element from Schmoll's model. Motivation is often thought to be the ultimate driving force behind travel behaviour (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981). It can be defined as the state of drive or arousal that impels consumer behaviour toward a specific goal (Sheth and Mittal, 2004). Tourism marketing manager should consider the importance of motivations in the travel decision process, bearing in mind the question "Why do seniors travel?" He should take into account that different travel-motive segments exist within the senior market and should therefore target these segments accordingly to ensure that their travel and tourism needs are more adequately met (Cleaver Sellick, 2004). Tourism marketing manager could relate to various studies based on seniors' travel motivations. For example, he could employ Shoemaker's (1989) research of elderly market on the benefits sought from tourism. According to the author, the first group, "family travellers", used pleasure travel as a way to spend time with their immediate families. Tourism marketing manager could therefore develop promotions that focus on "family reunions", where families from different areas gather in one location such as cruise boat or a resort hotel. A second segment from Shoemaker's study were "active resters", a group who travelled to seek intellectual and spiritual enrichment, to rest and relax, and to meet other people and socialize. Promotions building on these reasons for travel could focus on "learning weekends" sponsored by hotels to encourage intellectual enrichment (Shoemaker, 1989). Moreover, special programs could be developed to promote social interaction, such as dance and bridge contests. The third group from Shoemaker's research was the "older set", who liked their trips filled with different activities and liked to stay in all-inclusive places. Marketing activities targeted at this segment should therefore stress these characteristics. Different studies determined the key travel motives of the senior market and could be of use to tourism marketing manager. However, one needs to consider that the majority of studies investigated motivation for travel within senior market in the United States. The tourism marketing manager should take the culture focus of the studies into account when applying the findings to tourism practice. Another major element of both Schmoll's and Mayo and Jarvis's models are social influences that affect individual travel behaviour, such as role and family influences. Findings from the research conducted by Shim et al. (2005) show that, generally, in senior market spouses have a negative impact on travel, which suggests that tourism marketing manager should attempt to convert the spouse from a travel gatekeeper to a travel conspirator (Shim et al. , 2005). According to the authors a message that promotes a hedonistic approach to travel expenditures may accomplish this. Schmoll's model addresses advertising and promotion as another important element influencing the travel decision process. Mayo and Jarvis's model, however, ignores those external stimuli and from that perspective could not be very useful for the tourism marketing manager. Schmoll's model could prove useful when considering the influence of advertising and promotion on the travel decision process of the senior market. The research from Shim et al. (2005) shows that mass media play an important role in mature consumers' search for travel information, influencing different dimensions of seniors' behaviour and attitude regarding pleasure travel. Hence, the authors suggest that television, magazines and other mass media should be seen as a useful source of access to senior market for companies in the pleasure travel and tourism industry (Shim et al. , 2005). The second segmentation variable chosen for the purpose of this essay are young couples without children (newly married) as one of the stages within the family life cycle. The basic idea of the family life cycle concept is that most families pass through an orderly progression of stages which are defined by unique combinations of socioeconomic and demographic variables (Wells and Gubar, 1966). Various authors argue that the stage in the family life cycle has an impact on consumer travel behaviour (Wells and Gubar, 1966; Lawson, 1991; Oppermann, 1995). According to Bomball et al. (1975) young married couples posses the following characteristics: at this stage consumers are generally in better financial position than later in life, they display a strong tendency to purchase expensive items and are highly susceptible to advertising. Wells and Gubar (1966) and Hong et al. (2005) similarly suggest that newly married is the stage in the family life cycle which is especially important for heavy leisure and tourism spending. Stampfl (1978) supports this theory indicating that young married couples spend a lot of money on durables and vacations. Moreover, he believes that at this stage shopping energy levels are high, a lot of buying is done impulsively and decision making process is based on joint decisions. Various authors (Consenza and Davis, 1981; Sheth and Mittal, 2004) agree with Stampfl, stating that the decision dominance structure at this stage of the family life cycle is syncratic (joint), indicating that during the decision making process both spouses contribute but neither dominates. According to Litvin et al. (2004) both parties may compromise, bargain, or persuade each other, but in the end, both spouses make the decision and more or less agree that it is the right one. Consenza and Davis (1981) believe that syncratic decision making reflects the fact that at this stage couples are most likely still in the 'let's-talk-about-it' stage of marriage. They are input-orientated joint decision makers seeking all the information they can get to make the right vacation decision. Various authors (Hong et al., 2005; Lawson, 1991) agree that young couples without children are the most active leisure travel group within the family life cycle. They tend to allocate a large amount of their family budget to travel expenditures. According to Bojanic (1992) they are attracted to beach resorts that offer different activities and are adventurous to some extent. One should consider that vacations are frequently "consumed" by a family unit (Fodness, 1992). Understanding how families make decisions is essential to travel agents, promoters of tourism in the private sector, and state and local governments interested in attracting tourists (Jenkins, 1978). Various discussions of travel behaviour as well as the selected tourist consumer models, however, focus on individual travel behaviour only and do not pay attention to joint travel decision processes. It could therefore be argued that due to this pitfall the selected models might not be particularly useful for the tourism marketing manager, employed within the destination organization sector, when applying the models to the particular segment and tourism practice. Nevertheless, the essay will now attempt to apply the ideas discussed above to some of the elements of the selected models and tourism practice. According to Nichols and Snepenger (1988) when efforts are directed towards joint decision making couples, promotion should be directed towards both spouses. To time promotion effectively one should consider that young couples plan their vacations sooner than the others and use the largest number of information sources to plan their holidays. Therefore, marketing materials should be dispersed broadly and made available early in the season. As joint decision making couples participate in different leisure activities, advertisements should focus on engaging them in such activities as visiting friends and relatives, camping, hiking, and visiting national parks and monuments (Nichols and Snepenger, 1988). Tourism marketing manager should also consider socioeconomic status as one of the determinants of travel behaviour from tourist consumer models. Newly marrieds tend to spend a lot on leisure travel. Moreover, results from Hong et al. (2005) show that leisure travel expenditures increase with income. As young couples without children are generally in better financial position than later in life, tourism marketing manager should take this into account when employing various marketing strategies to target the segment effectively and efficiently. According to Hong et al. (2005) education is another factor that affects spending for leisure travel. The authors indicate that those with a high school education are likely to spend more than those with less than high school education but tend to spend less than those with a college education (Hong et al. , 2005). Tourism marketing manager should therefore consider education factor as well when trying to improve the understanding of tourist behaviour within the newly married segment. <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>The main aim of this essay has been to explore how relevant tourist consumer models might be useful for tourism marketing manager, employed within destination organization sector in the city of Oxford, by improving his understanding of tourist behaviour within the particular tourist segments. The essay focused on Schmoll's (1977) and Mayo and Jarvis's (1981) tourist consumer models. The segments discussed in the paper were seniors and young couples without children. The main conclusion to be drawn from the essay is that tourist consumer models can be thought of as a relatively useful tool for tourism managers, helping them to improve understanding of tourist behaviour. It should be noted, however, that travel decision process is a complex one and influenced by different internal and external factors. This essay has focused only on specific elements from the models. To understand tourist behaviour as a whole, tourism managers should consider each and every element from the models, analyze other tourist consumer models as well and compare their similarities and differences. Furthermore, it can be argued that the analyzed models have several disadvantages. They are based on individual travel behaviour and do not pay attention to joint travel decision processes. In addition, the particular models ignore postpurchase evaluation stage together with tourist satisfaction. According to Pizam and Mansfeld (1999) the majority of tourist consumer models have pitfalls. Firstly, they are stereotypical and generalized and have no time dimension. Secondly, they ignore elements such as emotions and feelings and are rarely based on empirical research. Moreover, the majority of models derive from USA and Western Europe. Tourist behaviour, however, is culture bound and one could argue therefore that the models would not be particularly useful when related to tourists from Eastern Europe or Asia. When applying the ideas from the theory into tourism practice all this should be considered in order to maximise the level of understanding of tourist behaviour. 