Gothic romance fiction pivots around a central female character. Many classical Hollywood films turned to the Gothic to tell woman's stories. I intend to explore why the Gothic is seen as a genre for women and privileges their experiences. <heading>Fred Botting, Gothic (London: Routeledge, 1996) </heading>Offers a general study of the genre. Explains the Gothic's importance due to the cultural anxieties it evokes through characters, location and plot. Introduces feminist criticism to portray Gothic writing as a female experience. Claims the heroines' reactions are the centre of the narrative. Discusses the "uncanny" and the homely terrors in the Gothic. <heading>E.J. Clery, Women's Gothic: From Clara Reeve to Mary Shelley, 2nd edn (Devon: Northcote, 2004)</heading>Explains the rise of Gothic fiction through its socio-historical context. Studies the work of the main Gothic female writers. States the most thrusting and assertive female writers were the Gothic novelists. Stresses the importance of passion and extreme feelings in the Gothic which are presented through its extraordinary plots. <heading>Mary Ann Doane, The Desire to Desire: The Woman's Film of the 1940s (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1988), pp. 1-37, 123-175</heading>Claims women are oppressed in 1940s films. Argues the effort to introduce female subjectivity clashes with narrative forms. Asserts Gothic films take female subjectivity to its limit and studies the importance of the female gaze. Identifies female paranoia in Gothic films and illustrates these arguments with case studies of Caught and Rebecca. <heading>Kate Ferguson Ellis, 'Can You Forgive Her? The Gothic Heroine and her Critics', in A Companion to the Gothic, ed. By David Punter (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000) pp. 257-268</heading>Discusses a feminist criticism of the Gothic. Debates the role of women in the genre, displaying a wide variety of interpretations and arguments. States feminists do not agree if Gothic heroines are submissive or not and if this model is promoted to readers. The Gothic is a genre which reflects and develops women's fantasies. <heading>Misha Kavka, 'The Gothic on Screen', in The Cambridge Companion to Gothic Fiction, ed. by Jerrol E. Hogle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), pp. 209-228</heading>Defines the Gothic film genre through the classic horror period, the female Gothic and the adaptations of Poe. The Gothic heroine has a double function as she suffers and investigates a mystery prompted by sexual anxieties. Introduces the concept of the "frigid heroine" whose reaction to the threat of sexuality is to be scared of sex. <heading>Steve Neale, Genre and Hollywood (Oxford: Routledge, 2003), pp. 151-206 </heading>Relates the Gothic with film noir and melodrama. Indicates similarities with film noir based on attraction between characters, the emotional importance of the protagonist and the suspicious settings of stories. Melodramas offer a genre for the female point of view and focus on the dramatic, emotional and psychological aspects of stories. <heading>Joanna Russ, "Somebody's Trying to Kill Me and I Think It's My Husband", in To Write Like a Woman (Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1995), pp. 94-119</heading>Offers a commentary and analysis of the nature of the Modern gothic. Runs through each of the essential elements that constitute a Gothic story and how they contribute to its style. Argues Modern Gothics are adventure stories with passive protagonists as the heroines never take an active part in resolving the mysteries that surround them. <heading>Andrew Smith and Diana Wallace, 'The Female Gothic: Then and Now', Gothic Studies, 6 (2004), 1-7</heading>Argues the need to redefine the term 'Female Gothic' as Moer's original definition of 'Female Gothic' (the work of female writers in the Gothic) has become too vague. Studies the current situation in criticism of Female Gothic and suggests Female Gothic may be considered a separate literary genre. <heading>Diane Waldman, "'At Last I Can Tell It to Someone!': Feminine Point of View and Subjectivity in the Gothic Romance Film of the 1940s", Cinema Journal, 23 (1984), 29-40</heading>Explains the 1940s signified a transition for women and the Gothic romance emerged from here. Indicates women were a large part of the audience so studios wanted a genre for them. The Gothic offers a means of expression of feminine reject to patriarchy and favours woman's perception. Insists the central character is a woman and it is her experience spectators encounter. <heading>Kim Wheatley, 'Gender Politics and the Gothic in Alfred Hitchcock's Rebecca', Gothic Studies, 4 (2002) 133-144</heading>Studies the film Rebecca in a Gothic frame. Explores the containment of the character Rebecca and women's perspective. States the film banishes woman's perspective at the end. Highlights the emotional dependence of male on heroine. Implies the film may be a "man's film after all". 