<heading>Introduction</heading>In order to address the essay question I looked through various laminated magazines aimed at active professional women in their 20s and 30s. The magazines taken into consideration were in three language versions. In English: Cosmopolitan, Psychologies, Red, Magazine B; in Polish: Olivia, Elle, Your Style, Pure Health and in Spanish: Cosmopolitan and Marie Clair. <heading>Cognitive paradigm </heading>According to the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary cognitive means connected with thinking or conscious mental process. <quote>The cognitive paradigm focuses on consumer decisions which rest on ideas, information, evaluation, etc.; thus managerial control is achieved by providing information and persuasion. Systematic decision-making among consumers may be less common than is generally assumed, and this limits the value of this approach. It seems more suitable for one-off decisions than repetitive purchasing (East, 1997). </quote>Cognitive consumer paradigm is understood as related to rational and unemotional product evaluation, consideration of all pros and cons in function of consumer's needs. The cognitive consumer paradigm is usually applied if one talks about purchase of relatively valuable goods which are supposed to serve for a long time or in case of buying a certain item for the first time. Usually consumer's behaviour is explained by cognitive paradigm if things like properties, cars, white house appliances, laptops or even mobile phones are purchased, especially for the first time. The paradigms is applied to purchase of high involvement goods. The application of the cognitive parading is a bit limited as its theory can be applied to relatively small number of purchasers. Most of the purchasers on the market are repeated purchases and they account according to East (1997) for 2/3 of all the purchasers occurring on the market. Even if a consumer makes the purchase of durable and relatively expensive good for the first time usually they have not enough resources to apply so called extended problem solving (EPS), which consists of time consuming, profound market investigation, detailed calculations, offer comparison and sometimes even consultation of consumers' magazines in order to make the best possible decision of purchase. Usually consumers apply so called limited problem solving (LPS) and take into account few possibilities or visit the closest shops. According to LPS consumers are happy with the first satisfactory product and on this basis make a purchase decision. This way they save their time and its excess can use for doing other things or resolve other maybe more important problems. To illustrate this paradigm I use the example of Orange mobile phone operator advert in Polish press. Advert provides consumer with quite a lot of useful information as well as with nice and catching on slogan: 'Your mix, amazingly light'. There are three types of mobile phones of different makes presented: Nokia 6020, Sagen my301X and Simens C75. All are in the same price of 1 PLN if you sign long term contract with the operator. The consumer has a choice (a reasonable degree of freedom) and can select the make which suits him best. Apart from presenting a selection of mobile phones the advert gives detailed information on call charges, costs of SMS and costs of the fixed contract. The advert includes also brief information about possible bonus. This type of advertisement perfectly fits within the cognitive paradigm. The author of the advert knows well, that according to this paradigm consumer will compare the prices. By providing directly all the information consumer may be looking for the advert tries to make the process of price comparison as easy as possible. It seems that author has a deep understanding of the limitations of the cognitive paradigm - very really consumers make fully rational decisions preceded by a long period of investigation and price and offer comparison. The author knows that in the modern society time is a scare resource and consumers are usually happy with the first satisfactory solution they came across. This kind of behaviour is known as satisficing behaviour. Ad's author is also aware of the fact that every one likes to be given a choice. That is why he presents range of 3 different mobile phones of different makes - to give consumers impression the choice is theirs and the product is not imposed on them. Exploring the limitations of the cognitive paradigm makes the advert smart, well targeted and very much up to the point. <heading>Reinforcement paradigm</heading>Again according to the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary reinforcement is when something is made stronger. <quote>The reinforcement paradigm focuses on the way behaviour is modified by the environment; therefore, managerial control is achieved by changing the consumer's situation. It is less useful for expanding complex behaviour built upon a great variety of paste experience which cannot be traced (East, 1997). </quote>In this case we are talking about reinforcing certain consumer behaviour in regard to a particular product. First of all expose consumers to a certain product advert, this way allowing them to remember the product name neither without buying it, nor trying it out. Then, trying the product out may make consumer like it and as a consequence they may start buying and using it regularly. Reinforcement is the main focus of interest from marketing perspective, e.g. for modifying consumer behaviour like brand switching. The degree to which reinforcement occurs as a result of product consumption is a critical determinant of whether the product will be purchased again. Products that deliver positive reinforcement are more likely to be repurchased. Repeated purchase is less likely when product use does not reinforce the consumer or even worse punishes the consumer (Engel at all, 1995) According to what is written above, there are three basic types or reinforcement: <list>positive reinforcement, which leads to receiving some positive stimulusnegative reinforcement, which leads to removal of some adverse stimuluspunishment, which reduces the odds of the behaviour occurring again</list>Distributing free samples to consumers allows them to experience product reinforcement without product purchase. According to the data presented by Engel at al (1995) free samples distribution pays off, by using free samples market penetration was increased by 60%. ´You can't get something for nothing´, says Engel. Getting consumers to simply try a product, thereby enabling them to appreciate the reinforcement derived from consumption more full, often enhances the odds of purchase (Engel at al, 1995). According to the same source, independently form product reinforcement there is also non product reinforcement. This is frequently observed in fast food restaurants, which often use a tactics of including a small gift in children's meals for reinforcing the child, who in turn reinforces parents. Adults can be the target of such reinforces as well -different supplements such as colourful plastic bags, etuis for mobile phones, plastic slippers or glasses are often attached to issues of women's magazines, especially to the Polish and English edition of Elle and Spanish edition of Marie Clair. Very frequently CDs with popular movies or songs are attached as well. There is reinforcement in order to change consumers behaviour e.g. brand switching, but there is also reinforcement of heavy user. Heavy users are the consumers who account for a disproportionate amount of product consumption. Reinforcing heavy users pays off and it is more desirable to attract and retain heavy users than moderate of light users. As the best examples to illustrate reinforcement paradigm facial creams adverts in women's magazines can be used. Almost on every second page of magazines aimed at active ladies between their 20s and 30s such as Cosmopolitan, Psychologies, Red, Magazine B, Olivia, Elle, Your Style, Marie Clair there is an advert of a facial cream or any other cosmetic. Looking at the advert with such high frequency one becomes familiar with the name of the product, its image, declared properties and accompanying slogan. Sometimes it happens that free samples are attached, this makes it possible to try the product out, get familiar with it, and if the experience is positive to start buying it and using it regularly. Let's have a look on L'Oreal's new infallible make-up which lasts up to 16 hours (advertised both in English Red and Polish Your Style). Going through both magazines we see different L'Oreal products advertised on subsequent pages: mentioned before infallible make-up, but also collagen filler and fade-resistant high shine hair colour. This technique's objective is both to reinforce the brand awareness among loyal consumers, attract new users as well as to reinforce heavy user. A free sample of the product is attached to the page advertising new infallible make-up, ladies are supposed to try it out 'because they are worth it'. The expected outcome of the strategy is to make heavy user consume more in terms of quantity and variety of products offered by L'Oreal and to attract new users, make them learn about the product by trying it out. The aim of the strategy is that the possible future consumer will start liking the product and will remember to buy it while shopping for cosmetics next time. According to Engel at al (1995) this example shows how learning occurs as result operant conditioning (instrumental learning). The whole process is concerned with how the consequences of behaviour will affect the frequency or probability of the behaviour being performed again. The satisfaction experienced by the consumer while using the make-up increases the odds of repeated purchase. Repeated purchasing would be unlikely if the make-up failed to satisfy the consumer. <heading>Habit paradigm</heading>The Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary describes habit as something which you do often and regularly, sometimes without knowing that you are doing it. <quote>The habit paradigm focuses on established patterns of behaviour which are rapidly mobilized in response to relevant stimuli in the situation. Here managers benefit from studying the way behaviour is associated with particular stimuli; once identified, these stimuli can be used to elicit the behaviour and this is important in fields such as pack design and advertising (East, 1997). </quote>According to East (1997) again, both cognitive and reinforcement paradigms emphasize the modification of consumer behaviour and explain changes that occur in consumer purchasing. The fact is that in case of very many products markets are very stable and consumers' behaviour is quite repetitive (habitual). Habits enable consumers to avoid decision making as well as allow them to concentrate on relatively few problems where their paste experience provides them with no ready response. East (1997) makes a very important point: by saying that the habit paradigm excludes problem solving or planning before action, but does not imply that consumers are irrational or unreflecting. People may obviously think after the event and they will not buy a brand which disappointed them. In this case they will break their habit and try something else. Most repeated purchases sets on satisfactory experience. But although people do have good reasons for their purchase, this may not be the best reason (the same like in case of cognitive paradigm and satisficing behaviour). As the nature of habit restricts experimentation, consumer may be not aware of improvements in products ranges for which they could benefit. The habit parading is discussed in the context of brand loyalty, usually in case of low involvement products such as food, but not only. To illustrate the habit paradigm let's consider H&M cloths advert. I assume people targeted with this advert are H&M loyal purchasers. They trust and like the brand and shop at H&M on regular basis. Given the H&M cloths are relatively cheap I can consider shopping for H&M cloths as habitual event, as most of people exchange their T-shirts and other pieces of basic clothing every season. Consumers looking through the magazines' pages and seeing the logo they just remind themselves to go shopping for cloths at H&M. To make the process easy for them the advert is constructed the way that no bright cloths appear on it, so that they contrast very well with red H&M logo. By giving prices of every piece of clothing advertisers may accelerate the whole shopping process. Consumer may find the prices satisfactory and stick to the brand, do not do any further research and do not consider any other option as they have already gained all the information needed. 