Poland is predominantly an agricultural country, it is also a transition economy, World Trade Organization (WTO) member and a new European Union (EU) Member State. From all those reasons agri-food polices seem to be a fascinating topic for discussion. More than 15 years ago (in 1989), Poland regained its democracy and since than has been undergoing deep changes in all sectors of economy. Especially agricultural and food policies have been heavily influenced by the process of EU accession. One can say that in legislative terms and in terms of impact on public opinion, this process has been much more influential than WTO membership (4). In the last 15 years Poland has been changing its agricultural policy many times, at certain point was recognized as the least subsidized economy in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. In 1988, just before the transition started, Poland's Producer Subsidy Equivalents (PSEs) was 24% compared with 49% in the EU. This means, that Polish farmers were subsidized but far less than those in the EU. By 1993 while the EU's PSE had reminded at 48% that of Poland dropped to 16%. In terms of Consumer Subsidy Equivalent (CSE), it equalled 52.9% in 1989 but by the 1991 it dropped to 0.2% (virtual zero). In two years price subsidies completely disappeared from the level of more than 50% to zero (4). It has dramatic effects, as Poland become the least subsidized agricultural sector on the world. Not only consumers had to pay higher prices, but also lack of trade barriers made EU heavy subsidised export to enter Polish market easily and this way undermine agriculture even further. As western commodities had lower prices, attractive packaging and differentiated offer, they become very attractive for Polish consumers. Due to lack of adequate policy instruments and facing the UE competition Poland failed to fulfil the quota of its export to EU markets, and never exceeded 80% of what it was allowed to export (4). Despite this fact, fear against Polish agricultural commodities and cheaper labour within old EU countries was still significant and was followed by a strong anti Polish propaganda in western press, (especially British and French) depicting Poland, especially its agriculture as heavily backward. As the idea of European accession was slowly approaching, the subsidies levels increased slightly, reaching PSE of 22 in 1997 compared with 42 in the EU (3). The possibility of future accession, was a turning point in Polish policy making in early 1990s. The main and the only objective of pre-accession agri-food policy was to restructure Polish agricultural sector and all the accompanying institution for the European integration and full Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) adoption. As percentage of population employed in agriculture in Poland (18.8%) is comparatively high referring to other EC countries (EU - 15, 4.3%), and the farm establishments are rather small (average farm size equals 7.2 hectares) and dispersed (2), that is why possibility full CAP adoption by Poland was seen as treat for the whole EU budget. There were also voices of many consumer's organizations such as The European Consumers' Organisation (BEUC) and Consumer International (CI), that full CAP adoption will be especially harmful for Polish consumers, especially the poorest as they will bear cost of the policy by paying higher food prices (4). Apart form this argument many European academics and policy makers were warning Poland against full CAP adoption in its current shape as it would be switching form one type of command economy to the other. As Tarditi, Marsh and Senior-Nelo have said (4): <quote>"Given this situation, it would be hypocritical to suggest to the Central and Eastern European Countries (CEECs) as they seek to introduce a market oriented economy, that they should change from their previous command economy regimes to a command-economy-biased CAP. This would imply the very type of economic inefficiency and inequitable income distribution from which they were seeking to escape. It seems much more honest to admit that a transition to a more market oriented economy is needed on both sides of what was the iron curtain, and to set a transition period and a time horizon for a convergence towards a genuinely market oriented CAP [in a wider EU]."</quote>In early 1990s assistance programmes funded by western countries have been introduced to Poland. They were aimed at solving different agricultural related problems. PHARE and Special Accession programme for Agricultural and Rural Development (SAPARD) were financed by the EU, the Rural Development Programme was financed from World Bank funds. PHARE programmes were the first significant source of funds for assistance in the Polish agricultural sector, their aim was to strengthen Poland's ability to accept and implement acquis in agriculture (1). In 1990, in the first year of PHARE implementation Poland received equivalent of EUR 100 million, out of EUR 200 million assigned for support of all CEEC (5). In the following years the proportions of PHARE funding were changed and aid directed to agriculture support was reduced in comparison to support directed to other branches of the economy. Despite of limited funds, significant part of PHARE funds was distributed among central institutions responsible for rural and agricultural planning, such as: Agency for Restructuring and Modernisation of Agriculture, Agency of Agricultural Property of the State Treasury, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and different Inspections such as Veterinary, Seed, etc (5). According to the report 'Rural Poland after the integration with European Union'(5) it is difficult to determine exactly how the funds were allocated, as variety of strictly agricultural and non agricultural projects were implemented. Authors of the report are saying that, the funds allocation is difficult to call cohesive strategy, but despite this fact Poland gained experience in assistance programming and management. In change Rural Development Programme was one of the first programmes to be concentrated around defined goals and meant as a package. The programme was made of three components: micro credits, measures aimed at changing the labour structure and rural infrastructure. Under the Rural Development Programme the following activities were carried out(1) : <list>introduction of structural disability pensions;support for semi-subsistence farms;support for farming activity conducted on areas with unfavourable natural conditions;support for agri-environment measures and improvement of animal's welfare;forestation of agricultural land;harmonisation of agricultural holding standards with those of the European Unionformation of agricultural producer groups </list>Last but not least of the aid programmes - SAPARD was a pre-accession tool aimed at supporting rural and agricultural development of New Member states in order to prepare them to participate in the CAP (5). Poland was granted EUR 171.6 million yearly thanks to its implementation, while all 10 candidate countries together received EUR 529. SAPARD started in Poland in July 2002 and consisted of 6 measures (1,5): <list>support of improvements in the processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery products;investments in agricultural holdingsdevelopment and improvement of general rural infrastructure;diversification of economic activities in rural areas;agri-environmental programmes and afforestation;vocational trainings for farmers and other persons engaged in agriculture or forestry;technical assistance (used by the implementing authority, e.g. Ministry for Agriculture and Rural Development)</list>In Poland 6 out of 7 SAPARD measures have been implemented, only measure 5 have not. The highest number of applications were submitted for measure 2 and the lowest for the measure 1. Measures 1,2 and 3 managed to contract over 99% of available funds. SAPARD has been run by Agency for Restructuring and Modernisation of Agriculture, which was appointed as a SAPARD agency. According to the Agency data almost 100% of funds directed to Poland within this particular aid programme was used (5). Apart from programmes directly supporting financial activities there is also LEADER program aiming at social coherence of rural societies (5). LEADER's idea is to apply bottom to top approach, which is in accordance with one of the most important EU principles - the principle of subsidiarity. Within the framework of this programme rural societies should form alliances with local authorities, business and Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and all together pursue common objective, e.g. look for and select projects adequate to local community needs. In Poland LEADER programme still remains a challenge as presently the civil society is being in the process of formation and a lot of incoherence can be observed. All those above mentioned programmes prepared ground for the CAP introduction. When Poland was undergoing restructuring process, accession negotiations were taking place as well as the works on CAP reform. As the result of those two Poland and other New Member states, even if there was no transition period for agriculture agreed, before receiving full direct income support have to go through phasing in period, which started at 25% of the EU direct payment in 2004, and is going to gradually increase on yearly basis, reaching 100% in 2013. Apart form direct aid, rural development measures and funding, new entrant countries' farmers can also benefit form such CAP instruments as market support. In turn, they do not need to fulfil all the obligations required from EU15 farmers such as environmental and animal welfare requirements in order to qualify for payments (9). The financial support directed to agriculture comes from national and UE budgets and most of payments from UE budget require national co-funding. Apart form it, in Poland, there is also a wide scheme of crediting agriculture, within this scheme 20 360 investment credits on preferential rate were issued. Within the restructuring process Polish agriculture and agricultural markets were transformed to greater extend than was expected. There was a significant change in funding of agriculture, which consisted of a reduced share of indirect subsidies for subsidies obtained directly by agricultural producers. This way of subsidising is the most socially equitable measure, as it allows farmers to keep their income on an adequate level but does not increase the prices of food commodities for consumers (1). This seem to be very positive policy change. Apart form changes in the financial support, in 2003 for the first time in 10 years a surplus in foreign trade in agri-food products was noted. In 2004 this trend continued. The positive trade balance almost doubled (from EUR 44.6 million in 2003 to EUR 853.2 million in 2004). In the mentioned years, the increase in exports of agri-food products was higher than that of all other products exported from Poland. This provided an increase in the share of export of agri-food products in total export (1). Year 2004 was the first one in 7 years to bring income increase in Polish agriculture (5). Despite very many pre-accession reservations farmers seem to be the first beneficiaries of the integration process (5). A year after the accession, according to 'Gazeta Wyborcza' survey, Polish farmers seemed to be the happiest segment of the society, looking with trust into future (8). 