<heading>Area</heading>The Ouse Valley is located north east of Brighton in East Sussex along the South Downs which runs along the length of the chalk downs of Hampshire and Sussex, in the Wealden District, (See Figure 1). The chalk 'dives' under the English Channel and re-emerges in the Champagne region of France. <figure/><heading>Climate</heading>Grapes require a mean annual temperature of 10-12 oC and an annual rainfall below 700mm. According to the Meteorological Office, the South of England had an average mean temperature of 10.6 oC and an Actual rainfall of 802mm. In particular, the South Downs had an average mean temperature of 10.4 oC and a rainfall of 650mm; this is according to the Contours Walking Holidays. These conditions, given a rise of 2 oC, are ideal for the growth of grapes. <heading>Terroir</heading>The South Downs consists of tilted layers of limestone and flint nodules. The south facing slope is gentle and is well drained. The north slope is steep. The soils are thin and calcium rich but lack other minerals. Deeper soils are found on the plateau, south dip slope and valley bottoms. In the shallow south dip, soils are chalk and clay based. <heading>Viticulture</heading>Grapes grown for wine can be better growing on less fertile soils. Fertile soils can cause excessive vegetative growth of the vine. Therefore the low mineral content soil in the Ouse Valley is ideal. In the vineyard, the vines will be planted on the south dip slope and valley floor, where the soil is thickest which to accommodate the large roots of the vines. The vines will be planted north to south, allowing the maximum sun exposure. The vines will be planted in rows that are approximately 2m apart to allow for machinery to be manoeuvred when collecting the grapes on the valley bottom. On each row the vines will be planted at intervals of 4-6m, to allow development of a warm microclimate, air circulation and adequate lighting, (see figure 2). Seyval Blanc will be grown on the flat land. This grape is a hybrid and is the most disease resistant grape in the UK. It ripens late in the season and produces a wine that is light and neutral in taste and style, quite similar to Chardonnay. Pinot Meunier, which is a derivative of Pinot Noir, and Chardonnay will be grown on the slope for the production of sparkling wine. <figure/>Rootstocks varieties such as Vitis riparia will be used for Vitis vinifera to be grafted onto. It starts growth in late spring and so can be subjected to a late frost in winter. Vitis berlandieri would also be ideal as it grows well on chalky soils. The vines will be planted in spring to be harvested in October - November. Vines have evolved to maintain a place in the sun, achieved by its entwining nature and rapid growth. This will be controlled by regular training and pruning. The most common way to train a vine is by the vertical shoot position of the trellising, (see Figure 3). It allows the vine to catch maximum light. <figure/>Pruning allows adequate light, air circulation which in turn reduces humidity, and therefore disease, decreases the amount of perennial wood which may cause injury. <heading>Vinification</heading>A mainstream vinification of Seyval Blanc will take place. The grapes will be picked by machine, reducing costs although there is a higher risk of fruit damage. Once back at the winery, SO 2 will be added to prevent oxidation. The grapes will be crushed and de-stemmed (see figure 4). During pressing, the skin will be present with the juice. This will increase the extraction of phenolics resulting in a more robust wine. Mainstream fermentation at 15-20 oC will take place. Stainless steel vessels will be used for this process and also for maturation. During maturation the wine will be stored under a CO 2 blanket. <figure/>The Pinot Meunier and Chardonnay grapes will be hand picked from the slopes. The whole bunch will be pressed. The must produced from this will also have SO 2 added to prevent excessive oxidation. Two fermentations will take place. The first will be malolactic fermentation at 15-20 oC. The first stabilisation step will then take place by holding the must cold. Maturation will take place in stainless steel vats under a CO 2 blanket. This will be followed by a second stabilisation at cold temperarures. This will incorporate a filtering process. The second fermentation will then be initiated; at this stage sugar will be added with the yeast. Filling will take place immediately and the bottles will be stored on gyropallets (see figure 5) to allow clarification to take place. <figure/>The bottles will then be finished by topping up and corking. The finished product should have a strong fruit flavour and aroma. <heading>Wines</heading>Seyval Blanc wine is a popular choice for English vineyards. It produces a crisp, fruity and moderately dry wine with a alight citrus note. Pinot Meunier and Chardonnay will produce a fruity, bright and acidic sparkling wine, similar to Champagne. 