<heading>Introduction</heading>Fluidisation is a process used for particulate materials. The process involves making the particles behave as if they are a liquid. In a fluidised bed reactor, particles are placed in a cylinder and medium is passed around it. The fluidised reactor is used to lift or expand the particle bed. The medium is pumped through the bottom of a column. The medium can be either gas or liquid. Fluidisation may be done to react the particulate and medium, if they meet they may form a product and so if they did not move around the column they would not react. This is a process used throughout industry, for example collecting protein molecules on the surface of a solution which is a type of adsorption. At first there is no movement of the particles and they remain still on the bed, the bed is said to be in a fixed state so there is no reaction in the top layer of the bed. Before the particles can start moving around the column, the medium has to provide enough force to overcome the weight of the particles. To achieve this, a flow rate had to be determined in order for the first sign of movement to occur, this is the fluidisation state. This can be observed as a rise in the head of the bed, it will gradually move up the column as the medium is increasingly flowing through. Once a flow rate has be found that will cause some motion in the particles, the minimum fluidisation velocity has been achieved. This is also known as the incipient fluidisation velocity. It represents the transition between the fixed and fluidised state. If the flow rate is increased further the motion will increase even further and the head will rise. A point will be reached when the particles will be able to leave the column; this is known as particle transport and may also be referred to as pneumatic transport. The movement of particles is not strictly in one upward motion. Channelling occurs, as mentioned in 'Fluidization' by Davidson, Clift & Harrison. This can be witnessed if the column is transparent. In some parts of the bed, there are motions in vertical directions, some going upwards and some downwards. This act of channelling means that pressure drop throughout the bed differs. This is not always desirable. The principle of fluidisation has several applications in industry. In particular heat exchange between the particles and surface. Catalytic reactions may also be achieved. The solid or gas particle may have catalytic properties if mixed sufficiently with the liquid by fluidising it. In the experiment solid-liquid fluidisation was performed. Silica particles were placed in the column to form a bed. The fluidisation medium used was water. The flow rate of water was increased slightly so that transitions could be established and the minimum fluidisation velocity of the particles could be determined. <heading>Experimental</heading>First the fluidised bed reactor was calibrated by marking h=5cm height intervals along the column. Water was pumped through and the flow rate was increased and the voltage was recorded each time the water reached the height of the markers. For the actual experiment, a zero mark was decided on the column, this was 141mm from the bottom of the column. Water was filled to this zero mark. 396g silica particles were placed in the column and allowed to settle. To reduce the bulk density (or volume that was occupied in the column) and porosity of the silica, the side of the column was gently tapped so that any caught air was released. This reduced its height by about 5cm. To collect any particles stuck in the 'dry' part of the column, the flow was started then stopped so that the silica could be caught and be brought back to the bulk of the column. The flow was started and was increased gradually each time by altering the levels on the rotameters. Once the minimum velocity was reached, the head was let to settle and the height was recorded each time. The volumetric flow rate was measured by collecting water in a measuring cylinder for a specified length of time. The flow rate was increased until particle transport started to occur. <heading>Results</heading>See attached graphs and table of results. <heading>Example of Calculations</heading>Using last row of data from table.  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Pressure drop based on liquid height, using calibration curve  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Terminal velocity of a silica particle using Stoke's equation:  FORMULA  <heading>Discussion</heading>From the results table and graph 2 it can be seen that the increase in velocity and therefore volumetric flow rate of the water has resulted in a change in the head of the bed which indicates a change in pressure drop. Initially before the water was pumped through the column the head of the particles was at a height of 0.141m, above the water entry. When the water was pumped through, initially there was no change in the condition of the bed of particles. No movement was observed. This continued for the first four readings. It was not until a flow rate of 7.33x10 -7 m 3s -1 was achieved that there was any expansion of the bed. This was at a velocity of 5.84x10 -3ms -1. At this point the silica particles could be seen moving in an upward path in the column. As the flow rate and velocity were increased even further the bed continued to rise and expanded and the silica particles were moving quite significantly. As soon as the rotameter was changed the bed rose rapidly but after some time it steadied itself to a constant head. When the velocity had reached 9.421x10 -3ms -1, the head of the bed was near the top of the column and was beginning to leave the column which is when the experiment ended. As the flow rate was increased the pressure drop also increases, from looking at Graph 2 it can be seen that the pressure drop increases steadily with velocity. However when the velocity was 7.524x10 -3 ms -1 the curve on the graph appears to be changing - the gradient is decreasing suggesting the pressure drop is levelling itself out and was going to attain a maximum value. It can also be seen that as the flow rate and velocity increased the voidage increased also which means the amount of space available for the liquid to travel has increased. <heading>Conclusions</heading>From the results it can be concluded that the velocity at which the silica bed started to expand was 5.84x10 -3ms -1. This is the minimum or incipient fluidisation velocity. At the minimum velocity there is a transition from the fixed bed state to the fluidised or expanded state. At this point the silica particles have overcome the force they exert. The frictional drag is decreased and so the particles are rearranged and offer less resistance to the fluid causing the bed of silica to expand. Fluidisation has begun. As the velocity was increased even more the pressure drop also increased, which can also be concluded from graph 1, as the voltage also increased. From looking at graph 3 it can be seen that there is a maximum pressure that is reached. This pressure value is independent of velocity and so remains constant. This is due to the height of the water being constant. As the velocity is increased a path for the water is created and so has overcome the pressure of the silica particles meaning that the bed can be disrupted causing it to expand. In a fixed bed, the particles are positioned on top of each other at the bottom of the column. As the velocity increases and expansion occurs, the surface of silica particles becomes horizontal and the particles inside the bed can rearrange themselves and move around. The particles become dispersed uniformly. Increasing the velocity causes the particles to become separated from each other and the distance between them becomes further, they become freely supported in the bed and fluid mix. Eventually the particles can not separate any further from each other and so the pressure drop remains almost constant and is equal to the weight per unit area of the bed. If the velocity was decreased after this maximum was found, the pressure drop would not be the same for the same velocities, it would be higher as the bed would only contract so the particles are resting on top of each other. The increased pressure drop shown by graph 3 is due to more space becoming available for the water to travel through the bed to move the particles and expand them. There is a point where the velocity has increased to a point when the particles can no longer remain in the column. They start to leave, and this is called particle or hydraulic transport. This occurred at 9.421ms -1. The distances between the particles increased so much that the pressure caused the bed to rise, shown by increase in bed height, which mean the particles escaped from the column. The particles have become conveyed by the fluid. The terminal velocity was determined by two methods, by using the trend line in graph 4 and by using Stoke's equation. From the graph, the terminal velocity was 0.011ms -1 and from Stoke's equation it was 0.022ms -1. This is quite a large variation and this error may have been due to experimental errors and inaccuracy when taking measurements. Therefore the result given by Stoke's equation may be considered to be more reliable as it relies on data that was not determined experimentally. In fluidisation, the fluid velocity must exceed the terminal velocity of the solid for the expansion phase to occur. It occurs when the accelerating force of the particle is balanced with the resistances forces within the fluid. This can be observed in the results data, as the incipient velocity is greater than the terminal velocity. It can also be assumed that wall frictional losses are negligible. This is because the flow in the column can be related to Reynolds number and so the concept of friction and flow can be applied. The higher the velocity the less friction occurs at the wall of the column and so the fluid has less time gripping on to it. This means that there are not enough frictional forces to have a profound effect on the expansion of the bed. The experiment could have been expanded by reducing the velocity once the maximum pressure drop had been achieved, which would made it possible to observe changes in the settling bed pressure and height. It would also have been beneficial to have taken more readings at different flow rates so that the data could be made more reliable, this is because the rotameters are not often accurate and so more manual readings may have helped. Overall the experiment was successful with few errors e.g. taking accurate readings and timings. 