<heading>1. Introduction</heading>The archaeology of the Bronze Age of the Greek mainland has traditionally entailed attempts to confirm the Homeric texts, stylistic comparisons of architecture, artistic appreciations of finds and detailed examinations of pottery in order to achieve chronological refinements. The notion of the 'state' in archaeology implicates evolutionary thinking and theories influenced by the social and biological sciences (Chapman, 2003). However, the term 'state' has advantages over the traditional approaches. It can prove to be a useful analytical tool for understanding the structure of mainland societies as it encompasses specific organisational attributes. In order to address the first part of the question it is necessary to identify the point in time when states become visible archaeologically. Since complex chiefdoms exemplify social inequality and a hierarchical structure, these can be regarded as precursors to state societies (Flannery, 1999: 4). Therefore, one needs to ascertain when mainland societies had clearly passed the 'threshold' from chiefdom to statehood. Consequently, the early state can be defined as the first state to emerge following the chiefdom mode of organisation. It ought to be emphasised that the definition of 'early state' within archaeology is a contested issue. Smith (2003: 17, 19, 87, 275, 277) rightly stresses that various political agendas, such as current nation states, traditional historicism and comparative politics, inevitably affect the archaeological study of early states. In this paper, I would like to follow a historical materialist perspective taking the state society to refer to a specific political structure (Chapman, 2003: 98; Smith, 2003: 85). Specifically, I would like to draw upon the presence of the following features as highlighted by Chapman (2003: 46-47, 96-97; 2005: 79-80) in order to investigate the emergence of early states: 1) success for the few at the top and protection of their privileges, 2) class, rather than kinship, as societal structuring principle, 3) physical or ideological coercion, 4) a decision-making hierarchy and 5) bureaucracy and centralisation of economic and political activities. This essay will follow a factual approach and will assess critically the archaeological evidence for early state emergence and form. Any analysis of the process of state emergence and formation, in other words the gradual or abrupt rise of the state, is beyond the scope of this research. Furthermore, it will be assumed that the emergence of mainland state society was not secondary to Minoan states and for this reason any comparisons with Crete will be avoided. Regarding the geographical specification of 'mainland Greece', given the nature of available evidence this essay will focus primarily on southern Greece. This is because the existence of an early state in Thessaly at the coastal area of modern Volos is questionable (Andreou et al, 2001: 272-273). In addition, any evidence that the Macedonian sites of Kastanas, Assiros and Toumba Thessalonikis, which show elements for large-scale agricultural storage, actually indicate complex social differentiation remains inconclusive (Andreou, 2001: 166, 169; Andreou et al, 2001: 304). In order to address the second part of the question I will be examining the character and power base of mainland states. This is because state form clearly pertains to the nature of state organisation, such as the extent of centralisation. While it may seem problematic to generalise about state form across different sites (Galatay and Parkinson, 1999: 4), for brevity this essay cannot possibly examine the intricate differences in state form between centres such as Pylos, Mycenae, Tiryns and Thebes. Finally, the term 'palace' will be used loosely in this essay to denote major Mycenaean sites. <heading>2. The Appearance of Mainland State Society</heading><heading>2a. Pre-State Society</heading>In contrast to Crete, 'palaces' on the mainland appeared relatively late in LHIIIA (Dabney and Wright, 1990: 47). This late appearance has instigated the search for state society traits in earlier Bronze Age periods. The following table summarises the ceramic phases of Early Helladic (EH), Middle Helladic (MH), Late Helladic (LH) and subdivisions. <table/>Claims for state functions in the EH have been based on evidence for centralised storage and administration as well as on the presence of elaborate architecture and large settlements. The interpretation of the EHII Rundbau at Tiryns as a monumental granary, due to shaft compartments (Kilian, 1986: 68) rather than archaeobotanical evidence, reflects an unjustified emphasis on architecture. The limited space for storage, the questionable stockpiling of sealed goods and the use of sealings for personal possessions rather than the administration of commodities make the relevance of the House of Tiles for the emergence of the early state questionable (Peperaki, 2004: 224; Whitley, 2004: 197; Kalogerakou, 1999: 97; Halstead, 1994: 203, 206). Thus, the House of Tiles no longer constitutes an example of early complexity as Renfew supports in his "Emergence of Civilisation" but a location for occasional gatherings (Peperaki, 2004: 214-215, 226). Similarly, the recently discovered EHII apsidal three-roomed house at Thebes, with outdoor pithoi and monumental walls, provides evidence for communal foci and labour mobilisation within a kin-based society (Aravantinos, 2004: 1255, 1258). The lack of consensus regarding the function of EH II corridor houses (Dickinson, 1994: 59; Kalogerakou, 1999: 91-92) may have actually inflated their relevance to the appearance of the early state. The massive size and dense habitation of EH Thebes, the speculation that it stood at the top of a regional settlement hierarchy (Konsola, 1981: 160-161, 167, 179-181) and the continuity of occupation down to LHIIIA-B (Aravantinos, 1995: 615) make it tempting to argue for an EH Theban state. However, given the collapse of the House of Tiles and other EH elaborate structures it would be problematic to assume a linear evolutionary path (Whitley, 2004: 193, 195) claiming that continuity affected the appearance of the first state. In 2000, a small EHIII jewellery hoard with trinkets of gold, silver, carnelian and crystal was found at Kolonna in Aegina. The ornamentation of one of the beads shows an etched technique known in Mesopotamia. This unique necklace has been considered as evidence for the accumulation of wealth within settlements and far-reaching trade links for prestige items desired by local elites (Reinholdt, 2003: 260-261; Reinholdt, 2004: 1114-1115, 1118). However, can the presence of these EH social inequalities be interpreted accurately when it is not possible to pinpoint to the exact nature of contemporary societies (Chapman, 2005: 92)? Recently, it has been suggested that Kolonna in Aegina represents a MH state because of monumental fortifications, a very rich Shaft Grave, centralised storage and specialised pottery production (Niemeier, 1995: 80; Rutter, 2001: 154). It would appear that the EHIII-MHIII fortifications at Kolonna with their intricate gate layouts exemplify a unique style different from the later Cyclopean technique (Field, 1985: 150; Niemeier, 1995: 74-75; Rutter, 2001: 126). Although Niemeier (1995:76) rightly postulates that these impressive fortifications required considerable planning and organisation, there is no reason to assume that only a state society could achieve their construction. The individual buried in the MHI Shaft Grave at Kolonna must have had a special status given the golden diadem worn on the head and the fact that except for the knife the rest of the grave goods have no stylistic parallels elsewhere (Kilian-Dirlmeier, 1997: 66, 68, 71). If these grave goods (Figure 1, Plate 1) are stylistically distinct they could have been made exclusively for this individual. It is possible that the riches in this grave reflect the isolated presence of a local leader without necessarily denoting established and sustained social stratification. The Shaft Grave was deliberately located just outside the fortification (ensuring visibility for those inside and outside the wall) and the burial was on ground that was not soft and unsuitable to digging. There were no other internments nearby and subsequent works on the walls did not affect the Shaft Grave (Kilian-Dirlmeier, 1995: 50; Kilian-Dirlmeier, 1997: 67-68, 72). Therefore, this grave may have acted more like a commemoration monument rather than an indicator of class-society par excellence. The recent discovery of a Großsteinbau made from thick walls could be contemporary to the Shaft Grave (Felten and Hiller, 2004: 13), but there is no further evidence to substantiate Felten's (2005: 11) suggestion that it served as the residence of a local leader. Although the large pithoi from Kolonna probably stored agricultural produce (Rutter, 2001: 130), it remains questionable whether surplus was centrally organised. Rutter (2001: 125, 145) has emphasised that there was large-scale specialised pottery production and export (Gold Mica ware) but the exact production site remains to be found. In the absence of any modern regional survey and fabric/clay analysis the existence of multiple production sites around the island cannot be ruled out. As Hope Simpson (1981: 32-33) reports, in the early twentieth century Furtwängler located three other sites with Mycenaean pottery far away from Kolonna whose exact dating is unfortunately imprecise. There is also no apparent reason to associate Aegina's participation in numerous trade networks, as indicted by a plethora of Minoan and Cycladic pottery (Voutsaki, 1993: 67, 156), with central authorities controlling this trade. The MHIII-LHI Shaft Graves at Mycenae have been a subject of immense fascination. Schliemann's mask of Agamemnon has become "one of the most widely recognized icons of the Aegean Bronze Age" (Dickinson, 2005: 299). The deposition of wealth at Mycenae aimed to legitimise property rights and hence strengthen social stratification (Voutsaki, 1997: 44). However, it is possible to disagree with Voutsaki's (1997: 36-37) critique of a Marxist-driven association between labour input and the value of the objects in the Shaft Graves, because as Chapman (2005: 94) argues labour investment is integral to the initial ascription of value of an artefact. Wolpert (2004: 129) disputes the existence of an established ideological framework that made prestige items in the Shaft Graves socially important. The question that arises here is how much ideological legitimacy is required to justify the presence of such excessive riches, especially when the mechanism of production and acquisition of the Shaft Grave artefacts is still not well understood (Chapman, 2005: 94). It remains uncertain whether a local or external supply of prestige items was centrally organised. Arguments that the Shaft Grave individuals show class-consciousness (Graziadio, 1991: 406, 412) marking a transcendence from kinship society (Voutsaki, 1998: 44) can be contested. Facial reconstructions of the individuals buried in Circle B (Figure 2, Plate 2) revealed that skulls from the same grave show family likeness (Musgrave et al, 1995: 129-130). If the kinship ties between the individuals buried in grave Γ and those buried in A and Γ (Musgrave et al, 1995: 118) can be confirmed by DNA analysis (Brown et al, 2003: 497), then the correlation between family and wealth becomes particularly intriguing. This is because grave Γ is exceptionally rich (Voutsaki, 1997: 41). What may be extrapolated from these elites is that kinship rather than class mattered to the society. Furthermore, in view of extensive grave-reuse and concerns about lineage, Wolpert (2004: 132, 135-136) rightly questions whether status had replaced kinship as a societal structuring principle. Although the osteological material is fragile and in poor condition, the larger physique and better health of the Shaft Grave individuals (Musgrave et al, 1995: 131-134; Graziadio, 1991: 406) could indicate additional privileges. However, this does not necessarily imply that the social rank of these elites was fully established. The analysis of grave goods provides evidence for gradations in wealth/gender differentiation and the fact that Grave Circle A flourished when Circle B declined could signify inter-elite competition (Graziadio, 1991: 437-440; Voutsaki, 1997: 43-44; Rutter, 2001: 141; Whittaker, 2001: 356). In addition, some individuals were interred with more armour than they could possibly carry (Graziadio, 1991: 419) and this may be taken to emphasise military ideology and claims to power. During the Shaft Grave period, there is a tendency towards more complex mortuary rituals in both the Argolid and Messenia (Voutsaki, 1998: 44). The electrum flat mask of individual Γ55 in Circle B at Mycenae may have served a ritual purpose. According to Musgrave et al (1995: 120-121) the facial reconstruction did not match the mask features. However, one could not agree with Voutsaki (1993: 15, 169) who suggests that Mycenaean burials primarily reflected mythical values rather than social rank. How could such eschatological concerns have dictated the inclusion of golden artefacts in burials? It is more likely that the increasingly elaborate mortuary rites were used in conjunction with a conspicuous consumption of wealth in order to strengthen the existing social order (Dabney and Wright, 1990: 50) within a complex chiefdom society. Our understanding of the early Mycenaean period (LHI-II) is limited because the LHIII 'palaces' have covered pre-existing structures. The 1998 discovery of a predecessor Megaron at Tiryns dating to LHII-LHIIIA1 is important in filling the gap between the Shaft Grave and 'palatial' period (Maran, 2001: 26, 28). However, architectural continuity cannot be equated with continuity in social structure. Although groups of tholos tombs in the Argolid and Messenia show the presence of competing elites, the nature of power in these elites remains unclear and a chiefdom rather than state society may be more justly assumed (Voutsaki, 1998: 55; Shelmerdine, 2001: 349, 352). The regional and chronological variations within grave types do not appear to support the existence of a three-class society whereby 'royals', 'middle-class' and 'commoners' were buried in tholoi, chamber tombs and pits/cists respectively. <heading>2b. State Society</heading>Although it remains unclear exactly when the early state first appeared (Rutter, 2001: 146), during LHIIIA-B state features become visible in the archaeological record. Top elites appear to have appropriated successfully the increased production of foodstuffs and prestige items (Shelmerdine, 2001: 359, 362; Galatay and Parkinson, 1999: 8) ensuring that the state mode of organisation worked in their favour. The emergence of 'palatial' architecture, including a central Throne Room with hearth and four columns (Figure 3, Plate 2; Shelmerdine, 2001: 350), ought to be seen in conjunction with the view that the Main Courts of Mycenae, Tiryns and Pylos had restricted access and limited capacity (Cavanagh, 2001: 130-131). In other words, architecture distinguished apart the highest societal echelons. This can be further supported by the fact that fortifications at Mycenaean citadels were not necessarily defensive but projected messages of power and control (Dickinson, 1994: 81). As Field (1985: 363-366) highlights the gigantic compound walls at Gla (Figure 4, Plate 3) could not have been defended by its small population, but demarcated the main locus of activity with one section of society overseeing the other. Mortuary evidence also supports a more rigidly centralised social structure because during LHIIIA-B there is increased unevenness in wealth distribution. Besides, tholoi and chamber tombs become more standardised and tholoi appear exclusively at 'palatial' centres (Voutsaki, 1993: 98; Voutsaki, 1998: 48, 55; Galou, 2005: 137). The Linear B records inform about differentiation based on property ownership, because the "wanax" (king) owned three times more land than any other officials (Shelmerdine, 1999: 19). The mobilisation of labour and intensification of agricultural activity underpinning a plethora of engineering projects, such as monumental tombs, roads, bridges, river diversions and land reclamation, (Dabney and Wright, 1990: 51) may have entailed some form of physical coercion. At the same time, the presence of dedicated cultic centres, the rampways for processions at Mycenae and Tiryns and the modifications to Megaron B at Eleusis reflect the institutionalisation of Mycenaean rituals during the 'palatial' phase (Shelmerdine, 2001: 366-367; Galou, 2005: 137; Cosmopoulos, 2003: 19) and possibly an ideological legitimation of power. Although the precise duties and relative ranking of various functionaries mentioned in the Linear B tablets ("wanax", leader of the people, officials, companions, mayor) are unclear (Shelmerdine, 2001: 358; Shelmerdine, 1999: 24), they do indicate, however, some form of decision-making hierarchies. Furthermore, the Linear B texts inform about centralised administration for agricultural produce, craft specialisation (e.g., bronze-working, textiles, perfumed oil), personnel management including the keeping of slaves, taxation and the te-ra-si-ja redistributive system (Shelmerdine, 2001: 359-360; Halstead, 1994: 208). The impact of a central site is strongly supported by the considerable increase in the quantities of artefacts during LHIIIA-2, as shown by recent regional surveys around Mycenae (Cherry and Davies, 2001: 152, 154, 156). <heading>3. The Nature of Mycenaean State Organisation</heading><heading>3a. Extent of Centralisation</heading>With the LHIIIC collapse of Mycenaean states, any analyses of LHIIIA-B state organisation have been implicitly associated with the search for fault lines which could have resulted in system collapse. To a certain extent, this explains the emphasis put on bureaucratic centralisation as an inherent flaw of state form. In this context, the Linear B tablets, which are derived primarily from the Pylos archive of LHIIIC, have dominated our understanding of Mycenaean state form. Although the clay tablets were accidentally preserved by destruction fires and hence may distort the extent of bureaucracy in earlier state phases, the fact that they were prepared with substantial care (often copied and summarised) makes them an important source of evidence (Bennet, 2001: 27-29). However, the decipherment of Linear B resulted in an enthusiastic vision of Mycenaean states in line with feudal Europe (Galatay and Parkinson, 1999: 5) including the underlying notion of 'territoriality'. The tendency in the 1970s to carry out central-place analysis and divide the landscape into Thiessen polygons resulted in a geometric regularity that wrongly served as a metaphor for organisational form (Smith, 2003: 122, 125, 127,129). There is no reason to associate every Mycenaean state with a fixed territory. Shelmerdine (2001: 344) emphasises that it is still inconclusive whether Mycenae, Tiryns and Midea reflected separate states in the Argolid. Could the failure of recent regional surveys to specify the full area under the control of Mycenae (Cherry and Davis, 2001: 146) be due to the actual shifting of spatial expressions of this state? There is evidence for industrial and agricultural activity that was not controlled centrally. Regarding industrial production, the operation of central 'palatial' workshops has been challenged. The Northeastern Building at Pylos, which was thought to be a workshop (bottom right of Figure 3, Plate 2), has been re-interpreted as a clearing-house redistributing various goods and managing personnel (Bendall, 2003: 224). Shelmerdine (1999: 22) has also questioned the presence of a textile workshop at Thebes in the absence of any evidence for whorls. As Whitelaw (2001: 54) points out, neither the archaeological nor the textual evidence at Pylos can suggest stockpiling of raw materials or end-products within the 'palace' complex. There was clearly a limit to the centralisation of raw materials and human resources, especially since the Linear B tablets do not clarify whether craftspeople were employed occasionally or full-time (De Fidio, 2001: 18). In addition, Whitelaw (2001: 77) has estimated that the annual pottery production at the 'palace' of Pylos was only a small fraction of that throughout the polity. It has been further argued that given the ubiquity of clay resources and preference for non-conspicuous pottery the 'palace' was not interested in monitoring pottery production (Knappett, 2001: 84, 87, 94; Whitelaw, 2001: 78). This may also be supported by the lack of any reference to potters in the Linear B texts (Knappett, 2001: 85). Thus, this genuine gap in the textual evidence could indicate that not everything fell under the remit of central administration. Although the LHIIIA2-B trade expansion and wide distribution of Mycenaean pottery are thought to reflect centrally-driven export industries, the tablets do not provide any evidence for distant trade in prestige goods (Shelmerdine, 2001: 353-354, 362). In addition, the huge amounts of excavated pottery in the Pylos 'palace' were used internally rather than destined for export (Whitelaw, 2001: 77). Recent chemical analysis of Mycenaean pottery in Thessaly, (i.e., the periphery of the Mycenaean world), revealed that 80% of the pottery was made locally (Feuer and Schneider, 2003: 236). This crucially highlights that the extent of centrally-driven export has often been assumed rather than proven. Regarding agricultural production, evidence for centralised administration of surplus is debatable. Large rooms for grain storage have been found at Gla (where grain seeds were recovered) and one of these rooms is even decorated with frescoes (Wright, 2004a: 458), something which could emphasise the salience of centralised storage. However, it is problematic to generalise using solely the evidence from Gla. Since only one seal stone was excavated there, it is questionable whether this site was an administration centre for agricultural produce. The range of cereals and pulses found archaeobotanically show greater diversity than what the archival emphasis on wheat would suggest. This supports a broader agricultural basis beyond the remit of central monitoring (Halstead, 1994: 208; Halstead, 2001: 38). Furthermore, based on Linear B evidence and modern ethnographic parallels Halstead (2001: 47) argues that the 'palatial' intervention in the production of cereal grain and flax as well as the contribution of oxen at Pylos can be contextualised within collaborative arrangements and sharecropping. However, in the absence of archaeological research on hamlets and farmsteads (Cherry and Davis, 1999: 95), it is difficult to be specific about the extent of local appropriation of surplus and self-sufficiency. Regional surveys are crucial for overcoming the top-down examination of Mycenaean state organisation (Galatay and Parkinson, 1999: 4). From the Pylos regional survey, it has been suggested that the relative growth of the sites of Ordines and Beylerbey was due to their status as special beneficiaries of the central administration (Bennet and Shelmerdine, 2001:138). However, it remains unclear whether Ordines and Beylerbey were passive or active participants in the state system. Although lately a model whereby 'palatial' elites permit non-palatial economic activity has superseded the traditional top-down form of Mycenaean totalitarian states resembling Near Eastern prototypes (Thomas, 2004: 115; Cherry and Davis, 1999: 93, 98), it is uncertain whether the 'non-palatial' sector was encouraged or simply tolerated by the centre. It is also possible that tensions other than the 'palace'/ 'non-palace' division dissected Mycenaean society. <heading>3b. Power Bases of Early States</heading>The overall intensification of economic activity during LHIIIA-B does not necessarily imply that the power basis of the political order was exclusively economic. Projects such as the drainage of lake Kopais and associated system of dikes (Wright, 2004a: 459) signify an imperative for more extensive agriculture and generation of surplus. On the other hand, however, there is no reason to agree with Small (1999: 44-45, 47), who influenced largely by Mesoamerican states, argues that Mycenaean states functioned as "estates" continually taping resources from the Mediterranean region to supply materials to their internal workshops. Similarly, the Linear B texts can be understood as selective monitoring systems without implying economic determinism. The Theban tablets provide information about ratios (wine, figs, and grain) and divine offerings (Shelmerdine, 2001: 356) with references to sacred places as if these were integral to 'palace' activity (Aravantinos, 1995: 618). This crucially highlights the possibility that economic and ritual activities were intertwined and both were sources of power for the political order. In addition, the question whether the act of management per se was an important power base for the central state machinery emerges here. Could the textual references to the extensive transfer of goods across the landscape (Galatay and Parkinson, 1999: 7) signify that the process of mobilising resources (human and material) was in itself important? The many different 'professions' mentioned in the Linear B tablets from the Northeastern Building at Pylos (Bendall, 2003: 224) could simply refer to just a few individuals with multiple skills rather than to craft specialists forced to work as labourers. Thus, textual evidence could reflect the management of multi-tasking rather than the organisation of many coerced labourers. These speculations hint that there could be alternative appreciations of bureaucracy, whereby the act of management, rather than just the outcome, mattered to the elites. In addition, Smith (2003: 278) argues that early states tended towards simplification rather than complexity. If that is the case, then the management of various activities could have aimed at simplifying the organisational structure of the state. Aravantinos (1999: 129) rightly points out that according to Theban Linear B texts high-ranking elites were also priests or divine representatives, making the distinction between socio-political and religious activities of little relevance to Mycenaeans. Furthermore, Shelmerdine (1999: 24; 2001: 358) emphasises that the ceremonial rather than the administrative role of the "wanax" is more clearly attestable. The monumental horns of consecration in mainland 'palatial' sites and the possible occurrence of official rituals at the 'palatial' central hearth also provide evidence for the religious legitimation of central authority (Whittaker, 2001: 359; Shelmerdine, 2001: 362-363). Therefore, it emerges that there is a strong link between elite status and ritual engagements enabling power legitimacy through religion. Flannery (1999: 15) stresses that "agents" who founded early states from chiefdoms tended to manipulate ideology to serve the necessities of state structure. This could be reflected in the increased evidence for disarticulation of earlier burials in the 'palatial' period as this could relate to elites legitimating their position through ancestor worship (Galou, 2005: 138; Voutsaki, 1993: 153-154) It also appears that Mycenaean elites had restricted access to some ceremonies. Isaakidou et al (2002: 90) have concluded from the analysis of sacrificial evidence at the Pylos 'palace' that although the number of cattle sacrificed could feed several hundred people, the small number of miniature cups associated with the sacrifice suggest that the ritual was restricted to an exclusive group. Both iconography and Linear B inform about frequent processions and 'palace'-provisioned banquets (Shelmerdine, 2001: 369, 371; Bennet, 2001: 33). Claims that feasting ceremonies were only held by the top echelons of society are rather difficult to make. As Thomas (2004: 116) notes, evidence for kylikes used widely in feasting have been found in great numbers from both major and minor sites such as Mycenae, Tsoungiza and Korakou. It is still possible that feasting ceremonies were encouraged top-down by the ruling elites on certain occasions. It is difficult to argue for a predominantly military legitimation of political authority. Field (1985: 365) questions whether the various fortress walls of Mycenaean citadels (Figure 4, Plate 3) were defensive strongholds since they lacked water supplies. Whittaker (2001: 360) suggests that fortifications symbolised the military might of the central ruler. However, many fortifications (e.g., at Mycenae and Tiryns) were extended after the first destruction in LHIIIB (Shelmerdine, 2001: 372) and this could suggest that wall construction was in response to particular circumstances rather than an integral aspect of constantly legitimating political power. It would be reasonable to assume that religious and military ideologies were interconnected although this argument rests partly on subjective interpretations of fresco iconographies (Whittaker, 2001: 359-360). It is questionable whether the entire social order revolved around one ruler as Dabney and Wright (1990: 47) claim. In early states, the rulers would have needed to gain the support of the population and be willing to engage in power-sharing (Flannery, 1999: 15). Besides, the "wanax" should not be solely associated with exclusive administrative control because the Linear B tablets from Pylos also mention various royal workers, religious personnel and the "damos" (community) with administrative authority and land privileges (Shelmerdine, 1999: 23-24). Therefore, Mycenaean state organisation could have involved various elites in leading roles and as Chapman (2005: 79) suggests multiple authorities and heterarchies. Although the emphasis on individuals may be the result of post-modern archaeological scholarship, the importance of leaders in affecting politico-economic structures, symbols and ideologies should not be underestimated (Wright, 2004b: 67, 69, 71, 80). Thus, the individual(s) at the top of Mycenaean decision-making must have been instrumental in shaping the state form and power base contingent on historical circumstances during the approximate period of eight to ten generations of Mycenaean state society (Table 1, page 3). Smith (2003: 146) argues convincingly for shifting rather than static relations of authority by drawing upon the Maya state. In other words, the source of power for early states did not need to be constant within a fixed politico-economic system but subject to conscious choice and change. <heading>4. Conclusions</heading>As detailed in the above commentary the EH archaeological record does not appear to approximate the scale and complexity of the five state-defining features. Evidence for architectural elaboration, large settlements and artefacts of unique artisanship during that phase most likely reflect petty chiefdoms. The Shaft Grave and massive fortifications of MH Kolonna do not substantiate claims to statehood because as Chapman (2005: 93) remarks centralised functions and class relations are questionable. The marking-out of social status in the exceptionally rich MHIII-LHI Shaft Graves at Mycenae does not equal class-consciousness because kinship ties remained structurally important. The absence of evidence for decision-making hierarchies and centralised politico-economic functions may in fact be a symptom of the precarious position of the Shaft Grave elites within a complex chiefdom society. In contrast to earlier periods, all of the state features become visible in the archaeological record during LHIIIA-B when societies appear to have passed the threshold from chiefdom to statehood. However, this essay has not argued for lines of continuity or discontinuity throughout the Bronze Age as it is ambiguous whether and how these affected the appearance and form of mainland states. To a certain extent, the point in time when the early state emerged depends on the sophistication of the definition of the state and the concentration of archaeological research on certain Mycenaean citadels. The Linear B tablets appear to have biased our understanding of state form creating a picture of highly centralised bureaucracies. Recent re-interpretations of the extent of centralisation have been based on disputable archaeological evidence for workshops, export industries and redistribution of agricultural surpluses in the 'palaces'. Furthermore, there have been arguments for broad 'non-palatial' agricultural activity and collaborative farming arrangements. It remains unclear exactly how 'palatial' and 'non-palatial' sectors interacted and whether this involved tensions, toleration or mutual interests. Additional cleavages in society may have intersected the 'palace'/'non-palace' divide. The form of Mycenaean states was neither predominantly nor exclusively economic. It remains a speculation whether the act of management per se constituted an important source of power without connotations for ever-increasing complexity and oppression. The link between top elites and ritual engagements may relate to various strategies for legitimating the political order. If there was a military official ideology then this was probably integrated within the wider religious sphere. Given that the centrality of the "wanax" beyond the ritual domain is questioned, various elites may have been important in shaping the state form with their decisions. If the existence of heterarchical structures can be ascertained by future research, then surely this will challenge the prevailing image of a strictly hierarchical organisational form. The emergent state form in mainland Greece was not dictated by systemic variables but was underpinned by issues and relations of power and authority as well as by strategies for legitimating the status quo. If various elites managed the state as a political form through decision-making, then the emergence of the early state and the form(s) it assumed were not accidental. Therefore, although it is possible to challenge the extent of centralised control and envisage diverse and interrelated power bases affecting state organisation, individual leaders may have been instrumental in defining both when the early state emerged and the kinds of form it took. 