This is an important question to attempting to address the viability of an island Archaeology whereby it is possible to implicate ethnography, models of interaction and the active role of material culture. There is scope to talk about island societies rather than islands because an island is not always a social unit. Besides, by examining a number of islands in the Neolithic we can address the very nature of Neolithic societies and contrast with the village-settlements in Thessaly and the salience of agriculture on land that was frequently flooded. We can agree with Broodbank that the seas united rather than divided Neolithic communities in the Cyclades. Firstly, the extreme barren environments of the Cycladic islands created an imperative for external links and contacts. Secondly, one would expect from ethnography a nexus of contacts between islands as part of survival strategies (exchange and exogamy). Thirdly, the archaeological similarities in material culture between different islands appear to reflect the social ties between islands communities. The procurement of obsidian from Melos and the Final Neolithic procurement of metals are also indications of intensive sea-faring. Since the Cycladic islands are inter-visible, one is inclined to want to cross to a nearby island. Given that the arable land on the Cycladic islands is very restricted, it is important for the inhabitants of these islands to invest in social storage so as to secure the help of neighbouring communities in times of crop-failure. In archaeological terms that cultural horizons that cover the Neolithic period are the following: <list>Late Neolithic Saliagos cultureFinal Neolithic Kephala cultureFinal Neolithic/ Early Bronze Age Grotta-Pelos culture.</list>The Saliagos culture is characterised by villages of substantial sizes and village communities in touch with one another. The concentration of Saliagos sites is in the Southern and Eastern Cyclades. These villages were definitely not self-sufficient but sent out special task groups to procure foods and resources at certain points in time. There is evidence of foreign flints and Melian obsidian on Saliagos villages. All these island communities appeared to have been sharing the same pottery because there is similarity in terms of decoration motifs (light-on-dark pottery). This is wider pottery horizon stretching from the East Aegean to Attica and Euboia and shows that there were far-reaching links between different sites during the Neolithic period. Thus, extensive interaction is not a distinct Cycladic feature. The Kephala sites are mainly concentrated on the island of Kea. It is interesting that they are poorly located for access to the best arable land. It is likely that factors, such as visibility from Euboia were important in the location of these sites. There are two pottery spheres of interaction: On Kea there are similarities with Attica and Euboia. On Zas, on the island of Naxon, there are links with Samos. It is unclear whether the travel routes for prestige items corresponded to directional travel. The Grotta-Pelos phase is characterised by expansion and fission. There are now smaller communities inhabiting these island and the links between sites increase. The networks of contact now become dense and there is a marked rise in the number of objects and exotic items being exchanged. As the South Eastern Cyclades develop their own localised identities, the dependence on external places may have diminished. The following points could be summarised: The similarity in pottery styles may reflect the desire to maintain contact with areas outside the Cyclades. Melos was not settled in the Neolithic but remained important for its obsidian. The Zas cave on Naxos possibly served as a ritual site. Overall, the Neolithic communities of the Cyclades were characterised by endless sea-travel and the Early Bronze Age ideology of sea-faring as we know it from the depiction of long boats on mirrors may actually make archaeologically visible a long sea-faring tradition with its roots in the Neolithic. 