A quotation from Haspels reads: I call him after the repeated subject of the Sphinx with her victim. Haimon the son of Kreon was the last and fairest victim of the Sphinx. There is not a comprehensive monograph on the Haimon Painter and the 1936 book by Haspels is still being used as the main textbook. Moreover, there is negative sentiment in the literature about the Haimon Painter. He is being discussed within the context of the degeneration of art and the Haimon Painter is being described productive rather than artistic. Haspels (1936: 131) emphasises that the conception of the decoration on the Haimon Painter vases is vague and there is no unity between the scenes. There are definite problems with the existing literature on the Haimon Painter. Firstly, there are a number of limitations relating to the art-historical approach. The emphasis has been on stylistic distinctiveness because style has been used for chronology. The attribution of vases to this painter has been based on detailed comparisons. Secondly, there are generalisations about the function and value of the Haimon lekythoi. They are assumed to be cheap oil flasks for the poor or for commodity trading. They are also assumed to relate to ritual and burial use just because the lekythoi shape is a funerary shape. Therefore, there is a disparity in the existing literature. On the one hand, the Haimon Painter has been a specific academic construction. On the other hand, the use and value of the Haimon lekythoi are discussed within the context of generalised assumptions. There is surely more we can learn from these pots. Beazley's legacy would make us look for the characteristic thin rays on the lekythoi shoulder. However, there are far more questions we ask about these vases. The main question we can address in this piece of research is whether we can learn about the function and importance of the Haimon lekythoi by examining their find locations. The circulation patters of these vases are particularly interesting as a preliminary search on the online Beazley archive revealed an intriguing geographic distribution: From Olbia in South Russion to Ampurias in Spain. The question that arises here then is why these cheap quality vessels be circulating so widely. Were they personal gifts? Were they widely traded because they were so cheap? It is necessary to analyse a number of archaeological contexts in depth. For instance, the Agora wells in Athens exemplify deposits from domestic rubbish. This contrasts with the presence of these vessels in major sanctuaries such as Delphi and with the ever-presence of Haimonian lekythoi in cemeteries in Attica and all over Greece. The Haimon Painter can be defined as a successful business person or as a smart marketer who manufactured vases in a mass-production manner at a time when the black-figured decoration technique was well established within classical Athens. He appears to have been targeting a particular market niche. Therefore, there was a certain social need or cultural taste for Haimonian lekythoi. It is more likely that they were used and valued as mere oil flasks rather than as Haimon Painter lekythoi. Hence, we need to better appreciate the archaeological contexts of the Haimon lekythoi and make inferences about the social value of these pots. Consequently, the existing art-historical approaches to the study of Greek Vases can be criticised and the theoretical and practical viability of a contextual approach can be tested. It ought to be emphasised that the link between the archaeological find context and the social significance of pot can be questioned. A number of wider academic debates are implicated. Firstly, the merits and shortcomings of the art-historical approach. All too often, the academic expertise on style has led to a neglect for the social significance of artefacts. Besides, there are limitations to the artistic study of pottery when poor quality vessels are being examined. Secondly, there are wide debates about the trade in Attic pottery. Vickers and Gill have argued that metal rather than clay vessels were valuable for trade. This could imply that Haimonian lekythoi were traded widely precisely because they were not valuable. It is moreover intriguing that most Haimonian lekythoi show heavy wear marks which may be due to pre-depositional usage. Quite possibly, these lekythoi were deposited after long period of household use. An understanding of the social significance of Haimonian lekythoi can enhance our understanding of the contemporary society. These second rate artefacts responded to a certain social demand and were not just manifestations of artistic decline. By examining specific information derived from archaeological contexts, it is possible to add to the existing knowledge about this lesser painter of classical Athens and reach some more concrete conclusions about the importance of these vases. 