<heading>Introduction</heading>Since Neolithic times, Man has dramatically altered the landscape of Britain from a former almost blanket forest cover more than 12,000 years ago to a predominantly open landscape today. The present landscape is made up of a variety of habitats. As well as woodland, there are also those created by Man, including moorlands (especially on the uplands), heathlands and grasslands. These are 'plagioclimatic communities', habitats that have been arrested a particular stage of succession, and are maintained under various forms of management pressure such as burning and grazing. Grazing comes in many forms. The major grazing animals of Britain today are cattle, ponies, sheep, deer, and rabbits. The main effects by herbivores are grazing, trampling, elimination and nutrient input. Grazers vary in what vegetation they eat and how. Sheep are able to crop the grass to a very small height (mm) due to their jaw and teeth structure, whereas cattle tear grass with their tongues. Ponies also crop the grass to a short height but are important in nutrient cycling of an area (Putman et al., 1989). In temperate systems, heath, acid grasslands and bogs experience lower grazing pressure during a year than woodlands (especially deciduous). The latter are used constantly thoughout the year for shelter and feeding. Various improved grasslands also have a high level of use by herbivores. Ponies spend half their time on grasslands over a year (Putman, 1986). Grazing animals have an immediate influence on the functioning and development of a community by altering the relative abundance of plant species. Often, palatable plants are eaten at expense of less-favoured coarse species and in time the latter comes to dominate a habitat. This report aims to give a brief overview of the effects of grazing pressure on upland moorland, lowland heathland, lowland deciduous forest and grassland habitats of Britain. The role of grazing in conservation is discussed. 'Browsing' is included in the meaning of 'grazing' in this review. <heading>Impacts of grazing on various habitats in Britain and their conservation</heading><heading>2.1 Upland moorland - Wales</heading><heading>2.1.1 Negative effects on vegetation</heading>Particularly since the Second World War, Britain's uplands have been subjected to intense grazing pressure by sheep, causing great loss of heather moor. As a consequence, there has been a general decline in biodiversity in the uplands, including Snowdonia National Park, a designated Special Site of Conservation. Sheep grazing in upland Wales is not beneficial to wildlife, as they prefer more palatable species and avoid siliceous plants e.g. Molinia caerulea (Purple Moorgrass) (Rieley & Page, 1990). M. caerulea and Nardus stricta (Mat-grass) thrive under high grazing pressure and soon become dominant in the community at the expense of more palatable species. For example, the Nardeto-Caricion bigelowii acid grasslands, which occur <1300m, are dominated by N. stricta. Their ranges have extended much across the upland regions due to grazing. Good et al. (1990) studied vegetation type in relation to sheep densities in north Wales. Under increased grazing pressure, bushes have decreased and recruitment prevented. In order to allow saplings to establish and mature, sheep density must be reduced for a prolonged period of time (e.g. 15 years). If grazing continues at high levels, conservation problems are likely to occur in the future. At Hafod y Llan farm, in the Snowdon National Nature Reserve, Wales, sheep density has increased over the past few decades. The pressure has led to severe decline in valuable habitats for wildlife such as mires and wet heaths, which support breeding curlews and lapwings. This is a typical case for many farmlands in Wales. In such areas, M. caerulea has become the dominant and poses a fire hazard. Dry heath, which supports red grouse and merlin, has also depleted, leaving non-diverse vegetation dominated by N. stricta. Regeneration of Quercus (Oak) woods and upland Ulmus (Ash) woods is prevented under high grazing pressure. <heading>2.1.2 Conservation</heading>Since the 1980s in England and Wales, the Government took on a new approach to more sustainable farming and has made efforts to remedy the situation by means of agri-environment schemes, such as ESA (Environmetnally Sensitive Areas) and CSS (Countryside Stewardship Scheme). In Wales, the National Trust and Countryside Council for Wales (CCW) have worked with farmers to conserve/enhance biodiversity and beauty, historically, improve and enhance habitats using the very element that caused the damage in the first place - grazing. Certain schemes included the pasture/woodland scheme, designed to create a chain of diverse woodland with open glades and scrub, maintained by light sheep grazing with some cattle. Welsh Black cattle are used to seasonally graze woodlands to keep down the Molinia. Improvements were observed to be fast on heather. At ADAS Pwllpeiran Experimental Farm, mid-Wales (a consultancy and research centre for land bases industries), low-level grazing was needed to prevent invasion of Sorbus aucuparia (Rowan) and Picea sitchensis (Sitka spruce) to maintain grasslands. Heath was improved to standard NVC H12 Calluna/Vaccinium community. Smallshire et al. (1997) advised suitably low stocking levels preferably by hardy animals (e.g. Galloway cattle and Scotch Blackface sheep) along with small-scale planned burns of dwarf shrub. They suggested for upland heather to be maintained in good condition requires a stocking rate of 0.075-0.225 livestock units (LUs) /ha. <heading>2.2 Lowland heathland</heading><heading>2.2.1  Negative effects on vegetation</heading>Heathland has low structural diversity (Putman, 1986). Heathlands of south Hampshire support much M. caerulea among the Calluna and Erica heaths. This grass can be deleterious to heathland communities as it can dominate and out-compete Calluna. Calluna is easily trampled and shoots are killed by contact with N rich urine. It is more common on less intensively grazed areas (King, 1960; Hunter, 1962). Scorching also affects Agrostis setacea (Bristle bent grass) and Erica species. Enrichment of the soil by excreta promotes growth of Carex panicea (Carnation Sedge), M. caerulea and A. tenuis (Common Bent) (Putman, 1986). Grazing may modify lichen distribution (Farrell, 1993), such as on the Breckland heaths. Sheep tend to congregate in certain areas and disturb lichen cover, and create bare patches of ground into which annual plant species such as Erophila verna (Common Whitlowgrass), Teesdalia nudicaulis (Shepherd's Cress) and Saxifraga tridactylites (Rue-leaved Saxifrage) can spread at the expense of other heathland vegetation. Trampling and dunging may cause significant damage to important reptile areas in heathland. It is essential that animals used in grazing regimes on heathland are kept away from reptile foci, particularly those of the rare Sand Lizard (English Nature, 1999). <heading>2.2.2 Conservation</heading>Over the last half-century or so, there has been dramatic decline in heathland across Europe; over 85% of British lowland heath has been lost (The Herpetological Conservation Trust, undated). Contributing to the decline is greatly reduced stock grazing (sheep, cattle and pony). The most important remaining heaths are in Dorset, Hampshire, Surrey and West Sussex. Lowland dry heathland supports many important fauna, often species with Biodiversity Action Plans, including various reptiles (e.g. Sand Lizard and Smooth Snake), birds and arthropods. M. caerulea can encroach on heathland and outcompete C. vulgaris, and is a problem in many upland moorlands of Britain. Milligan et al. (2004) suggested an Integrated Land Management Strategy for restoring moorland vegetation in upland Britain and keeping M. caerulea controlled. For restoring moorland, the Strategy advised cutting vegetation three times a year and employing a grazing regime equivalent to ESA levels at ~1.8 ewes ha -1. Grazing also lowers M. caerulea cover in bog valleys and other heathlands. <heading>2.3 Lowland deciduous forest - New Forest</heading>It's probable the New Forest has sustained heavy grazing pressure for most of 900 years, mainly from deer, ponies and cattle. Grazing has led to a lack of virtually any ground flora/shrub layer in New Forest woodland (Putman, 1986). There is complete loss of structural layer between 5-20 cm height, and a clear browse line at 200 cm (marks limit where browsing deer can reach). <heading>2.3.1 Effects on community structure and vegetation</heading>Putman et al. (1989) investigated changes in vegetation and fauna under heavy grazing pressure in an area of woodland in the New Forest. They found under grazing pressure, very little tree regeneration takes place and unpalatable species are favoured, maintaining open spaces. The ground-flora has poor diversity, with palatable species absent e.g. Mercurialis perennis (Dog's Mercury) and Galeobdolon luteum (Yellow Archangel). Brambles, ivy and other species are also completely eliminated. The herbaceous layer is sparse, dominatd by Oxalis acetosella (Wood-sorrel) and Euphorbia amygolanoides (Wood Spurge). Palatable shrubby species e.g. Corylus avallana (Hazel), Prunus spinosa (Blackthorn) and Cretaegus monogyna (Hawthorn) are eliminated and prevented from regenerating. There is virtual eradication of many shrub layer species e.g., Acer campestre (Field Maple), Salix caprea (Goat Willow), S. cinerea (Grey Willow), Rubus fruticosus agg. (Bramble), Rosa arvensis (Field Rose) and R. canina (Dog Rose). Ilex aquifolium (Holly) and Ulex (Gorse) are severely stunted and 'hedged'. Pteridium aquilinum (Bracken) gives some structure to the shrub layer (formed the bulk of 10-70 cm height), as it is largely unpalatable to herbivores. An ungrazed area has more structural diversity than an area grazed, due to plants regenerating at the ground floor, herbaceous and shrub layers and canopy. <heading>2.3.2 Impacts of grazing</heading>Under high grazing pressure, particularly palatable or grazing-intolerant species are lost. Species resistant to grazing (physical/chemical defences) or graze-tolerant (growth-form and physiology able to withstand a degree of defoliation) are encouraged. Although continuous grazing prevents secondary succession, there is no significant effect on the population age structure of the forest trees (Putman et al., 1989). Intensity of grazing varies over years. At times of relatively low herbivore density some regeneration may occur, enough to guarantee continuation of woodland cover. Vera (2002) claims livestock grazing leads to development of groves, not that forest disappears as a result. However, unrelenting use of woodlands with no regeneration leads to development of grasslands. As grazing affects the vegetation structure of woodland, this has effects on related ecological functioning such as faunal niches. Reduced structural diversity under grazing, means less cover and limited food for herbivorous and insectivorous mammals (Putman, 1986). Diversity of rodents within the woodlands, heathlands and grasslands of the New Forest is much smaller than equivalent areas outside (Putman et al., 1989). Tawny owls highly predate on wood mice - become specialised, as voles inavailable in the forest. Buzzards rely heavily on small rodents as prey, and success of breeding is directly related to abundance of prey in an area (Tubbs, 1974). Low breeding success with high grazing suggests high grazing causes decline in rodents and lower buzzard breeding. <heading>2.4 Grasslands</heading><heading>2.4.1 Effects on community structure and vegetation</heading><heading>Physical structure</heading>Grassland species structure and composition is also largely influenced by activities of herbivores. Plants often grazed grow as a short prostrate canopy under intensive grazing pressure. This is grazing avoidance behaviour. In this way, less biomass is 'apparent' and thus more resistant to grazing. This strategy increases the amount of photosynthesis and meristematic tissue that remains available for regrowth following defoliation (Dawson et al., 2000). Extensive lawns are a characteristic feature of the New Forest. The ponies are responsible for the close-cropped turf, to a height of no more than a few mm. The lawns lack the structural complexity of mature grasslands. However, ponies establish traditional latrine areas (Putman, 1986). No grazing occurs in the immediate vicinity of fresh dung. A mosaic of short-grass areas where ponies graze and relatively ungrazed but nutrient-rich latrine areas is created. In this way, the grazing behaviour of ponies leads to an increase in diversity of the sward itself, promoting a heterogenous community. <heading>Nutrient cycling</heading>Grazing can alter nutrient cycling and species composition of grassland. Cattle do not crop herbage as close as ponies, and so are forced to graze in ponies' latrines. Their dung therefore accumulates also in these areas (Putman, 1986). This results in patches of high nutrient input and low grazing and patches of continual loss of nutrients and high grazing. Over time, nutrients are continually transferred from areas grazed by ponies to latrine patches. Each sub-community has its own species composition: <list>Latrine areas - Ragwort (Senecio jacobaea), thistles (Cirsium arvense and C. vulgare) only occur here. Most dominant are L. perenne, Trifolium repens and Hypochoeris radicata (Common Cat's-ear)Short-grass areas - more abundant Poa compressa and Sagina procumbens (Procumbent Pearlwort).</list>K and P concentrations are higher in latrine areas, and is a major factor to differences in species composition between the sub-communities. Excretion also increases N content in patches of soil. Altered nutrient concentrations causes soil heterogeneity. Partial shoot defoliation may cause more release of organic compounds from roots especially lower molecular weight soluble exudates (Hamlen et al.,1972). Improved grasslands typically support more grasses than unimproved, as grazers increase soil nutrient availability by their excreta (Dawson et al., 2000). This favours bacterial growth in the soil. However, urine may scorch sensitive plant species. <heading>2.4.2 Impacts of grazing</heading><heading>Shrubs</heading>Grassland is maintained by specialist grass-eaters e.g. cattle, horses, sheep. Rabbits are also important grazers. Herbivores scrape up soil, and rooting of pigs, assisting seed germination of thorny shrubs including Juniperus (Juniper), Rosa, Rubus and Ulex (Vera, 2002). Thorny species may be vulnerable to grazing e.g. P. spinosa, C. monogyna and Rosa. Annual shoots are not spiny and are readily browsed by cows and sheep. However, these shrubs may not be totally eradicated from grassland if they can regenerate in under-grazed areas. Only P. spinosa advances rapidly in low or absent grazing by clonal spreading with runners. Development of scrub and groves is more a result of initial establishment of trees/shrubs after grazing has ended (Vera, 2002). <heading>Grasses</heading>Grasses are generally graze-tolerant and abundant in grasslands. Active shoot meristems and leaf growth zones are not damaged when a plant is grazed or mown as they are normally situated at the base of the leaf, enclosed by sheaths of older leaves (Schnyder et al., 2000). Grass roots often form arbuscular mycorrhizae (Newman & Reddell, 1987). External hyphae network may help compensate for loss of root mass due to defoliation, e.g. Lolium perenne (Perennial Rye-grass) (Allsopp, 1998). With defoliation, root mass, length and rate of elongation decrease (Holland & Dathing, 1990). Increased dead root material is a resource for decomposer organisms in the soil and could change microorganism community structure and act as subsequent source of nutrients for plant growth (Dawson et al., 2000). Grazing affects the pattern of vegetation production. Low levels stimulate regeneration and higher productivity, and higher levels suppress growth by lowering effective photosynthetic area. The New Forest grasslands sustain very high levels of grazing pressure, which have significant effects on productivity. <heading>Positive impacts</heading>Grant et al. (1996a) found floristic diversity of Molinia grassland was greater on grazed ground compared to ungrazed. Other broad-leaved grass species took advantage as Molinia was grazed and trampling caused higher frequency of bare ground. In Scotland Nardus grasslands, cattle and goats used N. stricta more than sheep. Under cattle grazing Nardus cover decreases, whereas sheep grazing increases both the cover and biomass of individual Nardus tussocks (Grant, 1996b). On a species-poor grassland in Oxfordshire, Bullock et al. (1994) found dicotyledonous plant species increased under increased sheep grazing pressure due to their high seed production and increase in gaps frequencies by trampling. On chalk grasslands, Brachypodium pinnatum (Tor-grass) and C. acaulon (Dwarf Thistle) are invasive, unpalatable species, which increase under heavy grazing pressure (Rieley & Page, 1990). After myxomatosis, when the rabbit population decreased in the early 1960s, lower grazing pressure allowed succession towards tall grassland and scrub. Goats have been used, even at the present day, to control Q. ilex (Holm Oak) on chalk rasslands (National Trust) (Countryfile, 2005), although numbers are managed to prevent erosion. <heading>DISCUSSION</heading>We have seen grazing can have a detrimental effect on woodland biodiversity and maintenance (Putman, 1986; Putman et al., 1989). The New Forest woodlands suffer from high levels of grazing by a range of herbivores. Structural diversity severely limited under heavy grazing by preventing regeneration, sometimes missing ground-flora and shrub layers all together. Such impacts on the vegetation have knock-on effects on associated wildlife. Under little grazing pressure, vegetational and faunal communities are more diverse. Intensive grazing on the uplands can cause community change from heather moorland to non-diverse acid grasslands, dominated by species such as Molinia and Nardus. Scorching by urine affects heath plants and promotes aggressive grasses. Trampling and excreta can be a problem on lowland heaths, putting wild fauna such as reptiles at risk. However, grazing can be an appropriate and necessary element in the maintenance of valuable habitats, particularly plagioclimatic communities. It has been seen that a degree of grazing is required to ensure their maintenance and high quality (Smallshire et al., 1997). Sustainable levels of grazing intensity are crucial in maintaining high quality habitats in the long term. If too high, a habitat will deteriorate; if too little grazing, a habitat may resume its successional pathway to woodland. For example, grazing may enhance diversity of grasslands by suppressing aggressive grasses and increasing the number of bare patches by trampling into which broad-leaved grasses may colonise and establish. Upland and lowland heath with >50% ground cover of dwarf shrubs may be maintained at high quality by subjection to low-level grazing to control invasive plants without suppressing heath vegetative growth and minimising the destructive effect of trampling. This practice is best used in conjunction with planned small-scale burns to vary dwarf shrub age structure. Other plagioclimatic communities including wetlands (reed swamps, fen meadows etc) and sand dunes are maintained by a certain level of disturbance. Wetlands and sand dunes may be maintained to a large extent by grazing (Rieley & Page, 1990). Vandvik et al. (2005) stress the importance of traditional land management regimes such as cutting, burning, grazing and turf-cutting, to preserve diversity of landscapes that are of high priority in Europe. <heading>Conclusions</heading>This has been only a brief review of some of the impacts grazing has on a few habitat types of Britain. However, it highlights the potential grazing pressure has to lower or maximise quality and value of certain habitats. Unfortunately, many of Britain's habitats have lost their economic value of the past, and depleted use of traditional management practices has led to their decline. Constant input of money into sustainable is required to ensure their existence. Grants administered by the Government, often in the form of agri-environment schemes, assist organisations to manage habitats appropriately. Over the past two decades, there has already been great improvement in reducing decline of habitats and wildlife diversity. To name but one example, such improvements may be seen on the lowland heaths of southern Britain, which have received much attention and management by various groups including English Nature, the RSPB and the Herpetological Conservation Trust. It is crucially important to preserve the mosaic of habitats and communities across the British landscape to protect and improve biodiversity in Britain, in which grazing can play a crucial role in sustainable land management in conjunction with other practices. 