<heading>Introduction</heading>A line transect was made along an ecocline in a valley at Broadmoor Heath, nr. Bracknell (OS 843627). The gradient spanned from dry heath on gravels on the plateau down the slope to wet mire on peat above clay on the valley floor. Quadrats were sampled at various points along the line to determine the NVC communities along the gradient. <heading>Method and materials</heading>A 180 m line transect was positioned from the plateau to the valley floor. Attempts were made to identify distinct communities along the gradient by eye ad sample them using quadrats. Quadrat samples were made at various points along this line and species present were recorded. <heading>Results & Analysis</heading>Five main vegetation types appeared to occur along the valley slope down to the valley floor. Species are listed in table 1.0. The data was used to classify the communities present according to the National Vegetation Classification (Rodwell, 1991). On the valley plateau, mature heather occurred on gravels. Podzols form a layer over the gravels, which persist down most of the slope until soil conditions become too wet. The plateau vegetation recorded was keyed out to H2 community (Calluna vulgaris-Ulex minor heath), typical in the south east of England. At the top of the slope, the gravels disappear and sandy soil occurs, still underlying the podzol. This region also bears typical H2 vegetation, with generally more grasses and lichens and U. minor still present. However, Pteridium aquilinum and Molinia caerulea appear, and changes in species composition begins to become apparent. <table/>Along the middle region of the slope, gleys replace the sand. This anaerobic environment encourages reduction of iron compounds by microorganisms in the soil. The community is now M16a (Erica tetralix-Sphagnum compactum wet heath, Molinietum caeruleae sub-community), in which U. minor has disappeared and E. tetralix and M. caerulea are more frequent, along with presence of Sphagnum compactum. Vegetation occurs on peat floating on clay soils at the bottom of the slope approaching the valley floor, keyed out to community M16. Sphagnum species form a constant and important structural element of this community. On the valley floor, Sphagnum forms a raft over waterlogged soils. Vegetation keyed out to M21 (Narthecium ossifragum-Sphagnum papillosum valley mire). Pools of water are frequent, although the classification of this community is uncertain due to being poorly described in the NVC. Rhynchospora alba occurred in wetter areas, marking a transition to Rhynchosporion pool vegetation (Rodwell, 1991). Potomageton occurred in such pools, and it was uncertain as to whether the pool vegetation was M29 (Hypericum elodes-Potamogeton polygonifolius soakway) or M30 (related vegetation of seasonally-inundated habitats Hydrocotylo-Baldellion) due to poor descriptions. <heading>Discussion</heading>Unfortunately, for each region there was not a minimum of five quadrats sampled. However, the results produced show a series of transition zones along an ecotone. This was especially apparent at the top of the slope, where H2 community occurred but with new species, not described in the NVC. There may be scope to divide H2 into sub communities, i.e. with or without Pteridium and Molinia. Certain communities were not described in great detail, leading to difficulties in aligning them to NVC communities, e.g. whether pools of water at the bottom of the valley slope were classified as M29 or M30. M29 is apparently not present in the south east of Britain, and distribution of M30 is not really stated. As an incidental note, although not sampled, W4 (Betula-Molinia woodland) appeared to occur along the centre of the valley floor. The data shows a typical zonation around a lowland valley bog in southern England, as described by Rodwell et al. (1991) in M21a section. Such ecolines comprise transitional communities, which are at times problematic to key out to NVC. 