<heading>Question 1</heading>Lastminute.com business orientation has changed from product to marketing orientation. Product orientation focuses on goods. Marketing orientation focuses on buyer's need and satisfaction. Lastminute.com was product orientation as it sought to source and sell whatever products it could. Its brand name was not familiar to people. Its reputation and customer's loyalty were not established. It did not have large budget on marketing. It was still in the introduction part of the product life cycle and so it had low sales and profit. It took time to draw people attention and really tried it. The company was generating widespread awareness of the product and adjust price. The company wanted to sell more to increase reputation and gain profit so as to obtain more resources. It worked to increase and improve its quality levels. Later, lastminute.com has been possible to develop more of a marketing orientation as its brand name and reputation have developed. Also, partnerships have evolved with suppliers who have come to regonise the potential of the company. Lastminute.com changes its direction and focuses more on customers. It assumes that customers are not necessarily price driving but are looking for the total offering that best fits their needs. Thus the company has to define those needs and provide suitable offerings. This assumption meets lastminute.com operation which focuses on value and service rather than price. And "inspiration and solutions" become a good description of lastminute.com's core service. Lastminute.com create a database to group customers into common needs and wants, so the company can produce a specifically targeted marketing package that best suits the needs of one group. The company will make sure the customers are ready before it launches a new product. The advertisements in the wed site changes from time to time to meet customer needs. It also provides feedback form to collect opinions and allow communication, so they know what their customers need. Company reputation and customer loyalty have developed. The company tries to gain profit through customer satisfaction and loyalty. It is in the growth or maturity section of the product life cycle and so it has to consolidate loyal consumers and modify products. <heading>Question 2</heading>After understanding the nature of customers and their needs and wants, the company needs to act on that information so as to develop and implement marketing activities. These activities will actually deliver something to the customer. The means by which such ideas are turned into reality is the marketing mix. The 4Ps include product, price, place and promotion. Product--- covers everything to do with the creation, development and management of products. It includes new product development, product management, product features or benefits, branding, packaging and after-sales service. Price------ a flexible and dangerous element of the marketing mix. It includes costs, profitability, value for money, competitiveness and incentives. Place------ covers a wide variety of topics concerned with the movement of goods from one place to another. It includes access to target market, channel structure and management, retailer image and logistics. Promotion--- something about communication. It includes developing promotional mixes, advertising management, sales management, public relations management and direct marketing. Division of lastminute.com marketing activities: Product A product portfolio has evolved over time as the company strives to be able to offer everything for the perfect experience. Being quick and fast with new offering and consistently true to the brand. Make sure customers are ready before the company adds a new product or service. Provide online feedback form on products and services and the company is very responsive to the view expressed in this way. Price A mission statement saying that the company will offer people the chance to live their dreams at unbeatable prices. Send customers weekly newsletter via e-mail which is a cost effective way. It does not need other advertising media and so save money. The production cost is low. Time means money to some people, lastminute.com induce a positive image of a shortcut to good times with their friends and able to save customer's time. Timing is a key issue lastminute.com's day-to-day marketing. Place Negotiate with supplier to make sure that transaction and service delivery to take place delivery. Develops a technical department to maintain and manage the internet infrastructure, which allows transactions to take place. Deliver goods to customers on time. It provides many transaction ways to customers. Promotion Develops a technical department to maintain and manage the internet infrastructure, which allows communication to take place between the company and its customers. Entered into a partnership with Granada Media so as to generate awareness and traffic from complementary media. Advertising in the website changes throughout the day to meet customer needs. Distribute weekly newsletter via e-mail. There are different departments (production, purchasing, marketing, human resources, finance, technical and research and development) in the company. Various departments interact with other to create a consistent marketing mix. They are interdependence. Each department has its own responsibility There are supply managers whose departments source the products and services that the company sells. Business development department that manages strategic issues, e.g. partnership with other companies. Marketing department responsible for the complete range of well-integrated marketing activities. Technical department maintain and the internet infrastructure. Research and development department carries out market research and analyse feedback by customers. The combination of the 4Ps used needs to give the company a competitive edge. The edge may be created mainly through one element of the mix or a combination of them. Lastminute.com always provides new services and products with unbeatable price (product & price). It provides 24-hour internet ordering and delivery service (place). It provides many convenient and fast transaction ways to customers (price & place). Send newsletter via e-mail to customers to tell them more about the company (price & promotion) Consistently true to the brand The other 3Ps of the services marketing mix are people, processes and physical evidence. People---- helps in creating and delivering the products. Services often depend on how people perform them. Processes--- about manufacturing process, how service is delivered and what quality controls can be built so that customers can be confident that they know what to expect each time they consume. Physical evidence--- relevance to those who maintain premises form which a service is sold or delivered. The 3Ps are going to impose on and will be reflected in discussing applications of the original 4Ps. Make sure the products are delivered to the customers on time and without any damages. The delivery man should deliver the products to customer on time and talk to them in a polite way. Politely response to the feedback and make improvements. Create an attractive web site with clear instructions and detailed information. Never cheat or try to take advantages from customers by providing low quality products or services. <heading>Question 3</heading>Advantages Has opportunity to showcase products on a global basis in an open competitive market. May potentially sell goods and services to a global market. As internet use is international, the products can widely spread easily. Customers may click on the link in the intermediary web page and so more people will know about our company. Lower cost to advertise in the internet than in tv, magazine or newspaper. Freezing us from the constraint of geographic catchment areas as the agent will help in delivery. Partner with existing digital or internet brand can help promoting our company and products. Also to increase reputation. Internet penetrates among the population rise and there is a trend for increasing use of e-shopping. An internet-based intermediary has an existing customer database and it helps to deliver products to target segment. The agent is more professional and has more information on selling certain products or services. Provide another transaction way, a faster reception and processing of orders. Disadvantages Need to pay commission to the agent and so the production cost will increase. The agent may add a margin to the price of good and so the actual value of good cannot be reflected. Relationship with agent may break. There are still many people do not trust transaction through internet. The internet-based intermediary has many suppliers and there is great competition. <heading>Question 4</heading>Carl Lyons meant: There are no specific laws or regulations to become an internet-based intermediary. Everyone who has resources can set up a company like this. But it is hard to succeed because there are so many competitors and it is really hard to establish reputation and gain customer loyalty. I believe that it is true, The market has already been shakeout. Thus it is hard for the company to develop even you can enter the market. It takes a long time for the company to establish reputation and customer loyalty. A company should be well-structured. Various departments should be interdependence. There should be interaction and provide mutual support among departments. A well-structured customer database is essential for competitive advantage. Only an established brand name can recruit new customers easily to its database. Newer competitors find it hard to because consumers do not want to volunteer personal details to companies they do not know well. A successful company needs to maintain a good reputation and positive image and provide good service all the time. Every product has its own product life cycle, many decisions and strategies have to be made to maintain the product life. Sometimes doing business depends on luck and timing. If you enter the market at a good time, you may earn a lot within a short period of time. 