Insufficient intake of certain amount of nutrients will lead to deficiency diseases, but excessive intake will also cause undesirable effects. Reading University students between the ages of 19 and 23 years took part in a survey in Reading University in October 2004. They were asked to fill in a food frequency questionnaire to access their current typical diet and they represent 95% of the whole population in the university. The results are used to access their nutrients intakes. The Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy (COMA) set a range of intakes called Dietary Reference Values (DRV) used for groups and individuals as guidance. The range is normally distributed with: a mean requirement or Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) Reference Nutrient Intake (RNI), located two standard diviations above EAR, represents the amount sufficient or more than sufficient for the nutritional needs of most individuals in a group Lower Reference Nutrient Intake (LRNI), located two standard diviations below EAR, represents the lowest intakes which will meet the needs of some individuals in a group For male and female Reading students, both their EAR for energy meet the values set by the Panel of COMA. However, energy expenditure depends on basal metabolic rate (BMR), which is the rate person uses energy to maintain the basic function of the body, physical activity level (PAR), body size and composition. Thus different people will have different energy requirements and in turn different energy intakes. That is also why there is no RNI set for fats and carbohydrates (including sugar and starch). The dietary intakes of these nutrients are expressed as percentage of daily total energy intake and so it is hard to judge whether students' daily intakes are optimum. Half of the 95% population's alcohol intake exceeds the recommended RNI. Although alcohol is a good source of energy and beneficial to heart if take in small amount, high intake will conversely bring many adverse effects. For the increasing cases of coronary heart disease and obesity, it is advised that not to take too much fats, sugar and alcohol in our diets. In fact, our diets should be high in dietary fibre. Diet high in dietary fibre is also low in fat and helps improve bowel function. The dietary reference value of dietary fibre ranges from 12-24g/day where the students' range is 7.1-27.9g/day. This shows that some students have taken enough dietary fibre a day but some have not. The protein intake is quite high for Reading University students. There are 88% females of the 95% population and even the whole 95% males have taken protein which is higher than the recommended RNI. These proportion of students have taken an amount more than sufficient to meet their daily nutrition needs to be healthy and prevent from suffering deficiency diseases. Protein is important for body-building, repair and body defence. However, excessive intakes of protein may be associated with health risks. There is evidence that excessive dietary protein may contribute to demineralization of bone and people having vegetarian diets containing with lower protein intakes exhibit lower blood pressure. There is firm evidence that excessive protein intakes also increases glomerular filtration rate and lead to decline in renal function. Students have taken enough minerals except potassium, magnesium and iron. An average of 70% of the 95% students took these minerals less than the recommended RNI. These 70% students will have a chance that they may not consume sufficient amount. The mean daily intake of other minerals like sodium (Na: 2176 mg/d) and calcium (Ca: 988 mg/d) have already exceed the recommended RNI (Na: 1600 mg/d, Ca: 700 mg/d for both sexes). This shows that a high proportion of students have taken minerals which is more than the sufficient amount and they will have less chance to suffer from deficiency diseases, but excessive intake of minerals may be toxic to our bodies. The daily intakes of vitamins have a skewed distribution to the right which means a large proportion of students took more than enough vitamins a day. On average, about 73% of the students took vitamins which is higher than the recommended RNI. We should have a balanced diet to become healthy. At the same time, we need to be careful that we are taking right amount of each kind of nutrient. 