<list><heading>Perfect competition arises when</heading>1.) there are many firms, each selling an identical product2.) there are many buyers3.) there are no restrictions on entry into the industry4.) firms and buyers are completely informed about the prices of the products of each firm in the industry</list><list><heading>Monopoly arises when</heading>there is only one firm and there is no close substitutethere are many buyersthere are barriers to entryincomplete information </list>Firms in perfect competition are said to be price takers, i.e. they cannot influence the price of a good or service. Perfectly competitive firms are price takers because each firm produces a tiny fraction of the total output of a particular good and buyers are well informed about the prices of other firms. However, monopolies can charge whatever they like as they are the only firm which provides that good or service. In perfect competition, price is independent of the quantity sold and so the change in total revenue resulting from a one-unit increase in the quantity sold equals price. Therefore marginal revenue equals price and marginal revenue does not vary with quantity. Also, the demand curve for individual firm is horizontal, i.e. perfectly elastic, as the firm is a price taker. However, the market demand curve for the entire industry is downward slopping. The monopoly faces the downward slopping demand curve too. This means price changes as quantity changes and marginal revenue will be less than price. In perfect competition, firm's supply curve is based on the marginal cost curve. The industry supply curve is the sum of the firm's supply / marginal cost curves. For monopoly, the industry supply curve becomes the marginal cost curve of the firm. Let us see the diagram below, <figure/>In perfect competition, the market equilibrium occurs where the supply curve and the demand curve intersect. Each firm takes the price P C and maximizes its profit by producing the output at which its own marginal cost equals the price. As each firm is a small part of the total industry, there is no incentive for any firm to try to manipulate the price by varying its output. If the industry is monopolized, the industry supply curve becomes the MC curve of the firm. The new monopolized industry will maximizes its profit by producing Q M, where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. As marginal revenue is below the demand curve, output Q M is smaller than output Q C. The monopoly charges the highest price P M for which output Q M can be sold. Overall speaking, monopoly restricts its output and charges a higher price compared with a perfectly competitive industry. That is why monopoly is less efficient. Monopoly is a form of market failure and is less efficient than competition. Market failure prevents some of the gains from trade from being achieved. <figure/>Under perfect competition, quantity produced is Q C. Consumers pay P C for each unit bought and obtain a consumer surplus 1 represented by the blue triangle. <figure/>A monopolistic industry will restrict output to Q M and sell that output at a price of P M. Consumer surplus will be reduced to the smaller blue triangle. Consumers lose partly by having to pay more for what is available and by getting less of the good. Some of the loss in consumer surplus accures to the monopoly. Thus the monopoly gets the difference between the higher price (P M) and P C on the quantity sold (Q M), i.e. the monopoly has taken the red rectangle part of the consumer surplus. This portion of loss of consumer surplus is not a loss to society and hence is not a loss of efficiency. It is just a redistribution from consumer surplus to the monopolist. As output has been restricted, the rest of the consumer surplus becomes a loss. Actually the total loss resulting from the lower monopoly output (Q M) is the grey triangle. The part of the grey triangle above P C is the loss of consumer surplus and the part of the triangle below P C is a loss to the producer (a loss of producer surplus 2). The grey triangle, which measures the total loss of both consumer and producer surplus, is called the deadweight loss. Deadweight loss measures the loss of allocative efficiency as the reduction in consumer and producer surplus resulting from a restriction of output below its efficient level. A monopoly's reduced output and higher price results in the monopoly capturing some of the consumer surplus. It also results in the elimination of the producer and the consumer surplus on the output that a competitive industry would have produced but that the monopoly does not. Deadweight loss measures the degree of market failure or allocative inefficiency created by a monopoly. Usually a monopoly will produces an output below that at which average total cost is at a minimum. However, even the monopoly really does so, consumers still do not have the opportunity of buying the good at that price. There is a possibility that a monopoly will not produce any deadweight loss. That is the time when the monopoly is perfectly price discriminating. The more perfectly the monopoly can price discriminate, the closer its output gets to the competitive output. If a monopoly can perfectly price discriminate, it will charge a different prices to different consumers according to their willingness to pay on each unit sold. The monopoly can also increase the quantity of output to exactly the same as the perfectly competitive industry. When the monopoly perfectly price discriminates, its marginal revenue curve is the same as the demand curve. The last item sold will cost P C which is the same as its marginal cost. 1 The difference between the value of a good and its price is consumer surplus. 2 The difference between a producer's revenue and the opportunity cost of production is the producer surplus. 