A firm is an institution that hires factors of production and that organizes those factors to produce and sell goods and services. Modern firms are often made up of a number of individuals and are interchangeable with market. Individuals interact with each other in order to make decisions. That's also an obvious difference from the traditional firm as traditional firm only make decision in response to market price. But as there are more small individuals, communication problems arise. Incomplete information and misunderstanding onset conflicts. The 'principal-agent problem' (P-A problem) takes place when people (principals), as a result of lack of knowledge, cannot ensure that their best interests are ensured by their agents. Then who are the principals and who are their agents? The relationship between the shareholders and its managers is an agency relationship. The shareholders (the principals) want the managers (agents) to act in the shareholders' best interest. We can a software company, Microsoft as an example. The Microsoft Corporation senior managers (the principals) and programmers working on the next version of Windows (agent) is an agency relationship. Microsoft managers want the programmers to work towards their managerial goals. The P-A problem in a firm occurs because it is difficult to monitor the activities of all employees. In a large company, the flow of information can be slow and misleading. Some firms or some forms of business organization are complex. There is a long chain of connections, interests and procedures from the shareholders. Although this takes up the advantage of division of labour, this also generates two P-A problems: <list>1. Separation of ownership and control2. Monitoring and motivation problems</list>The separation of ownership from control is a problem if managers pursue different goals from shareholders. Sometimes shareholders (the principals) want the firm to maximize profit but the managers (agents) have their own goals such as maximizing salaries. The monitoring and motivation problems raise costs and reduce profits. It is more difficult for managers (principals) to monitor their workforce (agents) in complex organizations. Workers' utility falls as they do more work for a given weekly wage and they may do less work if they are not closely monitored by their managers. Any problems arise within the firm will affect its efficiency and in turn reduce the profit. In order to raise efficiency and avoid the problems of limited information, a rich variety of institutions, contractual relationships and compensation schemes have been devised in business organizations. Actually, the P-A problem cannot be solved just by giving orders and having them obeyed. The firm's owner (principals) must find a way to induce the managers (agents) to pursue the maximum possible profit and the managers (principals) must induce the workers (agents) to work efficiently. The four main ways are ownership, incentive pay, long-term contracts and internal restructuring. The structure and behaviour of the firms are made to minimize the P-A problems. The firm devises incentive mechanisms and structures such that the agents' behaviour is consistent with the objectives of the principal and or the monitoring role is easier. <heading>Ownership</heading>Giving a manager or worker ownership of a business is a way of improving job performance and increasing a firm's profits. The manager (agent) becomes more like the owner (principal) and profit maximization will become a more important management goal. Many large retails stores now offer staff cheap share purchase options. <heading>Incentive pay </heading>Staff are assessed annually against a wide variety of performance criteria. Many firms reward managers and staff by offering separate bonuses for meeting production or sales targets. These types of incentive pay schemes help focus the goals of all employees on profit maximization, reducing the P-A problem. <heading>Long-term contracts</heading>The contracts tie the long-term fortunes of managers and workers to the success of the owners of the firms. They also help cut labour cost. <heading>Internal structure</heading>Monitoring and motivating your workforce is easier in a small organization as the owner is also the manager and knows all the staff personally. By changing the internal structure of the firm, the flow of information and the benefits of team work and specialization can be increased. This also reduces the monitoring costs and makes the performance of one division less dependent on that of another. Nowadays, large companies always dominate trade although there are more chances for the P-A problem to occur. It is because those companies are large in scale and low cost capital will be available. They have better planning and are easier to carry out the schemes which cope with the P-A problem. Actually solving the P-A problem is one of the means to reduce cost too. 