<heading>Question 1</heading>A company needs to be aware of its external environment as the forces within the environment will affect the company and its business strategies. Understanding the environment helps the organization to identify key issues and ways of coping with change and complexity. According to the square onion diagram, the external environment can be divided into macro-environment and industry. The macro-environment consists of broad environment factors which influence the organisation and the success and failure of strategies. Those factors includes political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal environment (PESTEL). The industry is a group of organisations producing the same products or services including potential entrants, competitors, customers, suppliers and substitutes (Five Forces). Analysing the industry enables the organisation to know its position and improve its position relative to competitors. <heading>Political</heading>---This includes Government regulations which set a boundary on what supermarkets can and cannot do. Food labelling regulations relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs for sale to the ultimate consumer, such as The Food Labelling Regulations 1996 (Source: Food Standards Agency). Tesco labels and advertises its own-brand products. It needs to provide adequate and correct information to consumers. For examples, under the low GI diet and low salt campaign recently, GI labeling and salt content should be included. As Tesco produces its own-brand food products, it must make sure that the quality of raw materials and products meet the standards, such as British Standards ISO 9000:2000, ISO 9001:2000 and ISO 9004:2000. (Source: British Standards Online) Food hygiene and safety regulations providing hygiene legislation for safe production, transport and retail of food, such as The Food Safety Act 1990 (Source: Food Standards Agency). Tesco provides home grocery delivery. The transportation processes is crucial to keep the products safe to consume when they reach consumers. Most businesses should add VAT to products and services they sell and different taxation policies imply to different goods (Source: HM Revenue and Custom). Tesco sells wines, spirits and tobacco and also provide retailing service. Thus it must calculate the tax charged carefully and correctly. Legislations on marketing standard such as The Trade Descriptions Act 1968, The Consumer Protection Act 1987, The Prices Act 1974 (Source: Food Standards Agency). Tesco makes a lot of advertisings. The information provided should be clear that will not mislead customers. Also, there are loads of products sell in store. Price for each product should be displayed. Tesco is the UK's biggest private sector employer with over 250,000 people, and it is going to employ a further 116,000 internationally (Source: Tesco plc). Thus some employment laws must be aware. Also, there are health and safety issues to make sure employees have the rights to work in a safe environment. (Source: Health and Safety Executive). <heading>Economic</heading>---It reflects the overall economic health of UK and is important in driving our company's cost base and operation. According to the survey from Office for National Statistic: Household expenditure rose by 0.5 per cent, following 0.4 per cent growth in the second quarter of 2005. UK households spent an average of £434 per week in 2004-05 where food and non-alcoholic drink purchases contributed £45 to weekly household expenditure. Average earnings roses by 4% from 2003 to 2005. Unemployment rate drops from 5.0% in 2003 to 4.7% in September 2005. Inflation rate in 2005 is almost the same as in 2003. These statistics revealed the higher living standard in UK and growth in economy. Tesco has to adjust the products sold, source out fresher and higher quality produce to cope with the rising living standard. <heading>Socio-cultural</heading>---It represents the demographic characteristics, norms, values and customs of the general population. The demographic change is even the key force as it will affect the demand for particular products and services directly. It also exerts effects in a company's approach to marketing and advertising. UK had a growing population where the average growth per year has been 0.4 per cent since mid-2001. The total population in mid-2004 59.8 million (Source: Office for National Statistic). Thus there is a need of more stores and larger amount of goods. Provides different marketing and advertising approaches to target new segments. UK has an ageing population as a result of decline in both fertility rates and in the mortality rate. This has led to a declining proportion of the population aged under 16 and an increasing proportion aged 65 and over. (Source: Office for National Statistic) Offers more varieties of fresh fruits, vegetables and low-fat products as people are more aware of having a healthy diet. Larger range of organic products as people's demand of natural and non-GM products increases. Consumers' appetite for out-of-season vegetables forces Tesco to source supplies from other countries, which may increase cost. Builds service lines and seeks employees in India as UK workforce is much more expensive. <heading>Technological</heading>---Advance in science and information technology can affect all aspects of the business. New machineries for larger scale of production as population increases. Better quality and more fashionable clothes. Provides an attractive and informational website and updates it from time to time as there is an increasing use of internet. <heading>Competitions</heading>---Other organizations perform the same function and providing goods or services to the same customers are defined as competitors. Strong competitors and tight competition with other big supermarkets: Asda, Sainsbury's and Morrisons. Great number of non-food competitors such as Dixons, WHSmith and HMV. <heading>Customers</heading>---People and organizations who acquire goods and services from our company are customers. Household food shopping continues to be dominated by supermarket. More than 95% of people buy most of their food from supermarkets. Thus customers are so important to Tesco and they determine its success. <heading>Suppliers</heading>---They are those who provide raw materials and products. Maintains a good relationship with suppliers to ensure constant supply, otherwise customers cannot find what they need and will switch to other competitors. <heading>Stakeholders</heading>--- Individuals, groups or organizations with an interest in the company. Main stakeholders are customers, suppliers and employees. Customers emphasize on quality, safety and availability of goods and services. Suppliers are concerned about payment of debt of company and availability of liquidity. Employees expect work satisfaction, pay and good supervision. Tesco has to make a great effort to satisfy the main stakeholders. <heading>Question 2</heading>Knowing the strategic choices is important for a business unit looking to achieve advantage. The strategy clock is the competitive strategy options for the SBU. Most company will attain competitive advantage through price and differentiation. Tesco is in route 3 of the strategic clock which is a hybrid strategy. It seeks simultaneously to achieve differentiation and a price lower than that of competitors. Differentiates itself to provide large range of goods and services: grocery, non-food including electrical, stationary, clothing etc. and retailing services such as financial services, insurance and telecommunications packages. Has various own brands, from Value to Finest and lifestyle ranges like Organic, Free From and Healthy Living to enable customers to buy products to compliment their lifestyle (Source: Tesco plc). Continually innovating and investing in new lines to increase choice for customers (Source: Tesco plc). Compares price with other competitors by price check (Source: Tesco.com) and posters in store to show that it offers a lower price. Tesco always need to understand competitiors, segments operating/target in and what customers in that segment value in order to succeed. Some rivals are in the same position while some are in different position on the strategy clock as Tesco. Asda is also in route 3 as it provides large range of food, non-food products and retail services such as financial services and travel. So it is a great competitor of Tesco. Sainsbury's is in route 5 on the strategy clock. It also differentiates itself in providing both food, non-food and retail services such as Sainsbury's property and Sainsbury's bank, but of slightly higher price (Source: J Sainsbury plc). Morrisons is in route 2 on the strategy clock. Its strategy is on selling predominantly food, at low prices, and doing so only from large stores (Source: Morrisons). Tesco has changed position on the strategy clock over time. Was started in route 1 in 1920-60s as it aimed to sell large volume of products at a very low price. Tesco only sold grocery products in the beginning. Moved up to route 2 in 1970-80s as it opened its first petrol stations to have a bit more differentiation and introduce price-cutting campaign. In 1990s-present, Tesco moved up to route 3 to provide a wide ranges of products and services. (Source: Tesco plc) <heading>Question 3</heading>Tesco's competitors are Asda, Sainsbury's, Morrisons, Marks and Spencer and Waitrose <figure/>From perceptual map, Tesco and Asda both offer a wide range of products including groceries and retail services at a very low price. Sainsbury has slightly less product range and products are higher in price. Morrisons offer a low price but only sell food. Marks & Spencer only sell own-brand food and clothing at a high price Waitrose's products are at high price and mainly sell food. Supermarkets can differentiate themselves base on marketing, products and/or resources. Tesco differentiate itself base on all marketing, products and competences/resources. Marketing based: Organised online order system through Tesco.com Corporate social responsibility by reducing emissions from our transport distribution and refrigerant used (Source: Tesco plc). Introduce GI labelling on food products. Product based: Offers various own-brand products---Value, Healthy Living, Finest, Organic, 'Free From' and Fairtrade. Competence/resource based: It has a strong and stable core as it has long history and accumulated experience. Has knowledge of what customers value by building a complete data base through Tesco Clubcard scheme. Large number of workforce available. It is important that Tesco can sustain its competitive advantages. Sustaining low price competitive advantage is very difficult. Tesco has economy of scale and can buy in and produce high volume of products at once as it has lots of customers. This leads to a low cost base and being the cost leader. However, it is easily to loss tightness with customers of knowing what they need and value. Sustaining differentiation requires a company to have core competences that cannot be copied. It is crucial that Tesco can give customers what they want and able to move around the strategy clock. Differentiation which provide wider range of products so that customers can take away their eyes on price. <heading>Question 4A catalogue of strategic options for growth/development directions</heading><table/>Tesco has taken product development which offers new products or services like non-food, finance, insurance and telecoms as well as groceries to existing customers. As Tesco has existing data base, it is easy for them to understand their customers' and follow the changing needs of them by introducing new services and products. Expand product range by launching own-brand Value, Healthy Living, Organic, Finest, 'Free-From' products and Fairtrade range. (Source: Tesco plc) Partnership between Clubcard and AIRMILES to introduce new use of Clubcard points. (Source: Business To Business Travel Websites Group) Tesco has also taken market development as to target new customers and niche. Launches Tesco.com to sell products through internet to target those customers who do not have cars, do not have time to go shopping and buy large volume at one time. Has pushed into 11 other countries in Europe and Asia and focus on giving local customers what they want. Partnership with eDietsUK to launch 'Tesco Diets' which provides nutrition and healthy diets advice online to target segment who aware of weight and want to loss weight.(Source: Tesco Diets) Methods of development used to achieve the chosen development directions are internal development (develop new products in different own-brand ranges and new markets with the use of its existing data base) and partnerships (to pull resources together and explore new possibilities). Tesco's development directions are the same as Carrefour or Wal-Mart. Carrefour also sells a wide variety of goods in addition to food and sells own-brand products. it intends to increase the range of products (product development) Expanding its operations aboard into 28 countries (market development) Wal-Mart offers food, non-food such as books and electronics and retail services such as financial services and vacations (market development). (Source: Wal-Mart Stores) Operates in 14 other countries in different parts of the world (market development). (Source: Wal-Mart Stores) <heading>Question 5</heading>There are three success criteria by which strategies should be judged: suitability, acceptability and feasibility. These criteria can also be used explicitly to evaluate strategies as part of a process of strategy selection. Suitability is concerned with whether the strategies address the circumstances in which an organization is operating - the strategic options. How suitable, logical and likely are they to work. Acceptability is concerned with the performance outcomes/results of the strategies. Feasibility is concerned with how practical are those strategies and whether the organization has the resources/competences to deliver the strategies. <table/>To assess acceptability and feasibility, Tesco might use: Profitability analysis to understand the financial return of investing new products and markets Both financial and non-financial cost benefits Shareholder value analysis to impact of new strategies on shareholder value and to provide a quick look at the acceptability. Risk facing in purchasing a particular strategy as this will affect the growth. Stakeholder reactions to understand political dimension of strategy. Stakeholders are important to Tesco, it will be useful to understand the likely reactions of stakeholders to new strategies, the ability to manage those reactions and hence the acceptability of a strategy. Funds flow forecasting to identify the finance required and available, e.g. the amount of money needed for Tesco to buy in and invest new products. Identification of resources and competences required for the strategies. <heading>Question 6</heading>Tesco has been so successful in the UK market as it offers large range of products at low price. Its Clubcard Scheme which award customers with cash coupons attract customers to shop again. 