<heading>Question 1</heading>British Steel was one of the UK's largest and best known steel manufacturing companies. It became a privatised manufacturing company in 1989 and globalised in 1993. In October 1999, British Steel merged with Hoogovens (a Dutch company) and renamed as Corus. A company needs to be aware of its external environment as the forces within the environment will affect the company and its business strategies. Understanding the environment help the organization to identify key issues and ways of coping with change and complexity. The external environment can be divided into macro-environment and competitive environment. The macro-environment consists of broad environment factors which influence the organisation and the success and failure of strategies. Those factors includes political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal environment (PESTEL). The competitive environment includes potential entrants, competitors, customers, suppliers and substitutes. They are organisations producing the same products or services. Analysing the competitive environment enables the organisation to know its position and improve its position relative to competitors. British Steel/Corus's environment: Political A new currency established for European Union---Euro, in the late 1990s. The UK government declined to join to use euro. Europe governments willing to remove their subsidy of state-owned steel firms and to move towards privatisation. Economics Weak euro lowered purchasing power in European countries. Sterling strength against US dollar declined. High value of sterling against euro and excess world steel production capacity led to price reductions for bulk steels. Increasing need of steel exporting. Increasing unemployment rate. Technological Steel intensity in many products declined. With technological improvement, less steel was used to make products which gave the same performances, e.g. automobile industry. Improvements in metallurgical properties allowed steel beams to make major inroads into the construction market and increased steel demand. Competitions Strong competitors and tight competition. Mergers between competitors within Europe. Some of the factors above became the structural drivers of change, and shaped the company's development. The most important issues prior to the 1999 merger: British Steel needed to seek cost advantages. Weak euro forced manufacturer to drive the production cost down. World steel production capacity exceeded demand by more than one-third gave pressure to steelmakers to drive down the costs and improve productivity. Initiated the intention of the merger Merger brought about scale economies and sourcing efficiency. Combined the workforce of two organisations to attain cost and production efficiency. Strong sterling led to high costs of product development in UK and so there was a need to move offshore. Merger would increase the capital available and lead to more investments and more product developments. Steel demand of UK-based manufacturing industries decreased. British Steel had to explore new markets and export steel to other countries. Merger brought about new markets and global customers To increase the competitive power and compete globally by having good supply and distribution chains. To grow, to increase market share and to raise reputation as the organisation extended to other European country. The most important issues following the 1999 merger: UK government still refused to join euro resulted in a loss of £60 on every tonne of steel exported to Europe. Weak euro and unfavourable exchange rate. Falling price of steel. Unemployment rate increased due to cost cutting. Steel demand dropped from 20 million tonnes in 70s to 13.9 million tonnes in 2000. Increasing import and export. Merger of three of the Corus's European rivals, Usinor (France), Arbed (Luxembourg) and Aceralia (Spain). They would create the world's biggest steelmaker which competed with Corus Arbed and Usinor organised global alliances and focus on developing markets such as Brazil. The major opportunities and threats of Corus in 2001: Opportunities Growth through product and market development. Product repositioning. Trading with more developing countries. Threats Competitions with other organisations. Demand of steel decreased. <heading>Question 2</heading>Strategy capability is the ability to perform at the level required for success. It is about whether an organisation's strategies continue to fit the environment in which the organisation is operating and the opportunities and threats exist. Many issues of strategic development are concerned with changing strategy capability better to fit a changing environment. The critical issues about the British Steel/Corus's strategic capability addressed in 1990-2001: Successfully become a profitable privatised company through combination of increased investment, good management structures and revolution in working practices. Gained competitive advantages through product development and better management of the logistics of the supply and distribution chains. Globalisation to increase global competences. Had connections with other countries (Eastern Europe and USA) through joint ventures, overseas transplants and trading, so as to develop globally. Carrie out a three-pronged attack: productivity gains, exploitation of IT and reduction in costs of supplies to cope with falling prices of steel and unfavourable exchange rate. Exported excess production to other countries to prevent stock storing and increase revenue. Merger to increase company size and reputation. Joint chief executives to show that British Steel and Hoogovens were completely integrated at the business unit level. Cost efficiency by economic of scale and reduction in costs of supplies. Had aluminium production as an alternative source of income. Resources available to increase capability--- <list>physical resources: improvements in IT and productivity human resources: multi-skilled technicians as employeesfinancial resources: with capacity to achieve synergy benefits from variety of sources </list>An organisation needs to identify its strengths and weaknesses which are relevant and capable of dealing with changes taking place in the business environment. Analysing the strengths and weaknesses help an organisation to increase opportunites and reduce threats. Strengths Long history and well-known. Developed technology and have experience in steel production. Focus on the development and growth of downstream carbon steel business and took part in aluminium and stainless steel production to increase product range and explore new markets. Existing resources to increase competitive advantages. Weaknesses Small size and scale compared with main competitiors. Its operations outside Europe are mainly concentrated on small steel ventures in the US Lack of market in developing countries. Cultural problem as the corporate culture in the UK and the Netherlands are different. Short-termism. <heading>Question 3</heading>An organisation should concern about what people expect it to achieve and what influence people can have over the organisation's purpose when planning its strategies. Stakeholders are individual, groups or organisations with an interest in what the organisation does. They depend on the organisation to fulfill their own goals and in turn the organisation depends on them. The major stakeholders for Corus were customers, employees and shareholders. Customers Looked for wider range of and tailored made products to satisfy their needs. Expected more and better service. Wanted the latest technology. Wanted more international coverage. Want multipurpose metal or different metals for different purposes. They pushed the company to improve and diversify its products. Corus's response Help design and optimise the manufacture of customers' products. Provide services and solutions internationally. Provide a wider range of metal activities (steel and aluminium production) and diversification of products (aeroplanes, cars etc.) Exploiting of information technology (IT). Employees Wanted a stable job and safe working environment. Expected to have great opportunities and prospect. Corus's response International structure of the company with joint chief executives. Employed quality people. Offered employees challenging and stimulation career opportunities. Shareholders Expected Corus to grow and gained profit. Cost efficiency. They pushed the company to reduce costs but at the same time produce more. Corus's response There was a growth strategy. With financial support and capacity to achieve synergy benefits from a variety of sources. Productivity gains and cost reduction of supplies. Had new market in North America. 