<heading>Task 1. An exercise in multimodal discourse analysis. </heading>For this task I will look briefly at the concepts of multimodal discourse and semiotics then use this framework to analyse the advertisement for the Citroen C4 car which turns into a dancing robot. Multimodal refers to different methods of meaning making, linguistic, visual, audio, gestural, and spatial. (van Leeuwen, 2003). A multimodal approach to discourse allows us to view individual modes in relation to each other, rather than as single items. (Cook, 2001). Semiotics is the study of how meaning is created through the interpretation of signs. A sign is a unit of meaning which may be a word, a sound or a visual image. (Streeter, 2005). Semiotics enables us to see that the meaning we carry away from any discourse is not transmitted to us but is created by us through our interpretation. (Chandler, 2002). In the Citroen advertisement the image of the robot does not make us interpret the car as an actual robot but creates the context for interpreting the car within the confines of prior, possibly unconscious, knowledge. (Cook, 2001). The advertiser exploits this knowledge in different ways. Firstly exploiting the knowledge of those receivers, viewers, for whom the robot is iconic, resembling the popular 1980s toy Transformer, bringing to their interpretation a symbol of youth, fun, and a perception of a technologically advanced product. Secondly, exploiting a more general knowledge, many people associate funky music and dancing with enjoyment. Awareness that the dance moves were created by Justin Timberlake's choreographer (The Reel, 2004) is not necessary for interpretation but may be significant in appealing to subconscious awareness of this style. Interpretation will not be beyond the reach of these receivers, any sign will mean different things to different people. (Chandler, 2002). Interpretation is based on personal experience as well as social and cultural conventions. Silver is the most popular car colouring in the UK (Finlay, 2004) so the choice of silver here exploits a social trend. Connotation being the cultural meaning we give to a sign this robot connotes technological efficiency and pleasure. (Kress & van Leeuwen, 2001). The words accompanying the advertisement appear on screen simultaneously with a digital voice, reinforcing the technology message. The meaning of these linguistic items is enhanced by the visual and sound elements preceding them. The words 'alive' and 'technology' are used as visual and audio puns. (Cook, 2001). The paradigmatic choice of 'alive with technology' compared with the less effective, but equally possible, 'alive with nuts and bolts' impacts on interpretation. The latter connotes something less technological and so less desirable. The advertisement also helps illustrate how the participants are part of the context. For example, the musicians' name, 'Rhythm les Digitales', provides a subtle link to technology not apparent to many receivers. Combined with the Justin Timberlake and Transformer links, this may impact on the creator's perception of their advertisement and influence their presentation to the client. Limiting this mode of analysis is the practical inability to display any co-text, the surrounding advertisements or programmes, and broadcast time. (Cook, 2001). Even so we have seen how exploitation of our knowledge may occur without our awareness and this may allow us to judge if such exploitation is acceptable. <heading>Task 2. An interview concerning an area of contested language use. Transcripts provided in Appendix 2. </heading><heading>Introduction</heading>In considering areas of contested language use I came across two references which appear contradictory. One suggested, 'Lessons in texting may form part of the English curriculum...' (Lightfoot, 2005), while the other stated 'text shorthand is not popular'. (Lettice, 2004). <heading>Experiment </heading>Consequently I investigated attitudes to text message language of different generations with links to education by interviewing three female members from three generations of my family. <heading>Method</heading>Distance restrictions meant I conducted the interviews by telephone. A semi-structured interview format allowed me to explain questions fully and ask respondents to elaborate on their replies. Respondents react positively to this format as they talk about themselves and have the listener's full attention. (Seale & Filmer, 1998). <heading>Results </heading> Respondent 1 - a 79 year old retired tutor - dislikes lexical shorthand, ('c' for 'see', or 'l8r' for 'later'), but says it is easily interpreted. She accepts syntactic shorthand ('At home where you' for, 'I'm at home, where are you?'), due to technical restrictions of space and the physical effort of inputting full constructions, but feels it is an abuse of language. She expressed concern that young people may fail to appreciate the importance of 'correct' grammar and spelling in the future.  Respondent 2 - a 46 year old teacher - uses lexical and syntactic abbreviations when using multi-tap but not predictive inputting. She does not dislike shorthand and understands it but thinks it raises concerns about writing habits. With the increased use of screen based texts she feels schools should be making clear distinctions as text shorthand is not acceptable in formal writing.  Respondent 3 - a 16 year old student - uses and interprets text shorthand readily. She feels it is essential for speed and space and considers it 'correct' language, understood and accepted by her generation. She does not feel her language in other situations is affected as she is aware of the distinctions between formal and informal uses and sees no need for lessons. <heading>Comments</heading>The respondents apparently interpret text language by relating shorthand to prior linguistic knowledge. They provide coherence, making sense of what they read, by creating meaningful constructions not only from the text but also from what is missing. (Yule, 1996). The responses suggest that technical restrictions coincide with pragmatic understanding for lexical and syntactic abbreviation in message production. All messages sent by the respondents were to friends or family indicating a shared knowledge of terms, pragmatic understanding, and readiness for a direct approach, allowing speed and space restrictions to be overcome. This foregoes the social convention between strangers which requires a less direct, more formal, approach. (Segerstad, 2002). <heading>Conclusion </heading>I conclude that there are generational differences in attitudes to text language but this does not extend to interpretation. Indications are that acceptance of language change begins with the young as they quickly adapt to changing contexts. The impact on education seems to lie in the acceptance of text language officially, giving it some status as a mode of communication with a role to play within existing and other emerging modes. <heading>Conclusion to tasks 1 and 2. </heading>We have seen how technology affects the language behaviour of people already proficient in its use and how the persuasive power of advertising is enhanced through the use of multimodal discourse. These tasks have emphasised the role of language in creating social realities. Each methodology has allowed us to see the influence of context and how our personal interpretations of context are reflected in our language use. 