<heading>1. Introduction</heading>This essay begins with brief descriptions of two approaches to investigating males' and females' ways of talking, the variationist's and the language and gender approaches. It then concentrates on language and gender by discussing the theories of deficiency, dominance, and difference and considers the concepts of language as a gendered system and communicative competence where they provide an analytical tool for investigating these theories. Exampled are investigations and resulting suggestions for differences found. Also considered is the relatively new post-modern, or social constructionist, perspective. The focus is on English due to space restrictions. <heading>1.1 Variationist approach</heading>Variationism concerns itself with structure and form concentrating on the co-relation between a linguistic variable and one or more social variables. Variationists ask; <quote>'Do males and females use standard and non-standard speech forms in the same way?' (Baxter, 2005) </quote>Labov's (1969) study of non-standard English and Trudgill's (1972) study of Norwich speakers showed that women consistently use more standard forms than men and men use more vernacular forms than women within the same social class. Trudgill (2000:73) says this is 'the single most consistent finding to emerge from sociolinguistic work around the world in the past 30 years'. Variationism is primarily quantitative and looks at pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar. <heading>1.2 Language and gender approach</heading>The approach of language and gender is mainly concerned with identities and how identities are constructed through language. The methods used are qualitative and look into semantics, style and register rather than structure and form so that the focus is on meaning and the question asked is; <quote>'Do males and females use the same language differently?' (Baxter, 2005) </quote><heading>2. The theories. </heading><heading>2.1. The deficiency theory. </heading>Early work in language and gender by Robin Lakoff (1975) was based on intuition and personal observation rather than empirical research. Lakoff focussed on social structure by suggesting women speak a different and inferior language as a reflection of their inferior status in society, something she termed 'woman's language' (ibid: 53). The word 'deficiency' reflects the perception that this language is deficient compared to men's whose language is the norm from which women's language deviates. While Trudgill (1972) suggested that women's use of standard speech forms reflected their status consciousness Lakoff's (1975) theory suggested women's language showed subordination. She suggested that women were encouraged to use a softer version of male language to reflect their femininity and she described a set of features of woman's language which reveal their linguistic behaviour as submissive. Holmes (2001: 286), using Lakoff's terms, characterises the features as; <list>lexical hedges - 'sort of', 'kind of'. tag questions - 'you're going, aren't you?'rising intonation on declaratives - turning a statement into a question eg: 'she studies at Reading?''empty' adjectives - 'divine', 'adorable'. precise colour terms - 'lilac', 'cerise'. intensifiers such as just and so - 'I'm so glad you came'. 'hypercorrect' grammar - using Standard English and precise pronunciation.'superpolite' forms - 'would you mind', 'I'd appreciate it if'. avoidance of strong swear words - 'fudge', 'oh darn'. emphatic stress - 'I had a brilliant time'. </list>Subsequent research based on these characteristics was flawed by inappropriate interpretations of Lakoff's features - her intention was for them to be regarded collectively and modelled as a function for communicating women's inferior status, not to be used as arbitrary items to be observed individually. Laboratory based research was unnatural so data did not reflect actual language in use (Holmes, 2004). Results were interpreted statistically, answered no questions and gave no explanations. Empirical research based on Lakoff's features of 'woman's language' was conducted by O'Barr and Atkins (1980) who suggested a better term would be 'powerless language'. They investigated language variation in American courtrooms by analysing speech of witnesses and discovered that while some women used language as Lakoff (1975) described some, typically expert witnesses, did not. They also found that men's language varied in the same way, those of lower social status used more 'women's language', so relating 'powerless language' to social structure. These findings have been challenged in other research which will be discussed below. <heading>2.2. The dominance theory. </heading>The interaction between language and gender and the role power plays in that interaction can be seen in the dominance theory. Like the deficiency theory it too is based on unequal power relations but it focuses on men's oppressive linguistic behaviour rather than on women's linguistic inadequacies. Graddol and Swann (1989) discuss empirical studies undertaken by Zimmerman and West (1975) which focussed on interruptions made in conversations. Their research showed more interruptions occurred in mixed-sex conversations than in single-sex ones and that it was nearly always men who did the interrupting. They argue that interruptions are a way of controlling conversation and of working out power relations so reflecting a framework in which men's domineering behaviour is the issue not women's subordination. Challenging O'Barr and Atkins (1980), West (1984) conducted research into doctor patient interaction which showed male doctors interrupted their patients more often than female doctors and used interruptions to control the interaction. Female doctors were interrupted as often or more often by their patients than they themselves interrupted. This suggests that gender does have a relationship with power and status contrary to the perception of 'powerless language' O'Barr and Atkins (1980) proposed. The dominance theory is explored further below within the concept of language as a gendered system. <heading>2.3. The difference theory</heading>This theory challenges the previous two by denying dependency on unequal power relations and viewing males and female's different communicative styles as a sign that they belong to different sub-cultures (Coates, 2004). Tannen (1990: 42) has developed this theory saying 'women speak and hear a language of connection and intimacy, while men speak and hear a language of status and independence'. Arguments against Tannen's (1990) approach criticise her focus on miscommunication between the genders saying that this ignores studies which show the different speaking styles do allow men to dominate and therefore there is a power dimension involved (Mesthrie et al, 2000). Cameron (2005) says it is social arrangements which have separated the genders from early childhood providing each with a different speech style. She too criticises the absence of the power dimension pointing to the principle that although all varieties of a language are linguistically equal there remains a belief that one may be better than another which is based on social factors and enhanced by institutional prejudices not the least of which are power-based. The suggestion of different speech styles relating to men's and women's ways of talking will be discussed below within the concept of communicative competence. <heading>3. The concepts</heading><heading> 3.1. Language as a gendered system. </heading>This concept can be viewed against the background of linguistic features highlighted by Spender (1985). The structuralist theory of linguistics as proposed by Saussure states that language determines reality but Spender says that for women English does not express or name their feelings. Consequently women's reality is determined through male language and is systematically gendered through grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation. She points to an androcentric - male centred - principle which assumes everything in the world is male unless proven otherwise (ibid: 20). Consequently most of the semantic space of language is occupied by males. There are four linguistic features on which Spender focuses to show the bias in favour of men in both syntax and semantics. <list>Linguistic markingSemantic derogationLexical gapsThe false generic he and man </list><heading>3.1.1 Linguistic marking and semantic derogation</heading>These first two features are similar although linguistic marking is a less extreme form of semantic derogation. The former refers to terms which mark the female as an exception or deviant where the male form is either generic or neutral. For example; all animals that bark are called dogs but only female dogs are called bitches. This is also seen in feminine and masculine forms of words for people. For example; actor/actress, manager/manageress, duke/duchess. Graddol & Swann (1989: 100) point out that these terms may refer to 'female' (actress), or 'wife of' (duchess). Where actress marks the feminine form the unmarked form actor signals either men or humans in general. Spender (1985) says that there is a systematic basis to linguistic sexism which is not accidental but rule governed and that rule is to do with the pejorative nature of words used for and about women. For example bitch is used as a derogatory term for females. Many feminine forms have become equated with deviance, such as queen for  transsexual or used with reference to prostitution, madam, professional, courtesan, hostess. Spender (ibid: 15) points to work by Stanley (1973) which showed not only that there are more words for males than females but also that those words are more positive. This inequality extends to the large number of words for females which suggest sexual promiscuity compared to those for males, serving to devalue women in society through language. Graddol & Swann (1989: 112) example the use of mother and father as verbs when they investigate words for women and men. Compare; She mothered the children in the village for several years with, He fathered the children in the village for several years. While mothered suggests nurture, fathered suggests virility. It is interesting to note here that in response to the type of variationist studies undertaken by Labov (1969) and Trudgill (1972) mentioned above Gordon (1997) argues that woman's behaviour is associated with avoiding being seen as 'lower class' rather than with the desire to be seen as 'higher class', and that desire is closely related to the association of the lower class with sexual promiscuity. This emphasises the double standards imposed by society on men and women where prestige is awarded to promiscuous males but shame to promiscuous females. <heading>3.1.2 Lexical gaps</heading>The problem for women expressing their feelings by naming is highlighted by the concept of lexical gaps. The existence of lexical gaps exposes a narrow frame of reference for women making it difficult to articulate meanings for which names do not exist. Spender (1980: 184) refers to the term sexual harassment which allowed women to name a problem they knew existed but which only became real by its naming. She also uses this concept to point out the 'negative semantic space' which exists for women in traditionally male professions. The use of lady doctor for example where the term man doctor is simply not used. Or, as Graddol & Swann (1989: 109) put it, 'it seems more usual for people to be presumed male until proved female'. <heading>3.1.3 False generic he and  man</heading>The influence of the false generic he and man is summed up by Holmes (2001: 307) who examples an experiment which asked students to choose pictures to relate to chapter headings in a sociology textbook. Where the headings used the generic 'man', as in 'Social Man' and 'Industrial Man', students were more likely to choose a male figure than when the headings were non-specific as in 'Society' or 'Industrial Life'. Graddol and Swann (1989: 104) example comparisons between dog and man to highlight the bias which results in the use of man to mean male human rather than to be used generically to mean human. Compare; The dog next door has given birth to a puppy,with, The man next door has given birth to a baby. Where dog is acceptable here man is not. <heading>3.2. Communicative competence </heading>The concept of communicative competence was introduced by linguist Dell Hymes in the 1970s and can be defined as having knowledge of a language and having the ability to use that knowledge effectively. Hymes related communicative competence to a sense of appropriateness of language use which people learn in order to function in the world. Knowing when and when not to speak, what to talk about, how to talk about it and how to apply this in different circumstances contributes to the concept of a linguistic repertoire which allows for the multifunctional nature of language use. That is, speakers acquire a repertoire in which they use different styles for different purposes (Coates, 2004). Language and gender theorists Coates (2004) and Holmes (2001) agree that males and females have different conversational goals where males tend to be more competitive and females tend to be more co-operative. Coates (2004) relates this to a different understanding of what is expected of them resulting in different interactional strategies. Maltz and Borker (1982) argue for a cultural approach to the different styles, as does Tannen (1990) discussed below, and they highlight tendencies of one style compared to the other as follows; Asking questions. Women are more likely to use questions as a way of maintaining conversational flow. Minimal responses. Women's responses are seen to encourage flow and signal support while men use these to show agreement and are often slow to make them or do not make them at all. Tag questions. Women use these to facilitate flow while men use them when they are uncertain. Compliments. Women give compliments on appearance while men compliment actions. Interruptions. Men interrupt more than women, as evidenced in the Zimmerman & West (1975) study discussed above. Inviting contact. Women use names and the pronouns you and we more often than men encouraging others to speak and acknowledging the existence of others in a conversation. Topic control. Men use more mechanisms for introducing and developing topics (Zimmerman & West, 1975). Men make more judgements and declare their opinions more than women and also challenge others more. Tannen's (1990) investigations into cultural speech preferences were undertaken in varying contexts and led to the approach which perceives gender differences as being like cultural differences. Highlighted is the fact that children interact with their peers of the same gender long before they interact with each other as males and females. In this way they learn to share a speech style with little or no awareness of the style being used by their opposite gender. The issue of gender being perceived as binary in this manner is looked at briefly below. Cameron (2001: 117) sums this up saying that the two genders communicate cross-culturally and any misunderstandings will be systematic and predictable. <heading>4. Post-modern approach</heading>The three theories discussed above are not confined within strict boundaries and each may influence the other. While the dominance and difference theories predominated through the 1980s and 1990s there is a fourth perspective variously referred to as dynamic or social constructionist (Coates, 2004), or post-modern (Cameron, 2005). For clarity this essay will refer to it as post-modern because it will be referring mainly to Cameron (2005) who favours this use. A point made by Cameron is that neither the dominance nor the difference theories allow for the diverse nature of gender. Gender can no longer be viewed as binary. This shift relates not just to theoretical changes but must be linked to social changes as gender is no longer seen only as a male/female construct. Although this may always have been true it is only relatively newly acknowledged and the argument is that this concept requires new approaches. Cameron (ibid: 491) points to research into the language of drag queens by Barrett (1995), and of telephone sex-workers by Hall (1995) where features of Lakoff's woman's language emerged in the construction of subjects identities. Other researchers, Cameron (ibid: 492) mentions, Baxter (2003) and Coates (1996, 2003), amongst others, have focussed on gendered performances within specific groups or individuals and have shown speakers to change their position -influenced by the potential perception of themselves which they portray to others. Eckert & McConnell-Ginet (1999) suggest that the performance of gender cannot be seen only as a negotiation of relationships between genders but also within genders. Men and women construct and deconstruct their identities as they resolve issues of participation in the various contexts in which they interact, same sex or cross-sex. They refer to 'communities of practice' which they define as 'groups whose joint engagement in some activity or enterprise is sufficiently intensive to give rise over time to a repertoire of shared practice' (ibid: 185). A final aspect Cameron (2005) discusses is economic globalisation which sees men and women sharing more communities of practice. Her own research uncovered a 'feminized' (Cameron, 2000) style among British call centre workers suggesting a recognition of women's speech style as empathetic and so desirable in terms of the situational context of a customer relations interaction. <heading>5. Conclusions</heading>The theories of language and gender discussed focus on the interactional and multifunctional nature of language and, with the exception of Lakoff's (1975) original intuition based work, contextualise gender through actual language use. The differences between men's and women's ways of talking have been seen to be systematic but the explanations for these systematic differences cannot definitively be said to conform to only a hierarchal dominance position or only to cultural differences The post-modern approach suggests that the identity people create for themselves through their language is not fixed by a set of social variables which is adhered to for life, but maintains a fluidity which relies on a perception of language within a multifunctional framework and allows an identity to be constructed and deconstructed as people move between communities of practice. The social change which has seen today's generation of males and females more similar to each other than in earlier generations in terms of clothing, education, job prospects, and general life choices, has been recognised in the shift of the focus of study from the qualities which identify a man and a woman to social practice. The result has been cultural explanations of language use balanced with interactionally focussed data and explanations. The conclusion is that as the roles of men and women in the modern world become even more multi-functional and even less gender-defined, communication will become more flexible and it will become more difficult to separate gender from other social identities. Maintaining presupposed categories of gender and linguistic behaviour will not allow for the diversity of expression these roles demand so that the interweaving of theories is inevitable and new theories will continue to emerge. 