<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The biodiversity and abundance of Carabid beetles was studied at fifteen roundabouts in Bracknell. These islands are rarely disturbed by humans and therefore remain the only truly 'wild' areas in many towns and cities. At each roundabout area (m 2) was recorded, also distance from nearest green, and one pitfall trap was placed in each habitat type present. It was found that distance to nearest green played little part in the biodiversity or abundance of the beetle, however traps set significantly affected both. Also area was seen to significantly affect the number of species but not the abundance. As a result of this experiment it is suggested that future roundabouts should be designed to include a wide variety of habitat types including mature trees in order that improved conservation of species diversity can be achieved in urban areas. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Island biogeography is very complex, species diversity can depend on many factors such as size of the island, distance from the next island or mainland, habitat diversity and productiveness of the island. MacArthur and Wilson's ''equilibrium theory of island biogeography'' predicts that the number of species on an island should be roughly constant through time due to a constant turnover of species, balancing extinction and immigration. Large islands are predicted to have more species and more remote islands should have fewer species. It would be expected that the roundabouts studied in Bracknell would follow MacArthur and Wilson's Island biogeography theory. Often the types of islands studied are those that are newly formed in the sea due to events such as volcanic eruptions; they begin as a baron landscape and gradually become populated by plants and animals migrating from the mainland or other islands. Eventually they may become saturated when all available niches are filled. When looking at a roundabout as an island it must be considered that the area now enclosed by road may once have been part of a climax community; a relatively stable community of plants and animals at a stage where succession has stopped occurring, and therefore does not need to be populated from scratch. It is suggested that many small islands would have higher species richness than one large patch of the same total area (Magura et al, 2001). This should be evident from the studies on the roundabouts. Carabid beetles (Carabidae) are arthropods that occur commonly around the world, there are over 20,000 species that have evolved to fit into many environments, about 340 of these species are found in Britain (Kendal, 2004). They are ground beetles that belong to the family Coleoptera, and many are nocturnal. Carabid beetles are mainly carnivorous but a few are herbivorous and occasionally omnivorous. Of the carnivorous species a few have evolved to be specialist predators of certain prey species such as caterpillars, snails, aphids and mites, and many are very beneficial to the control of pests in gardens. They move around to hunt and only move away from an area if there is no food. Some adult Carabids can fly so may use this dispersal method to find a more productive area. Most Carabid beetles hibernate over the winter so require sheltered, undisturbed places that can keep them fairly warm and dry such as old logs or leaf litter under shrubs. Magura et al, 2001 identified that Carabid beetles can be divided into 'widely distributed generalist species', and more specialised species in their case 'closed canopy deciduous forest of the hills and mountains' species. On the roundabouts it would be expected that there would be a few species that were found at every site, they would be the 'widely distributed generalist species' and there would also be those species that were not as common that are specialised for certain habitat types. This should be seen on those roundabouts with more habitat types. It has been shown that greater habitat diversity, especially in larger sites, can support additional species, some of which may be rare (Donnelly and Marzluff, 2004). <heading>Methods</heading>This experiment was carried out in the town of Bracknell, on the outskirts of London, which represents an urban metropolis with many roundabouts of varying sizes. Fifteen of the roundabouts were chosen for the study so that a wide range of habitat types were represented, the areas were also of varied size. In the study the variety of abundance and species numbers of beetles was investigated. They were collected using wet pitfall traps in order that their populations in each habitat type were accurately represented. The pitfall traps were sunken in the ground and had a depth of 10cm; this was done using a bulb planter to create a neat, tightly fitting hole, in which a 200ml plastic cup was placed. The diameter of the cup was measured at 7.5cm. In order that the trap was as discrete as possible, the lip of the cup was set so that it was slightly lower than the surface of the ground, then a second cup was placed inside. This second cup allowed easy removal of the samples trapped at each collection interval. At every roundabout site, one trap was set in each habitat type present; this therefore corresponded with the total number of traps set in each site. These habitats were specified as: <list> A. Long Grass (Grass over 15cm in height) B. Short Grass (Grass between 5 and 15 cm in height) C. Lawn (regularly mown grass less than 5 cm in height) D. Long Grass under trees E. Short grass under trees F. Mature trees G. Immature trees H. Banks with long grass I. Banks with short grass J. Herbaceous borders K. Hedges</list>The types present at each roundabout were recorded along with the area, and the distance from the nearest piece of green land which was used as a measure of the distance from the nearest source of Carabid beetles that may move into or out of the system through migration. The number of traps set and collected in one day was restricted by the collection vehicle which had to be a bicycle due to the amount of traffic on the roads and the lack of suitable parking for the use of a motor vehicle. The traps were collected every 2-3 days and then reset over a period of 10 days between the 12 th of May and the 11 th of June 1999 (there was a gap between the 20 th of May and the 9 th of June). The samples were emptied, sorted and preserved in alcohol on the same day as collection so that the insects did not deteriorate by putrefaction. This involved wasing, removing of debris and then placing in Sterilinϑ containers with screw tops. These were then labelled and stored in a refrigerator at 4°C. The beetles were initially identified using a binocular microscope and the keys of Lindroth (1974), Unwin (1984), Forsythe (1987) and Harde (1998). <table/><table/><table/><figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><heading>Results</heading>The effects of the distance to the nearest green (m) have an insignificant affect on both total species (P=0.818) and abundance (P=0.544) of Carabid beetles caught in the traps (Table 3). This can be clearly demonstrated when comparing Sites 6 and 6b, they are the same size (2827m 2)but vary greatly in their distance from nearest green (225m and 75m), however their total abundance of beetles caught is the same at both sites (25). The number of traps set corresponds to the number of habitat types found on the roundabout, there is a significant effect caused by the number of traps set on both total species (P=0.000) (Fig 1) and abundance (P=0.053) (Fig 3) of Carabid beetles trapped (Table 3). This can be seen when comparing sites 1 and 11, site 1 has 5 habitat types and 40 beetles were caught were as site 11 only has 3 habitat types and only 8 beetles were caught in the traps. Site 1 has the same sites as site 11, but also has site type d; long grass under trees and site type h; banks with long grass. The area of the roundabout only has a significant effect on the total species number (P=0.016) (Fig 2) and not on the abundance (P=0.097) (Fig 4). Only one beetle was found at every site (Amara aenea) although a few others were found to be fairly common and occurred at most sites (Bembidion lampros, Nebria brevicollis, Pterostichus madidus) (Table 2). Eleven of the beetles appeared to be fairly uncommon as they were only found at one site; ten of these sites included the habitat type F which indicated the presence of mature trees. <heading>Discussion</heading>The results do not follow the predictions of MacArthur and Wilson's ''equilibrium theory of island biogeography'' completely, although there are significantly more species on roundabouts with larger areas (P=0.016), the distance from the nearest green or source of migrating beetles is shown not to affect the species numbers or the abundance. The nearest green may not affect the beetle numbers or species diversity because the distances involved are not large enough to be significant, the dispersal capabilities of Carabid beetles especially those that can fly may take them much further than the distances involved in the experiment. Similar problems were found when a similar investigation was carried out in Durban, South Africa (Whitmore et al, 2002). Also the definition of 'green' is not clear enough as it may suggest anything from a window box to a playing field and not all green areas may be potential sources of recruitment. Area may affect the total species, as larger areas may be able to support more beetles due to amount of prey that can be supported, also amount of foliage that provides shelter and food. When considering what size a roundabout should be to provide the best environment that can maintain high species diversity it is inconclusive as to whether being a large roundabout is more important than having many small roundabouts. Table 4 shows the area and the number of species of the smallest sites added together and compared with a single large site of a similar area. This is done with the first 6 smallest sites then with the first 7 smallest sites. The results clearly demonstrate that many small sites have more species added together than one large site. However when the species are analysed more closely of the first 6 smallest sites only 9 species out of the 25 are actually different and of the first 7 smallest sites only 9 of the 32 species are different. This finding does not support the prediction that many small islands would have higher species richness than one large patch of the same total area (Magura et al, 2001). <table/>The number of traps set, corresponding to number of habitat types present, may affect the number of species as there would be more niches provided, in which different species of beetles that have evolved to thrive best, can live. Other factors may have affected the beetle populations such as amount of pollution and amount of traffic which may have caused the pollution to rise. It has been found that some insecticides are toxic to many ground beetles and smaller beetles are more vulnerable than larger species (Kendall 2004). This may also be reflected in the beetles on the roundabouts as it may be that only larger Carabid beetle species can survive the types of pollution that they are subjected to by cars. Also number of birds living on, or visiting the roundabout, or other predators may affect the types and numbers of Carabid species present as different species have different defence mechanisms. Some Carabid beetles if attacked, may discharge an irritant fluid from glands at the tip of their abdomen, other species can regurgitate digestive gut fluids from their mouths (Kendall, 2004). Carabids have powerful jaws and can inflict a sharp nip when attacked; this is especially powerful in the larger Carabids. These factors should be looked into before considering the design of a roundabout that could support a high diversity of species. The plants in the areas were not considered in enough detail as areas with flowers may provide very different habitats that grass, bushes or trees may not, also different types of food sources. The term herbaceous borders may be too general to help explain findings at each roundabout. The importance of considering the plants is seen in the fact that the 'rarest' species of Carabid beetle that were only found at one site, were found 10 out of 11 times on roundabouts with habitat type F which indicated the presence of mature trees. After researching the ecology of these beetles it was found that Stomis pumicatus was often found in damp deciduous woodland and was nearly always encountered singly, and Pterostichus melanarius was commonly found to occur on wet woodland edge habitats in leaf litter, most were found to prefer damp conditions (Anderson & McFerran, 2001). Also Agonum assimile was found to be a forest species rather than a forest glade species (Grechanichenko and Guseva 2000). These findings may explain the results although little is really known about the habits and preferences of most Carabid beetles. However it shows that it would be important to include mature trees in the design of a highly diverse roundabout for Carabid beetles. The 3 most common beetles of the experiment were found to prefer dryer conditions and were reported as very common throughout Britain (Anderson & McFerran, 2001). Also it was found that Bembidion lampros could survive starvation for very long periods of time allowing it to live in a larger variety of environments including those that may not have much food at times, therefore making it more common (Petersen 1999). It would be important to further analyse which habitat types trapped the most beetles and how each habitat type affected the rest of the findings such as abundance or species numbers, to fully understand the ecology of roundabouts. Also which species were found at each habitat type and if this was similar at each roundabout. A combination of different trapping methods should be used for any further experiments as the pitfall trap method would only catch ground dwelling beetles that happen to walk across the trap and may therefore not represent all of the beetles on the roundabout. Also more of the environmental variables should have been recorded such as ground temperature, surface temperature, humidity, size of cover of decaying wood material, and canopy layer (Magura et al 2004) as these may be able to explain many of the anomalous results. Another problem with the way the experiment was designed is that the traps were collected on separate days, therefore did not represent a snap shot of the roundabouts. One collection may have been made after a period of relatively cooler weather so may have produced a smaller catch than on warmer days when the ectothermic Carabid beetles would be less active and so less likely to walk into the pitfall traps. The traps should have been collected on the same day at each site so that the trapping periods were the same and the results comparable. In conclusion for species and abundance it is more important to have a wide range of habitat types than to have a larger area. To maintain diversity of town wildlife populations specifically beetles this should be considered when designing roundabouts. However more research needs to be done into the diversity of other species including mammals and birds so that roundabout ecology can be integrated into the wildlife of the rest of the town. References Anderson, R. & McFerran, D. (2001) The Ground Beetles of Ireland  URL  Donnelly, R. & Marzluff, J.M. (2004) Importance of reserve size and landscape context to urban bird conservation. Conservation  biology, 18, 733-745. Grechanichenko, T.E. & Guseva, N.A. (2000) Specific features of carabid populations (Coleoptera, Carabidae) in forest biotopes of central forest-steppe. Zoologichesky Zhurnal, 79, 548-555. Kendall, D. (2004) Ground beetles and Tiger beetles.  URL  MacArthur, R.H. & Wilson, E.O. (1967) The Theory of Island  Biogeography. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. Magura, T., Kodobocz, V. & Tothmeresz, B. (2001) Effects of habitat fragmentation on carabids in forest patches. Journal of  Biogeography, 28, 129-138. Magura, T., Tothmeresz B. & Molnar, T. (2004) Changes in carabid beetle assemblages along an urbanisation gradient in the city of Debrecen, Hungary. Landscape ecology, 19, 747-759. Petersen, M.K. (1999) Capacity of Bembidion lampros and Tachyporus hypnorum to survive periods of starvation in early spring. Entomologia experimentalis et applicata, 90, 207-214. Whitmore, C., Crouch, T.E. & Slotow, R.H. (2002) Conservation of biodiversity in urban environments: invertebrates on structurally enhanced road islands. African entomology, 10, 113-126. 