<heading>Objectives</heading>To investigate the range of properties of various food packaging materials by a series of simple tests. <heading>Introduction</heading>Packaging is important in all food processing operations, and can be defined in terms of its protective role - 'packaging is a means of achieving safe delivery of products in sound condition to the final user at a minimum cost'. The functions of packaging are: <list>Containment - to hold the contents and keep them secure until used,Protection - against mechanical and environmental hazards which may be encountered during distribution and use,Communication - to identify the contents, assist in selling the product, and to provide other information such as heating guidelines or nutritional information,Machinability - to have good performance on production lines,Convenience - throughout the production, storage and distribution e.g. dispensing or ease of opening (Fellows, 2000).</list>Packaging provides a barrier between the food and the environment. It controls light transmission; the rate of transfer of heat, moisture and gases; and the movement of micro organisms and other pests. Moisture loss or uptake is one of the most important factors that controls the shelf life of foods. The permeability of the packaging, together with the vapour pressure of moisture in the food at the temperature of storage, will effect the moisture exchange, and as a result, will effect microbial and enzymic spoilage, condensation on the inside of packaging and resulting mould growth, drying out or softening of foods, or the extent of freezer burn (Fellows, 2000). Dehydrated foods require packaging that has a low permeability to moisture, otherwise they will lose their crispness, and if their water activity (a w) rises above the level, which will permit microbial growth, they will spoil. Foods that contain high levels of lipids or other oxygen-sensitive compounds are spoiled if the packaging has an inadequate barrier to oxygen. However, fresh foods, which are respiring, and have a high relative humidity (RH), require a degree of permeability to allow the exchange of CO 2 and O 2, without the excessive loss of moisture that would cause weight loss and shrivelling (Fellows, 2000). Chilled foods require controlled movement of water vapour out of the packaging to prevent fogging in display packs when the temperature changes, and foods packaged in modified atmospheres require careful control of both gas consumption and water vapour movement to achieve expected shelf life. The table below illustrates selected properties of packaging films (Fellows, 2000): <table/>Packaging should be sufficiently impermeable to retain desirable odours and prevent odour-pick up, and there should be no noticeable odour pickup from plasticisers, inks, adhesives or solvents used in the manufacture of the packaging material. Plasticisers and pigments loosen the film structure and increase its permeability, however permeability is not just related to the type of film, it is also affected by the type of gas or vapour and the relative humidity. Plastic films are joined together by heat seals; the strength of which is tested for various films in this experiment. An inadequate heat seal in polymer films, caused by the contamination of the seal with the product or faulty heat sealer settings, is one of the main causes of microbial contamination of adequately processed foods (Fellows, 2000). The suitability of a packaging film to protect foods from environmental damage depends on its ability to withstand puncturing or fracturing. In this experiment the bursting strengths and heat seal strengths of the packaging films give an indication of their behaviour under stress. The molecular structure of polymer films may be aligned in different ways, depending on the type of film and the method of manufacture, and this will result in varying properties of strength for different films. A flexible packaging film is a non-rigid, non-fibrous plastic polymer, which is less than 250m thick (Fellows, 2000). There are a very large number of possible combinations of polymer and treatment, to meet the varied requirements of foods, providing a range of mechanical, optical, thermal and barrier properties: <heading>Cellulose films</heading>Plain cellulose is a glossy, transparent film, which is odourless, tasteless and biodegradable in approximately 100 days. It is tough and puncture resistant, although it tears easily; and it is suitable for twist wrapping as it has low-slip and dead-folding properties. Cellulose films however are not suitable for heat-sealing, and the dimensions and permeability of the film will change with humidity. Cellulose films are used for foods that do not require a complete moisture or gas barrier, such as fresh bread, and some confectionary. Films are coated with other polymers to improve their barrier properties or to impart heat sealability, (Heiss, 1970) e.g. nitrocellulose is coated on one side of cellulose film to provide a moisture barrier but to retain oxygen permeability. A nitrocellulose coating on both sides of the film will improve the barrier to oxygen, moisture and odours, and enables the film to be heat sealed, providing a broad seal is used. Regenerated cellulose 350 MS is an example of a cellulose film coated with nitrocellulose (Palling, 1980). <heading>Polypropylene</heading>Orientated polypropylene is a clear glossy film with high tensile strength and puncture resistance and good optical properties. It is moderately permeable to moisture, gases and odours, however it is not affected by changes in humidity. Polypropylene has a density of 0.90 g/cm 3 (Palling, 1980). It is thermoplastic, and therefore stretches, and has low friction, which makes it suitable for use with high speed filling equipment. Biaxially orientated polypropylene has similar properties, but is much stronger; both types are used for crisp packets, biscuit wrappers and boil-in-bag films, as well as many other applications. Polypropylene also lends itself to moulding, and is particularly useful in the field of injection moulding (Palling, 1980). <heading>Polyethylene </heading>There are many types of polyethylene, which leads to a wide variability in properties. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is a very strong transparent glossy film; with good moisture and gas barriers and little shrinkage with variations in temperature or humidity. Low-density polyethylene (LDPE) is heat sealable, chemically inert, odour free and shrinks when heated. It is a good moisture barrier, but has relatively high gas permeability, sensitivity to oils and poor odour resistance. LDPE has a high tear resistance and impact strength and can be used from temperatures as low as - 50 oC to about 70 oC, (Heiss, 1970). It is less expensive than most films, and so is widely used for frozen foods, bread, meat pies and sausages, (Heiss, 1970), also including applications in shrink or stretch wrapping. The density of LDPE ranges from 0.916 - 0.935 g/cm 3 (Palling, 1980). High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is stronger, thicker, less flexible and more brittle than LDPE, and has a lower permeability to gases and moisture. HDPE has a high tear strength, tensile strength, penetration resistance and seal strength. The density of HDPE ranges from 0.95 - 0.965 g/cm 3 (Palling, 1980). Polyethylenes are waterproof and chemically resistant and can be used for shrink-wrapping. It can be perforated with up to 80 holes cm -1 for use with fresh foods and bakery products, or when un-perforated, can be used for edible fats. <heading>Polyvinylidene Chloride </heading>Uncoated PVdC film has very good moisture, odour and gas barrier properties; it is fat resistant and does not melt when in contact with hot fat, making it suitable for 'freezer-to-oven' foods. PVdC is also used as a coating for films and bottles to improve the barrier properties. PVdC film can also be used as cling film, by the addition of ketones or chlorinated hydrocarbons, to increase its flexibility (Heiss, 1970). <heading>Materials and methods</heading>Refer to practical schedule for the methods followed during this experiment. Each member of the group carried out the rapid tests on a different packaging material, as stated in the practical schedule, and the results are summarised in table 1, which is taken from Pg. 7 of the practical schedule. The following materials were analysed: <list>Polyvinylidene ChloridePolyethyleneReg. cellulose 350 MS.Reg. cellulose 340 DMS.Polypropylene</list>As well as the rapid identification tests, the following mechanical and physical properties of the packaging materials were investigated: <list>SubstanceGaugeBursting strengthTear strengthHeat seal strengthWater vapour permeabilityPermeability to odours and flavours</list>When tests were carried out, three repeats were taken, and the average used, providing a reading didn't differ from the average too considerably, in which case it was disregarded. The bursting and heat seal strength was measured using a Stevens machine, in which a 12.5cm length of the sample material was fastened into a tension cell and the load applied until the material failed or 100% extension was achieved. The heat seal was created from 2 strips of the material, using the appropriate time and temperature, according to the material, and as advised by the supervisor. For the water vapour permeability test, a disc of material 80mm diameter was exposed, giving an area of 0.005m 2. The dishes were stored in a controlled humidity cabinet at 25 oC and 75% RH. One repeat was taken for each material, and the weight was measured after 5 and 7 days. Permeability to odours and flavours was measured for all 5 materials and a control was used for comparison. The judges were allowed water in between each test, and the average opinion is given in the results table. <heading>Results</heading><heading>Table 1 - Rapid Identification Tests</heading><table/><heading>Table 2 - Mechanical and Physical Properties</heading>The average results from the mechanical and physical properties tests are shown below, and appropriate calculations have been carried out in calculating the average gauge, the substance, and water vapour permeability. <table/><table/><table/><figure/><heading>Discussion</heading><heading>Regenerated cellulose 350 MS </heading>The rapid identification tests have shown that Regenerated cellulose 350 MS is a moisture-proof, hydrophobic material, which is easy to tear, and resists stretches. The material has a thickness of 28.6m, which is within the literature values of 21 - 40m and a density of 52.1 g/m 2. The results from the bursting tests show that Reg. cellulose 350 MS has a reasonably high tensile strength, and an average extension of 6% was given from an average load of 4790g, when the material failed; the hand stretch test identified the material as being easy to tear. The heat seals formed were also strong, with an average extension of 10% from an average load of 4010g, when the material failed. Reg. cellulose 350 MS appears to have moderate moisture and odour barrier properties; it allowed an estimated 12.57g m -2 24 hr -1 permeability to moisture and a moderate penetration of the mint flavouring into the chocolate. These results suggest it may be suitable for foods that do not require a complete moisture or gas barrier, such as fresh bread, and some confectionary. Reg. cellulose 350 MS is coated with nitrocellulose on both sides of the film to improve the barrier to oxygen, moisture and odours, and enable the film to be heat sealed, providing a broad seal is used. <heading>Regenerated cellulose 340 DMS </heading>The rapid identification tests have shown that Regenerated cellulose 340 DMS is a non-moisture-proof, hydrophilic material, which is easy to tear, and resists stretches. The material has a thickness of 23.8m, which is within the literature values of 22 - 24m and a density of 33.5 g/m 2. The results from the bursting tests show that Reg. cellulose 340 DMS has a moderate tensile strength, and an average extension of 29% was given from an average load of 2670g, when the material failed; the hand stretch test identified the material as being easy to tear. The heat seals formed were also not as strong, with an average extension of 5% from an average load of 1170g, when the material failed. Reg. cellulose 340 DMS appears to have poor moisture and odour barrier properties; it allowed an estimated 67.57g m -2 24 hr -1 permeability to moisture and a considerable penetration of the mint flavouring into the chocolate. These results suggest it may also be suitable for foods that do not require a complete moisture or gas barrier, such as fresh bread, but that this material is not suitable for moist foods. A nitrocellulose coating one side will provide a moisture barrier but to retain oxygen permeability. <heading>Polypropylene</heading>The rapid identification tests have shown that Polypropylene is a moisture-proof, hydrophobic material, which is hard to tear, but stretches. The material has a thickness of 31.3m, which was slightly greater than the literature values of 20 - 30m and a density of 27.7 g/m 2. The results from the bursting tests show that Polypropylene has a very high tensile strength, and an average extension of 13% was given from an average load of 5990g, when the material failed; this is confirmed by the hand stretch test, which identified the material as being hard to tear. The heat seals formed were also strong, with an average extension of 16% from an average load of 6910g, when the material failed. Polypropylene also appears to have very good moisture and odour barrier properties; it allowed the least increase in mass, an estimated 0.71g m -2 24 hr -1 and the least penetration of the mint flavouring into the chocolate. These results suggest it may be suitable for foods with strong flavours or odours, or foods, which require controlled movement of water vapour. Polypropylene is used in crisp packets, biscuit wrappers and boil-in-bag films, as well as many other applications. <heading>Polyethylene </heading>The rapid identification tests have shown that Polyethylene is a moisture-proof, hydrophobic material, which is hard to tear, but stretches very easily. The material has a thickness of 34.6m, which was within the literature value of 25 - 200m, and a density of 33.5 g/m 2. The results from the bursting tests show that Polyethylene stretches very easily, and an average extension of 95% was given from an average load of 890g, with most trials not failing; this is confirmed by the hand stretch test, which identified the material as being hard to tear. The heat seals formed were also very strong, with an average extension of 93% from an average load of 890g. Polyethylene does appear to have reasonably good moisture, or odour barrier properties; it only allows an estimated 2.57g m -2 24 hr -1 permeability to water and only a very slight penetration of the mint flavouring into the chocolate. These results suggest that the polythene tested was not LDPE, because that has sensitivity to oils and poor odour resistance; it may however be Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), a very strong transparent glossy film; with good moisture and gas barriers and little shrinkage with variations in temperature or humidity. Polyethylene is less expensive than most films, and is also chemically inert, and so is widely used for frozen foods, bread, meat pies and sausages, also including applications in shrink or stretch wrapping. It can be perforated with up to 80 holes cm -1 for use with fresh foods and bakery products, or when un-perforated, can be used for edible fats. Polyethylene is suitable for frozen foods as it can be used from temperatures as low as - 50 oC to about 70 oC. <heading>Polyvinylidene Chloride </heading>The rapid identification tests have shown that Polyvinylidene Chloride is a moisture-proof, hydrophobic material, which is hard to tear, but stretches easily. This was the thinnest material tested, with a thickness of only 19.0m, which was within the literature value of 10 - 50m. The results from the bursting tests show that Polyvinylidene Chloride stretches easily, and an average extension of 89% was given from an average load of 480g, when the material failed; this is confirmed by the hand stretch test, which identified the material as being hard to tear. The heat seals formed were also strong, with an average extension of 86% from an average load of 413g, when the material failed. However Polyvinylidene Chloride does not appear to have very good moisture, or odour barrier properties; it allowed the greatest increase in mass, an estimated 133.00g m -2 24 hr -1 and maximum penetration of the mint flavouring into the chocolate. This may be due to added plasticisers, which loosen the film structure and increase its permeability, and may also be because of the thinness of the film. Cling film (Polyvinylidene Chloride) is normally used for short-term wrapping of poultry, which requires controlled movement of water vapour out of the packaging to prevent fogging in display packs when the temperature changes; and cheeses, because it is fat resistant; it is also widely used in the home. These results suggest it should not be used for foods with strong flavours or odours, or foods, which require controlled movement of water vapour, such as dehydrated foods that if their water activity (a w) rises above a set level, will permit microbial growth, and therefore spoilage. 