Insect conservation is not a widely reported issue, mainly due to the public's perception of these so-called 'creepy-crawlies', but that does not mean that it is not an important issue. As a student of conservation biology I can recognise the importance of insect conservation, insects are not only beneficial themselves but they are extremely useful conservation tools, so from a personal perspective insect conservation would be an excellent area of wildlife management to get into; and having worked with insects before I have a genuine interest in entomology. Conservation itself is a fairly personal issue, we want to save certain species simply because we have an interest in them or because they are aesthetically pleasing or because we feel guilty at destroying their habitat or population, so why shouldn't insects be considered as important as other organisms? The general lack of knowledge of even how many insect species there are makes it a difficult topic to study, only about 7-10% of insects are scientifically described (Samways, 1993), and there are only 771 insect species on the IUCN Red List of Threatened species (website, 2004). This shows how much more work is needed to be done on insect biology and ecology before we can think about conservation. Kim (1993) talks about the importance of insects in conservation as they have survived for over 400 million years in every type of habitat on earth and are major components in so many ecosystems. Generally, insects are thought of as pests, with millions being spent each year researching and developing insecticides that will wipe out whole populations of disease-carrying or crop-destroying pests, the global insecticide market was around $7 billion in 2000 (Syngenta website, 2005). There are many insect species that can be detrimental to humans in one way or another, from malaria-carrying Anopheles mosquitoes to agricultural pests like locusts (family Acrididae) and aphids (family Aphididae), though the fact remains that the vast majority of insects are directly or indirectly beneficial to us (Romoser and Stoffolano, 1994) and this is one reason why insect conservation is so important. Insects regularly play a part in everyday life, from basic insect products such as honey, wax (honey bee, Apis mellifera) and silk (silkworm, Bombyx mori) to their integrating role in many ecosystems. Beneficial insects tend to fall into three categories: pollinators, predators and decomposers, so it is easy to see how insects are vital to so many ecosystems. Common pollinators include the bumblebee (genus Bombus) and honey bee (A. mellifera); a study of flowers on chalk grasslands noted pollinators included Bombus lapidaries, A. mellifera and some Lepidoptera and Syrphidae (Lack, 1982). Predatory insects can be used in agriculture to provide natural biological control of other insect or plant species. However, from a conservation point of view it is important to investigate the full effects of introducing an alien species before it is carried out; for example Louda and O'Brien (2002) found that the exotic weevil (Larinus planus), being used to control the Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense) in Colorado, was having a detrimental effect on the native thistle species (Cirsium undulatum var. tracyi), and that introducing exotic insects for conservation weed management required more research. Many insects and insect larvae are responsible for the decomposition of waste matter in all sorts of environments. Common decomposers include termites (order Isoptera) and fly larvae (order Diptera); Paradise and Dunson (1997) found that helodid beetle larvae were keystone decomposers in Pennsylvania treehole communities. Insects are also important as a food source for animals and even humans, Defoliart (1999) notes that in tropical and subtropical countries the traditional use of insects as a human food source is continuing due to their nutritional and economic benefits. It is thought that more than half the food consumed by more than 1400 bird species in North America is insects (Swan, 1964). The role of insects as food has also lead to some important conservation issues - it has been documented that pesticides used in farming are partly responsible for the decline of British bird species such as the grey partridge (Perdix perdix) (e.g. Rands, 1986); insecticides wipe out most of the insects and herbicides kill off the remaining insects food source, leaving no food for the insect-dependent chicks. Insects play a part in various cultures around the world, for example dragonflies (order Odonata) are very important in Japanese culture and this has been used to help raise conservation awareness (Primack, Kobori and Mori, 2000). Hogue (1987) talks about the roles of insect gods and goddesses in the religions of the Greeks, Chinese, Aztecs and Babylonians in a review of cultural entomology. There are also those people who appreciate insects for their beauty or just there unusual behaviour, such as the praying mantis (family Mantidae) or dung beetle (family Scarabaeidae); it is thought that these amateur entomologists may be responsible for the declining numbers of certain species but there is no evidence documented of insect extinctions due to indiscriminate collecting (Pyle, Bentzien and Opler, 1981). For years insects have played a crucial role in medical research; in a review, by Potter, Turenchalk and Xu (2000), it was summarised that over recent years Drosophila researchers have developed important genetic techniques allowing for the identification and characterisation of genes involved in tumour formation and development. Insects are not only used in research but also as a medical treatment, maggot therapy was common in the 1930s and '40s and was reintroduced in the 1990s as a rapid, effective treatment for large necrotic wounds (Mumcuoglu et al, 1999). Insect larvae can also be a useful tool in forensics, Benecke (1998) summarises the main features of forensic entomology, the most common use being in estimating the post-mortem interval through the knowledge of insect life cycles and growth rates. As insects are not seen as particularly popular when it comes to getting funding for conservation research it can be useful to look at their application as conservation tools, the status of insect species living in a habitat can be a good indicator of the general health of the habitat itself, by simply monitoring the insect populations and diversity whole ecosystems can be helped. New (1995) summarises the main roles of insects as conservation tools, they can be thought of in four categories: keystone species, umbrella species, flagship species or groups, and indicator species. Keystone species are those on which the local community functionally depends, for example the long-proboscid fly (order Diptera) is a keystone species in certain southern African ecosystems where it is the sole or main pollinator of at least 120 plant species (Goldblatt and Manning, 2000). Less well-known taxa can be helped by more notable umbrella species, these do not necessarily have an integrating role like keystone species; Rubinoff (2001) warns against the use of vertebrates as umbrellas for invertebrates - a study in southern California, where the California gnatcatcher (Polioptila californica) was being used as an umbrella species for the conservation of coastal sage scrub, showed that the gnatcatcher was a poor indicator of certain Lepidoptera species in these habitats. Flagship species or groups increase the awareness of conservation needs by helping to gain public and political sympathy, based on their appeal; for example lots of money was raised for other species after the successful reintroduction of the Large Blue butterfly (Maculinea arion) (Whalley, 1989), and Jin and Yen (1998) suggest the use of the cricket (family Gryllidae) as a flagship taxa for invertebrate conservation in China, due to the trading and collecting of certain species. Indicator species are those that 'indicate' a particular set of environmental conditions best suited to it; certain invertebrates are particularly sensitive to changes and can be used to help monitor the health of a habitat. Parsons (1991) suggested that Drosophila species have a role as indicators of habitat change due to their close association with the rain forest habitat in which they live. Insect conservation is far more linked with habitat conservation than any other type of conservation is; usually the most important thing is seen as preserving the species itself rather than the environment in which it inhabits. If a species can be bred in captivity, particularly in zoos, it is considered a conservation success, whether or not it's natural habitat is still available; this is not good news for insects as it is unlikely that many rare species will be bred in captivity for public viewing, so to conserve them their habitat must be conserved too. There are examples of some insects being reared in captivity, usually with the aim of reintroducing populations into the wild, both the field cricket (Gryllus campestris) and wart-biter bush cricket (Decticus verrucivorus) were bred at London Zoo and later successfully re-established populations in the wild (Pearce-Kelly et al, 1998). Hughes, Daily and Ehrlich (2000) suggest using a habitat approach to conserve insect diversity, they found that community-wide studies were a good way of gathering diversity and distribution information about little-known taxa. It seems clear to me that to gain more support for insect conservation the idea of habitat conservation and the use of insects as tools should be promoted. One of the main aspects of insect conservation is the fact that it is usually human factors that are leading to the endangerment of certain species and it is therefore our responsibility, as with all conservation, to put things right. The main threats to insects are: habitat destruction, pollution and pesticides, the introduction of alien species, and overexploitation or overcollecting. New et al (1995) suggest that habitat destruction is the biggest threat to insect populations. There are currently 27 insects on the IUCN Red List whose threats include habitat loss or degradation (website, 2004). One of the worries about future habitat destruction is global-warming, though there is debate over the positive or negative impacts this will have on pest and non-pest species (Harrington, Fleming and Wolwod, 2001). Insecticides are clearly designed to kill insects but other pesticides can also have detrimental effects - herbicides, although they may not harm the insects directly, can wipe out an insects food-source in an area very quickly, as was shown when studying the grey partridge (P. perdix) (e.g. Rands, 1986). Pollution can take many forms and effect insects in various ways, for example heavy metals have been shown to effect many organisms, Moe, Stenseth and Smith (2001) noted the detrimental effects of cadmium on blowfly adults (Lucilia sericata). The introduction of exotic species, whether intentionally, through attempted biological control, or unintentionally can seriously effect an insect population, either by competition for resources or predation. Samways, Taylor and Tarboton (2005) actually showed that threatened populations could recover after the removal of alien species - three South African Odonta species that were nearly extinct were found at sites where invasive alien trees had been removed. Due to the large number of insect species extinctions are happening all the time, they just go unnoticed; Dunn (2005) reported that there are two types of extinction that are common for insects but rare for other taxa - loss of narrow habitat specialists from restricted habitats and the coextinctions of affiliates with their hosts. He suggests that more research should be done into documenting insect extinctions; it is worth remembering that not all extinctions are due to humans. Some species become extinct simply by adapting to changes in their environment and evolving into new species (New, 1995), in these cases which species should we be trying to conserve? There have been many success stories of insect conservation but, again, we are unlikely to hear about them unless they are a particularly popular or important species. As already mentioned, the reintroduction of the Large Blue butterfly (M. arion) was seen as a huge success, not only was an extinct population re-established but it raised awareness for invertebrate conservation in general and helped several other species living in the same habitat; in their summary of insect conservation, Pyle, Bentzien and Opler (1981), talk about the decline of the Large Blue and the subsequent efforts, such as habitat preservation, to save it. In both China and Japan culturally important species have been successfully conserved and helped to promote conservation awareness at the same time (Jin and Yen, 1998; Primack, Kobori and Mori, 2000). In the UK insect conservation is gradually gaining more support, with organisations such as Buglife, Europe's first organisation devoted to invertebrate conservation (website, 2005), and the Royal Entomological Society, which regularly holds meetings and symposiums covering all aspects of insect conservation (website, 2005). The UK Biodiversity Action Plan, set up in 1994 after the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity, is committed to protecting both habitats and species, including many insects (website, 2005). It is obvious by the wealth of information available that, for some, insect conservation is a priority but general awareness still needs to be raised. It is evident there are many beneficial aspects to insects and their life styles, which are all excellent reasons for conserving them, but there are also species that aren't so useful which raises some questions - should we be actively conserving them too or just leave them to cope alone? Or should we be encouraging eradication of certain pest species? As noted, millions are already spent on insecticides to deal with crop pests and there are various programmes aimed at dealing with insects hazardous to health; sterile insect techniques are now being used to deplete certain populations, for example the tsetse fly (Glossina austeni) has been eradicated on the island of Unguja, Zanzibar, through the release of gamma-sterilised males (Vreyson et al, 2000), but how justified is this from a conservation point of view? We feel inclined to save certain species as we have no moral right to let them become extinct so why should we allow other species to be actively destroyed? It is impossible to know the full impact on an ecosystem of removing a species from it, so in my view the focus would ideally be on treating the symptoms of these pest species, such as the diseases they carry, rather than the insects themselves. For all of the reasons mentioned above it is clear that insect conservation is an extremely important issue that deserves far more attention, the lack of knowledge does not mean there is a lack of interest, a simple search on the internet brings up thousands of insect and insect conservation related articles. According to the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (website, 2004) there are only 13 threatened species in the UK, four of which are reintroduced species like the Large Blue (M. arion); one of the species is only found in the UK (Myrmica hirsuta). This is clearly an underestimation as so many species are yet to be discovered, and currently the number of taxonimists, amateur and professional, is still in decline (Hopkins and Freckleton, 2002). It also shows how insect conservation is still not really seen as a major issue in the UK which I think should change; insect conservation is intrinsically linked with habitat conservation, and focusing on conserving habitats could help save numerous invertebrate, vertebrate and plant species. Specific species studies are important but habitat conservation seems to be the key to insect conservation and vice versa. From a personal perspective, as a conservation student with an interest in entomology, the fact there is still so much to discover and so few people to do it can only be a good thing. 