The red fox (Vulpes vulpes) is one of eight Carnivora indigenous to Britain . V. vulpes has the widest distribution of all Vulpes species and is thought to be the direct descendent of V. alopecoides; V. vulpes remains have been found in 400,000 year old Pleistocene deposits (Lloyd, 1980). The red fox's highly adaptable, unspecialised nature has been the key to its success but has also led to its establishment as a pest species. Red foxes in Britain can be considered in two different groups, the rural fox and the urban fox, each with its own specific pest issues and subsequent control problems. Rural foxes are considered predators of many farm and game animals, not only killing but causing stress as well. Foxes also carry many diseases making them an unwelcome resident of many urban areas. The fox is perceived to cause many problems, to assess the need for its control, its pest status must first be addressed. Canids evolved around 30-50 million years ago and there are 41 species in the family. V. vulpes is indigenous to the northern hemisphere and there are no Vulpes in South America; three foxes were introduced to Victoria, Australia, from Britain in 1864, not for control of rabbits but for sport (Rolls, 1969), and they are now considered one of the countries worst pests. There are many fables and myths surrounding the fox, originating from its opportunistic, versatile lifestyle and cunning nature; apparently foxes have been known to feign death to attract birds, catch crabs with their tails and disinfest themselves of fleas by wading into water with something buoyant in their mouths (Lloyd, 1980). Foxes were once hunted for their fur but this practice peaked in 1979 and no longer takes place (Lloyd, 1980). Red foxes are distributed across the UK, even inhabiting many of its small islands where they were probably not indigenous, such as Anglesey and the Isle of Wight; they were thought to have been introduced, illegally, to the Isle of Man in the 1980s but since then have either disappeared or fallen to extremely low densities, five or six on the whole island (Reynolds and Short, 2003). Fox abundance is difficult to determine, though estimates put the British population at around 240,000 - 21 st of 64 British mammals in a league table of abundance (MacDonald et al, 2000). Foxes, although carnivores, are generalists and opportunists, feeding and scavenging on anything from invertebrates to fruit to small mammals, dead or alive (Lloyd, 1980). They are mostly nocturnal and crepuscular and tend to be most abundant in fragmentary habitats where they have plenty of cover and food (Corbet and Harris, 1991). Foxes live in pairs or family groups in territories that range in size depending on habitat and, especially, food supply (Corbet and Harris, 1991), urban foxes have smaller territories than rural foxes (DEFRA, 2005a). Urban foxes occur most frequently in residential areas and less often in city centres and near industry (Harris and Rayner, 1986). The red fox has few natural predators, especially in the UK where it is only badgers and domestic dogs, probably more in urban areas (Corbet and Harris, 1991). The red fox originates from the countryside but since the 1930s has also colonised urban areas; these two groups of foxes have very different impacts, as pests, on their environment and therefore should be considered separately, especially regarding control; many of the common controls for rural foxes would not be suitable in an urban environment. Foxes are protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and the Wild Mammals Protection Act 1996; the current legal methods of control are shooting, snaring and trapping (DEFRA website, 2005). Gassing is illegal as there are no approved compounds, repellents have limited use and hunting with hounds was banned in February 2005 (DEFRA website, 2005). The main problems with rural foxes are the predation of livestock, poultry and game. Lambs are particularly susceptible to fox attack, as are ground-nesting birds and free-range poultry. The belief that foxes are too widespread in general is enough for many farmers to carry out control themselves or are happy for it to be carried out in the area (MacDonald et al, 2000). The Wildlife Conservation Research Unit (WildCRU) carried out surveys of farmers opinions over several years and found that in 1992 57% considered the fox to be a pest, and in 1981 74% thought the fox should be controlled in the countryside and 71% in towns, however it was only ranked fourth in a list of pests (MacDonald et al, 2000). The actual numbers of animals lost to foxes are difficult to quantify as most reports are from farmers that only suspect the loss is due to a fox; lamb losses in particular remain an unclear area with variations depending on flock size and management, as well as fox abundance (Lloyd, 1980). The 1981 WildCRU survey showed that of farmers who thought they had lost lambs to foxes, 83% based their assumption of the fact they had seen a fox in the area (MacDonald et al, 2000). In 1996 MAFF attributed 5% of lamb losses to 'predator/misadventure' (MacDonald et al, 2000), which covers fox predation amongst other things; the various problems with collecting data for accurate estimations mean that often farmers opinions are relied upon even though they are overestimates. Heydon and Reynolds (2000) noted that there were more lamb losses reported in Mid-Wales, where there is less shepherding and mostly outdoor lambing, than in two other areas studied, Norfolk and West Midlands; reported losses were decreased by 50% at all sites with the presence of a gamekeeper carrying out predator control, though this could be because more attention was paid to the flock meaning foxes had less chance to attack and any sick or injured animals were spotted more quickly. Moberley et al (2003) concluded that there were several management and non-management factors influencing fox predation on lambs and that these could be used to identify potential problem farms. There is belief among pig-farmers that foxes also take piglets, as well as agitating sows and spreading disease, and the increase in outdoor pig raising over recent years could add to this problem (MacDonald et al, 2000). There is obviously evidence of fox predation on livestock but the actual numbers are probably far less than the perceived problem and it could be said that the fox's pest status is overestimated. Predation on poultry is a long established fact, the earliest reports of predatory behaviour by foxes refer to the taking of poultry from farms and yards - unprotected animals feeding together in one area were an easy target (Lloyd, 1980). Foxes tend to kill a large number of animals, particularly birds, that are not all eaten - surplus killing - (Kruuk, 1972) and this is, potentially, a big problem for poultry farmers, especially after the growth of the free-range poultry industry. Moberly, White and Harris (2004) surveyed producers of free-range eggs, chickens, turkeys and geese to assess the impact of fox predation; it was found the highest losses were 0.5% of total flocks, recorded by egg and goose producers. It was, again, suggested that changes in farm management would be the best, and most cost-effective, way of reducing fox predation, rather than increases in fox control. Foxes are considered a pest by gamekeepers, large numbers of prey in one area are enough to attract foxes; Reynolds et al (1992) found that foxes were the main predator of partridges, through radio-tagging of the birds. Predator control is one way in which game populations have been helped to improve; Tapper, Potts and Brockless (1996) conducted experiments on Salisbury Plain and showed that three years of predator removal allowed autumn grey partridge (Perdix perdix) densities to increase 3.5 times. Although a dietary study may not show many game birds in the foxes diet, it has been shown to be an important predator as the proportion of birds taken is substantial compared to the number of birds in the area (Reynolds and Tapper, 1995). Foxes also prey on other birds, they are a particular pest of colonial nesting birds such as the least tern (Minsky, 1980). Seymour et al (2003) noted that foxes influence the survival of lapwings (Vanellus vanellus), even though predation was incidental; it was also found that foxes used greater search effort in areas of high waterbird density. Control is often carried out by conservationists to protect vulnerable ground-nesting birds (MacDonald et al, 2000). Urban foxes have their own pest status: they attack small, domestic pets and livestock, destroy gardens, raid bins, spread disease and disturb the peace with their calling (DEFRA, 2005a). The spread of disease is thought of as a big issue, both with rural and urban foxes, and although foxes carry a number of parasites and diseases there are very few that actually affect humans or domestic pets. The diseases most concerning humans are roundworm (Toxocarna canis) and Ecchinococcus, foxes are also known to be carriers of sarcoptic mange and although this is highly contagious among foxes there are few confirmed reports of it being passed to domestic dogs, and it should be noted foxes are not the only carriers of these diseases (DEFRA, 2005a). Foxes are often associated with rabies and, although there is none in Britain at present, there has been call for better studies into fox densities so that, in the unlikely event of an outbreak, control strategies could be more easily formulated (Wilkinson and Smith, 2001). Urban foxes are not always considered pests, people often like to see wildlife in their back garden and have been known to leave out food specifically to attract foxes (DEFRA, 2005a). As mentioned, the legal methods of lethal fox control are shooting, snaring and trapping, all of which are used for the control of rural foxes. Organised control of foxes, together with hunting for pelts, probably began with the appointment of Royal Fox Hunters by Edward I (Lloyd, 1980), and since then has been prevalent across the country. Fox control should ideally take place outside of cub-rearing season (March-May) to avoid the suffering of cubs left without a mother (Lloyd, 1980). The type of control, and its effectiveness, tend to vary with region and reflect agricultural and game-shooting interests (Heydon and Reynolds, 2000). In cities the most likely cause of death for foxes is road traffic accidents, 61% of deaths in Bristol, only 18% were caused by man, just 8% more than disease (Harris and Smith, 1987), so perhaps little extra control needs to carried out anyway. Shooting is considered a fairly humane method of control, the restrictions on guns and ammunition help to minimise the chances of animals being shot and only wounded, though there is insufficient data on the number of foxes wounded and the likelihood of their recovery (MacDonald et al, 2000). Shooting is generally either done at night, with a rifle and a light (lamping), as this is when foxes are most active, or during the day with dogs or people driving foxes from cover towards a waiting gun pack. Lamping is usually carried out from a vehicle and therefore requires an area with vehicle access and open terrain so shots can be fired safely (MacDonald et al, 2000); even with precautions shooting at night is risky, over the last two years one boy has been killed and another man injured in lamping incidents in the UK (BBC news website, 2005) and it is recommended that it should only be carried out by competent shooters who are familiar with the area in daylight (DEFRA, 2005b). Using dogs or beaters to flush out foxes is predominantly used in dense woodland and the usual weapon is a shotgun, the recommendation with this method is that large dogs be used to avoid the chance of them entering the den (DEFRA, 2005b). The use of bows, crossbows and explosives are all banned under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Shooting is not suitable for the control of urban foxes. Snares are also a popular control method for rural fox control, favoured by gamekeepers (MacDonald et al, 2000). The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 dictates that neck snares must be free-running and self-locking, and should be inspected once a day. Snares are placed on known fox runs at a specific height that should only entrap foxes, if other animals are caught by accident they can be released unharmed as the snare is not lethal; foxes that are caught are usually shot at close range (DEFRA, 2005b). Due to the fox's wary nature snares are a good method of control as they are not seen by the fox until it has been caught; DEFRA recently released a code of practice on snaring, supported by the Game Conservancy Trust (GCT website, 2005; DEFRA website, 2005). In some regions, particularly upland areas, snares are used in conjunction with 'middens' - these are something buried that will attract a fox, such as a rabbit carcass, surrounded by a fence that allows the fox access but prevents livestock entering; snares or traps are placed in the fenced area (MacDonald et al, 2000). Snares are not really suitable for catching urban foxes. Trapping is considered a fairly ineffective method of control in rural areas; live-capture cage traps are used by some gamekeepers but do not account for many of the foxes caught (MacDonald et al, 2000). Leghold traps are banned under the Spring Traps Approval Order 1995 and the use of live baits and decoys are banned by the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Again, foxes caught are usually dispatched. Traps can be used to catch urban foxes too, and some people prefer to see these foxes relocated rather than dispatched. Translocation of foxes is not a very good idea for several reasons: it is simply moving the problem from the area rather than getting rid of it completely; foxes are extremely territorial and the removal of one fox will just make room for another (DEFRA, 2005a), though this is a problem with any fox control; an urban fox translocated to a rural setting would probably not survive very long, foxes are adaptable but it would lack the immediate skills to survive, and it may have been placed in another fox territory (DEFRA, 2005a), in which case it would probably be attacked. Before the Hunting Act was passed in 2004, banning the hunting of wild mammals with dogs from February 2005, there was great debate over the effectiveness of foxhunting as a method of control. Foxes have been hunted in the UK for hundreds of years, either on horseback, on foot or simply using hounds to drive foxes out of woodland to waiting guns (Lloyd, 1980). Data from Masters of Fox Hounds Association-Registered hunts shows that mounted hunts culled between 13,800 and 15,400 foxes annually (MacDonald et al, 2000). It is widely believed that the idea of hunts controlling fox populations was a smokescreen for sport (Lloyd, 1980), though it was predicted that if no compensatory culling was carried out, the ban could increase fox populations by 10% (MacDonald et al, 2000). Traditionally, Fox Destruction Societies were set up in non-hunting areas, and until 1979 government-subsidised bounties were still available for foxes killed (Lloyd, 1980). Fox hunting is still seen as a contentious issue as many hunts have simply ignored the ban or found legal ways to get round it, and there is no evidence of the impact so far; the ban still allows stalking and flushing out with up to two dogs, and any foxes caught must be shot or killed with a bird of prey. The suggestion that the ban would be difficult to enforce has not been helped by some police forces admitting that regulating it is not a priority (BBC news website, 2005). Recent news reports suggest both supporters and opponents of the ban were happy at the recent start of the hunting season (BBC news website, 2005). In 2001 when there was a temporary ban on hunting due to foot and mouth disease, a study by Baker, Harris and Webbon (2002) showed that there was no increase in fox abundance in the areas they studied and that a total ban was unlikely to have a big impact, as suggested by MacDonald et al (2000)., There are also the non-lethal forms of control associated with fox prevention and good farm management. These mainly refer to fences and indoor birthing. In urban areas, again, fencing is a good idea to keep out foxes as well as minimising the attractants such as using a fox-proof dustbin to stop access to food. As well as these, DEFRA (2005a) guidelines for preventing damage by urban foxes include not intentionally feeding foxes, making bird tables inaccessible, using pesticides to remove invertebrates and providing secure accommodation for livestock/pets. Permanent fences for keeping out foxes can be expensive to install, especially in rural areas where they may need to be quite long, so should only be used for valuable livestock (DEFRA, 2005b). Fox proof fences must be about two metres high, with an overhang, to stop jumping, and at least a 45cm buried section to prevent digging underneath (DEFRA, 2005b). Poole and McKillop (2002) showed two types of electric fence, netting and strained wire, are both extremely effective at fox exclusion; electric fencing should be over one metre high to be effective. DEFRA (2005b) suggest the use of electric fences for protecting lambs and piglets when they are at there most vulnerable. Alternative controls include repellents, taste aversion compounds and contraception. Repellents are available but have very limited use, the one that was most effective, Renardine, is no longer available (DEFRA, 2005b). Taste aversion compounds are mild toxins or emetics that are applied to a bait to condition the fox into avoiding certain foods, they are also considered inadequate; field research by, for example, the Game Conservancy Trust and MAFF, has shown that conditioned taste aversion is not viable for fox management in the UK (MacDonald et al, 2000). In America many studies have been done on chemosterilistation (eg Balser, 1964) and there are currently studies under way to develop a bait-delivered immunocontraceptive for the control of the red fox; Bradley, Hinds and Bird (1997) note that there is still a lot of work to be done on understanding the immune response and finding the best delivery method. Studies on fox behaviour have shown that sterilisation has no effect on territoriality or survival and that immunocontraception could be feasible in free-living foxes (Saunders et al, 2002). Magiafoglou et al (2003) suggest that, over time, resistance could evolve to immunocontraception and that this should be studied as well. There has also been promising work on the possibility of using abortifacients, though apparently these are not seen as acceptable by ethicists (Tuyttens and MacDonald, 1998). A novel method has been tried in the USA, and to some extent in the UK, of using llamas to guard livestock against predators, which some farmers claim is successful (DEFRA, 2005b). It is clear that the red fox, in both rural and urban areas, is a pest to some extent, though the general lack of data on fox abundance, number of prey killed and efficacy of culling makes it difficult to determine what exactly its pest status is. It appears that its perceived status is greater than reality. There are continuing studies into how best to estimate fox abundance, including monitoring field signs (Sadlier et al, 2004) and counts from road traffic accidents in cities (Baker et al, 2004). After the extensive debate on the banning of fox hunting with hounds it will be interesting to see how much an effect it will have on fox populations, at present there is no confirmed data available. Fox control can be a costly business so finding the most suitable method and level of control for individual situations is paramount. Despite lack of data there is certainly some evidence of definite behaviours that humans, particularly farmers, wish to avoid, and through a combination of fox prevention and control these can be managed quite effectively. 