<heading>Introduction</heading>At the beginning of the twentieth century a massive 90% of the UK's agricultural land was farmed by tenants holding rented land. By 1991 this figure had declined greatly to just 36% (Soffee 2003). The reasons for this decline are numerous but still a significant proportion farmed land in the UK is held under tenancies. This report outlines the key pieces of farm tenancy legislation that apply to most rented farm holdings in the UK with case examples from two rented farm businesses visited. Under this legislation it is the tenant's decision what level of SFP is introduced on the agricultural land. Other more flexible and short term forms of tenancy exist to farmers such as contract farming and seasonal tenancies but these are a contractual agreements and not covered by this legislation in any way and may not include SFP entitlements for land (Defra/National Statistics 2005). <heading>Farm Business Tenancies Act 1995</heading>This modern agricultural tenancy act was created following a government consultation paper entitled "Agricultural Tenancy Law Proposals for Reform" that was published in 1991 and proposed reform designed to make agricultural letting simpler, more popular and increase flexibility between a landlord and tenant. The bill was proposed to parliament in November 1994 and came into power from the first of September 1995 (Soffee 2003). All tenancies created after these dates must be titled a Farm Business Tenancy (FBT) and use a simple legal framework which allows for more negotiation of conditions between tenants and landlords. FBT's can last various lengths of time and this is decided at the start of the agreement by the landlord. They can be as short as a periodic monthly rental but are more often agreed over medium time periods of between five and ten years on medium sized farms. The legislation first defines what a farm business tenancy is, requiring a tenant to meet a business condition and agricultural condition throughout the tenancies lifetime. The business condition means most or all of land rented must be farmed for the purpose of trade or business. This prevents a tenant from removing the majority of farm land from agricultural production or hobby farming which does not qualify for business condition. To satisfy the agricultural condition tenants must prove the purpose of renting land has been wholly, or primarily for agricultural purposes, but a tenant may exchange written "notice condition" with their landlord about any non farming diversification plans during the planned tenancy period in pre-tenancy agreements (Net Lawman 2006). With the recent stress of unstable market prices paid for agricultural commodities and the de-coupling of EU support from production there are an increased number of farms looking to source incomes through diversification schemes. The FBT framework makes it much easier for tenants to do this without having to make constant complicated legal changes to tenancy agreements as with the old legislation. The landlord however is still assured the majority of the holding is still being used for an agricultural purpose by the definition of a FBT. An example of this was seen on a holding held by the Browns at Boars Hole Farm under a FBT. Barns had been converted to stables with the landlord's permission and David Brown allowed to sub-let the stables for DIY livery and keeps all the revenue. So successful was this enterprise David converted a further a shed into a stable and can now generate one third of the farms total annual rent from just this sub-letting operation. Often Landlords will demand a percentage of revenue received via sub-letting income before they grant permission to sub let. This was seen on Jim Bryce's FBT where he had converted buildings using his own capital into commercial offices and had been allowed to sub let the buildings until he had received what it cost him to convert them and then had to give 20% of the revenue to his landlord. A FBT also states the periods of notice required if either party wishes to leave the agreement early. When FBT is initially agreed parties may create break clauses within the contract that allows the agreement to be broken under certain circumstances such as bankruptcy or failure of tenant to pay rent for example. These are written into the agreement and both parties must agree with these conditions for the tenancy to exist (Defra 2003). Otherwise tenancies of less than two years will exist until the finish date of rental and those agreed for a period of longer than two years a minimum of one year and a maximum two years notice must be given by either party wishing to leave the agreement. Once the agreement ends the tenant has no rights to remain on the property if the landlord does not continue with the tenancy. Any improvements or fixings that a tenant has made using their capital during their occupation of the property should be compensated for by the landlord at the end of the rental agreement and can include intangible benefits such as fertilizer spread or milk quota held on land however tenants have a statuary to remove any fixings/building as long as holding is returned to condition it was found in but usually they will have to ask landlords permission before instillation and discuss possible compensation agreements. Finally the landlord has no right under a FBT to claim for dilapidation at the end of agreement but if property is in serious state of disrepair they are able to claim compensation through common law. The final important part of FBT legislation is that it allows agreed rent reviews at particular time during the rental. Often a landlord and tenant will agree a set formula for rent review such as a 5% rise in rent every five years before agreement is entered. If they do not a agree the set formula the agreement is termed "silent" but the act allows the rent to be reviewed every three years by an open market rent if either party wishes. <heading>Farm Tenancies Act 1986 </heading>Farm tenancies agreed before the introduction of FBT's fall under this act which also consolidates a number issues arising from agricultural tenancy acts made before 1986 (Soffee 2003). Previous farm tenancy acts (FTA) were made to remove agricultural tenancies from common law where it was felt landlords had too much power over their tenants such as only having to give six months notice before leaving an agreement. These tenancies tend to be more long term and have no set life span like FBT's. The first benefit of act is increased tenant security which requires landlords to give a one year period of notice to quit the agreement before a tenant must leave property. The tenant also has the right to serve a counter notice within a month of receiving notice if they wish to stay. If the Agricultural Land Tribunal then proves the reason for the landlords repossession is not for any of the following reasons: in the interest of good husbandry or estate management, land is to be used for agricultural research, education or allotments or landlord will endure great hardship if not allowed to reposes property then the tenant will be allowed to stay providing they are not bankrupt, are paying the rent, are using land for agricultural purposes and are up keeping tenants maintenance obligations to a suitable standard. If there is dispute in this area a third party arbitrator from the royal institution of accountants can be called in resolve matters (Soffee 2003). The 1986 act also incorporated the changed law about security of farm tenure between family generations. The 1976 Agriculture (miscellaneous provisions) Act was the first act that ever allowed a farm tenancy to be passed on to two further future generations in event of a tenants death without the landlord being able to withdraw from the agreement. This was felt to be impractical and unfair to landlords and the law was soon changed so this could be removed from tenancies, however existing tenancies created between 1976 and 1984 are still entitled to this right. Eligible relations wishing to continue the tenancy must be a widow, brother or sister, son or daughter (adopted children eligible) and prove before a tribunal they are suitable person to take on the farm and have worked on the farm for five years or more (Defra 2003). They should make their will continue the agreement within three months of the death if they wish it continue or else the Landlord has observed enough notice to quit the tenancy. This was seen on Jim Bryce's main holding, Butlers Farm where he was the third and final generation of tenant to secure the rental of property under the 1976 act. Rent reviews legislation under the 1986 act is similar to that covered in the 1995 act, where either party can demand a rent review every 3 three years which is done by arbitration between the parties (Soffee2003). Most FTA's then have complex and long agreements containing "modal repair clauses" regarding landlord and tenant obligations to one another regarding who is responsible for maintenance of permanent fixtures. At the end of the tenancy it is usual that fixtures tenants have added must be compensated for by the landlord at their fair current value. This includes milk quotas (Soffee 2003). Only if the landlord does not wish to compensate the tenant for the fixtures, can they be removed provided the property is returned to original condition. These conditions were seen in practice at David Browns holding at Trumplett's farm where landlord was responsible for cost of maintain ace to water mains and his pig feeder would be classed as a tenant improvement fixture that would have to be offered to and paid for by the landlord should the tenancy end. Diversification is difficult to include in this act as it requires farm to be wholly for agricultural purposes. 