<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>This report looks to examine methods of controlling enteric diseases in calves and is structured around answering the following questions associated with the topic: How often do enteric diseases occur in UK agriculture and what are the consequences of this? What is enteric disease and how are they caused / spread? What are the symptoms and effects for infected calves? What is the best way to treat an infected calf effective recovery? How could calves be managed to reduce incidents of infection? What conclusions can be made about management of enteric diseases in the UK? </abstract><heading>How common are enteric diseases in UK agriculture and what are the consequences of this? </heading>On cattle farms, calf rearing is often a troublesome and time consuming aspect of production overlooked by many producers. Calves are very susceptible to wide range of diseases resulting in high mortality rates of between 2% and 5% being accepted on most farms in the UK, with two thirds of these deaths occurring during the first month of life dominantly as the result of enteric disorders (Garnsworthy 2005). The remaining third of deaths are usually the result of respiratory infections, especially pneumonia at around three months of age. Therefore enteric diseases are the largest cause of economic loss to the UK cattle industry and have a large effect on calf welfare. <heading>What is enteric disease and how are they caused / spread? </heading>An enteric disease is anything that stops the normal function of a calf's stomach by inhibiting normal intestine function. There are multiple causes of enteric diseases and these can be subdivided into managerial and infectious causes. A massive range of infectious bacteria organisms and viruses exist and each affects the function of the intestine slightly differently. Commonly identified infectious causes include; rotavirus, cryptosporidia, E-coli (K-99 strain is often to blame) coronavirus, clostridal, salmonella S (a zoonsoes notifiable disease) and bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD) virus to name just a few as well as fungi often causing enteric diseases (See Appendix 2). Routes of infection are various too, with transfer of disease organisms often from the mothering cow's colostrums or milk as well as accidental ingestion of the cows faeces (for example a soiled teat). Infection can be acquired from the surrounding environment with bacteria present on the bodies, the feed, in the air and faeces of other calves as well as being harboured in the surrounding building materials (formites). Vermin carrying disease such as rats contaminating feed with faeces are another potential way disease can spread. Every enteric disease will have initially been caused by bacteria, fungi or virus invading a calf's body in one of these ways. It normal to find controlled populations of bacteria such as e-coli within the intestine however it is often managerial factors that lead to a calf being unable to defend against this population effectively this leads to disease. This is the result of the way maternal antibodies are transferred into new born calves to provide passive immunity to infection. The placenta of a cow is impermeable to protein, making the transfer of IgG anti-bodies into the calf's bloodstream before birth impossible (Garnsworthy 2005). Calves are therefore born effectively with no immunity to disease causing organisms and are solely dependent upon the transfer of IgG anti-bodies, vitamins and fats into their bloodstream by ingestion of their mother's colostrum to protect them from the mass of rapidly invading bacteria that enter their bodies from the surrounding environment after birth. A calf's intestine gradually loses the ability to absorb IgG after birth after a period of between 24 and 48 hours after birth and will no longer be able to absorb antibodies (See appendix 2) after this. If not enough colostrums is received in this time a calf is venerable to an enteric disease. Poor management practises that cause stress also contribute to high rates of infection as they lower a calf's ability to fight off the infection. Wind chills, irregular feeding times, damp bedding and feeding of milk at incorrect temperature are all known to increase the likelihood of enteric diseases developing as calf struggles to maintain normal function. <heading>What are the symptoms and effects for infected calves? </heading>Good stockmanship skills are needed to identify calves suffering from enteric diseases quickly and accurately so that an effective treatment leads to an effective recovery minimises economic losses to the farmer. A calf with an enteric disease may display all, a combination or just one of the following symptoms during infection depending on what disease organism responsible for the disease. Scour (diarrhoea) is the most obvious initial symptom with smelly faeces being the result of undigested milk being excreted (Garnsworthy 2005). Examination of the faeces can often identify more specifically the cause of the disease (for example thin profuse yellow scour suggesting a rotavirus infection is to blame) and aid later treatment selection. Calf scour may also be the result of overfeeding of a calf or experienced when a calf excretes for the first time. This is normal and not caused by an enteric disease and a skilled stockman should be able to recognise and differentiate these causes of temporary scour. Dehydration and dry eyes are common as the result of the disease sloughing the epidermal cells tips (willi) in the intestine preventing the calf from absorbing liquids (Garnsworthy 2005). Calves are also likely to appear depressed lying on the floor with their head down, weak and lacking in energy and display a part or total loss of appetite in the early stages of the disease. <heading>What is the best way to treat an infected calf effective recovery? </heading>Calves showing any suspicion of these symptoms should be isolated away from other calves immediately, preferably by movement to an entirely separate building to stop the transmission of the disease to neighbouring calves via contact with infected materials and air space. Disinfection and removal of manure from their old pen will also prevent rapid spread of a disease through all the farms calves. The affected calf should then be fed a diet of electrolytes and glucose suspended in a solution of water warmed to around 25ºC to match the milk temperature the calf would receive from their mother's dam (Maff 1984). The electrolytes in this feed positively promote uptake of fluids through the damaged intestine allowing the water to re-hydrate the calf and glucose provides an instant energy source to aid quick recovery (Garnsworthy 2005). This diet should only be fed for a maximum period of two days and then occasional feeding of milk should be resumed to maintain the function of the epithermal cells that digest milk in the intestine as they naturally become dysfunctional after a period of low milk intake as a normal reaction caused by weaning (Garnsworthy 2005). This milk may cause momentary cases of scour but will be beneficial in the long term after recovery because milk will provide a far more nutritious feeding solution than glucose and electrolyte rich solution to maintain calf condition. Small amounts of water should be offered little and often during recovery to re-hydrate the animal too. Antibiotic treatments may also prove useful in killing the bacteria responsible however use of broad spectrum antibiotics against unknown bacteria is not recommended as only E.coli, salmonella and similar organisms that can be killed in this way and must using a targeted anti-biotic (Tickett, Mitchell & Hallows 1988). Doing this will require costly and time consuming blood and tissue tests as well as treatment consultation by a vet by which time a calf's health may have deteriorate rapidly. Hence this practice is too costly and impractical for the most of farmers. Late diagnosis of an enteric disease often leads to a very weak, cold calf that is unlikely to recover from the condition as is too weak to consume any feed. Emergency force feeding of electrolytes and glucose solution using a throat "tube" and use antibiotics may work however often culling to prevent the spread of disease and prolonged cruelty to the calf is advisable. <heading>How could calves be managed to reduce incidents of infection? </heading>For farms rearing calves focus should be made on the pro-active prevention of enteric diseases rather than reactive management after infection. Prevention will cut medicine and time input costs needed dramatically, reduce animal suffering/welfare and also lead to reduced instances of other problematic diseases (particularly pneumonia). As mentioned earlier the first key step to disease prevention many farmers fail to utilise is ensuring calves receive the adequate quantity of colostrum in early life so that they maximise the number of anti-bodies available to fight off invading bacteria in their blood stream. As a general guide it is accepted that ensuring a calf receives 3 litres of colostrum (this quantity should be adjusted slightly depending on the calves body weight) in the first six hours of life (when the calf's ability to absorb colostrum is greatest [see appendix 2]) should ensure maximum protection against disease. Feeding of colostrum for a few days beyond this period is beneficial in nourishing the calf with additional vitamins and fats but does little to improve disease resistance. This can be done by leaving a calf at its mother's teat for suckler beef production but it is ore practical on dairy units to milk the mothers colostrum and feed it to the calf via a bottle.Use of powdered colostrum or artificial injection of anti-bodies (such as rotavec-Corona) at birth can prove useful ways to guarantee protection. Care should be taken when purchasing un-weaned store cattle for beef production as the level of anti-bodies in calves is unknown and their health status may not be immediately obvious, so where possible store animals should be purchased from a known source where feeding of adequate colostrum is adequate to guarantee a good health status of the animals. There is also good evidence that feeding of pasteurised milk will reduce the number of cases of enteric diseases too (farmers weekly 2006). After feeding sufficient colostrum has been insured, the calves rearing environment should be considered carefully to prevent spread of disease organisms. Outdoor suckler rearing systems are the least susceptible to spread of infection. Indoor sucklers should be housed on fresh straw and cleaned regularly in housing with draft free but adequate ventilation. On dairy units use "calf hutches" is an expensive but ideal solution. These though plastic hutches are setup outside with a pen around them. The pen provides sufficient protection from elements that could cause stress educed infection whilst the open air stops air borne infections. Other useful management tips including through disinfection of buildings after calves are removed with a three week gap before restocking to kill bacteria and regular feeding routines are essential to reducing stress. Fans or storm sheeting can prove very useful tools in managing ventilation to prevent disease too. <heading>What conclusions can be made about management of enteric diseases in the UK? </heading>There is great scope to reduce the incidence of enteric diseases and the economic loses and animal cruelty associated with them in UK agriculture. Management to prevent the disease in the first place is key to achieving this. For many years now high rates of calf mortality have all too often become the accepted norm on farms and poor management and hygiene being a common cause on both dairy and suckler beef farms. Yet few producers seem prepared to change their calf rearing systems and buildings to tackle the problem blaming poor produce prices for the lack of investment in facilities and lack of skilled stockmen. However instances of enteric disease were widely reported before the economic downturn in agriculture (Andrews 1983) and in times of poor produce prices more focus should be made to maintain calf health to reduce economic losses rather than less. I believe the biggest reasons why producers continue to fail addressing the problem of enteric diseases in their calves is due to large time requirement needed to effectively prevent them at times of labour stress (i.e. weekend and harvest periods) and farm managers forgetting the link between healthy calves and income as most focus more on milk yields rather than quicker heifer rearing or weight gains. There is no reason why any cattle producer should not aim to improve the management of enteric diseases in times of economic hardship. I believe many farmers are utilising the full potential of colostrum to protect calves against enteric disease and mortality. 