<heading>Overview</heading>Sheepdrove farm located high in the Berkshire downs was bought by the Juliet and Peter Kindersley (a retired book publisher with an interest in agriculture) twelve years ago from the Milk Marketing Board. The Kindersley's aimed to convert the intensive cattle research farm, into a sustainable, environmentally considerate, organic farm with high standards of animal welfare using a "from field to plate" style of production. The 2000 acre (800hectre) mixed farm produces it's own organic lamb, chicken, pork and beef which it sells direct to the public through a butcher's shop in the centre of nearby Bristol (Sheepdrove 2004). To maintain the best disease control and soil fertility without use of chemicals, animal grazing/roaming is rotated around the fields between annual planting of arable crops. However the main focus of production is on meat products. The farms main enterprises are summarised below (Sheepdrove 2004): <list>80 Durrock cross sows in rotary field system16,000 mixed sex free range broiler chickens180 South Devon and Aberdeen Angus beef suckler cows 2,000 Shetland cross ewesRemaining land used for organic arable production of beans, wheat and barelyUntil recently stable & green waste compost recycling facilityKindersley rural conference centreRestoration of areas land under stewardship schemes to gain HLS subsidy payments</list>This report focuses upon compost processing at Sheepdrove. <heading>Introduction</heading>Soil type at Sheepdrove is Downland chalk, a very free draining soil that contains a lot of flint and chalk in regions. This makes keeping the soils fertile and productive a big challenge especially without the use of chemical fertilizers. A profitable solution was found when Sheepdrove operated a stable manure waste collection scheme. They charged stable owners to collect their surplus manure in skips and then used the waste to enrich their own soil. Recently this operation grew in size as the farm has began to process "green waste" in to compost too. Green waste is organic material such as hedge trimmings or grass cuttings that are thrown away as waste. Traditionally these materials were buried in landfills but as local authorities are forced by legislation to reduce the costly volumes of landfill waste, (Steve Emington-Letsrecycle.com-2005) the green waste is separated and sent to composting sites like Sheepdrove for recycling. The recycling provides a vital income to Sheepdrove as they are paid to process green waste from the Berkshire county area and the compost provides vital organic matter to bind and hold moisture, nutrients and microbes in the soil without chemicals. <heading>Composting Process</heading>"Composting is a natural process using aerobic conditions to convert organic material into humus"(Letsrecycle.com-2005). The conversion is done mostly by naturally occurring aerobic bacteria and fungi (Fig1.1) which create heat energy in the compost when active. Good compost should be between 64 and 74 degrees centigrade to show bacteria are converting lots of material. This also has a secondary function of killing weeds and harmful bacteria within material. Once temperature falls below this compost must be turned to incorporate oxygen microbes need to live. At Sheepdrove turning is done with a tractor pulled implement (Fig1.2) which passes an auger through the material. The waste is kept separate in two types of material, though dry woody material (e.g. hedge trimmings) and soft moisture rich organic waste such as stable manure leaves and grass clippings. Converting the soft waste is a relatively quick process only taking about 12 weeks before is useful compost. This material is simply mixed using mechanical handler and placed in windrows (a long straight heap) in a field. Placing material in these windrows allows it to be managed in batches easily and turned using tractor. The tough woody material requires more input to compost fully. This material must be screened and shredded before composting can begin. A shredding and screening (Fig 1.3) machine is hired around every six weeks to shred material. Hiring the machine is most effective short term as the capital investment needed to buy such a machine is huge (£250K-Wilibald used machinery 2003) . Material is screened magnetically to remove metal contaminants and then material shredded twice by two rotary drums. Breakdown of material is encouraged by the addition of dirty water from the farms own poultry processing plant. The dirty water is a by product of a wet plucking machine which makes two gallons of water for every bird produced. This is stored in a sealed tank and spread through the windrows as needed. The woody material takes a minimum of six months to be converted fully. Finally, when material is fully broken down it is spread on arable land using muck spreaders at (16 tonnes an acre). The spread is very thick because the farm has such high volumes of material to convert for a small area of land. <heading>Composting Legislation</heading>Waste disposal in the UK is highly regulated to prevent pollution that would have adverse effects on the environment. Composting operations at Sheepdrove are regulated by local planning laws and the Environment Agency. These rules are very strict and enforced carefully through issuing of licenses and annual inspections. Key areas of concern for the regulation in composting sites are the effect site has on quality of life and health of local residents, contamination, from and traceability of material. This requires careful management which adds to Sheepdrove's costs of composting. Sheepdrove employed a full time compost manager who was assisted by other farm staff when needed. One example of such an issue affecting Sheepdrove is that following the foot and mouth epidemic animals cannot be grazed on land where compost in contact with meat (this case chicken cachous) for six months (Environment agency-2001). <heading>Conclusion</heading>A combination of factors has led to the decision that composting is no longer a worthwhile enterprise at Sheepdrove. The first of these is environmental, Sheepdrove are finding the increasingly tough legislation in composting to restraining to continue. For example, to gain permanent planning permission would require building hard ground for the site to eliminate pollution from runoff which could contaminate watercourses. This is not only costly but goes against the environmental aims of the Kindersley's to conserve the countryside. Also the volumes of fossil fuels required to process the compost have been higher then expected. The increasing cost of oil combined with staff and capital outlay in machinery costs means little profit has remained at the end of the composting process. The burning of too much diesel also contradicts the Kindersley's aim to protect the environment as composting is likely to consume as much oil as alternative production of non-organic fertilizer does. It also seemed apparent the volumes of green waste were too much for the farm to cope with and meant accurate management was needed to ensure no problems arose. With this in mind the decision was taken in September 2005 to stop composting and make redundant the compost manager and machinery will be sold once all remaining compost is processed. Poor planning is to blame for the failure of composting operations at Sheepdrove. If costs and environmental considerations had been estimated more accurately before going ahead with the idea they could have thought of more efficient and profitable ways to process the material or not have gone ahead with the idea at all realising it contradicted the Kindersley's aims. In the short term the farm has secured more fertile soils, but how will they boost soil fertility in the future organically? Additionally the cost of depreciation of the composting machinery will be large. As a independent enterprise composting at Sheepdrove is likely to have made little financial or environmental sense. 